thread-1: Start crawling
WebPage index: 00000
Free content
Free content , libre content , or free information , is any kind of functional work, work of art , or other creative content that meets the definition of a free cultural work .

Definition
A free cultural work (free content) is, according to the Definition of free cultural works , one that has no significant legal restriction on people's freedom to:
Free content encompasses all works in the public domain and also those copyrighted works whose licenses honor and uphold the freedoms mentioned above. Because the Berne Convention in most countries by default grants copyright holders monopolistic control over their creations, copyright content must be explicitly declared free, usually by the referencing or inclusion of licensing statements from within the work.
Although there are a great many different definitions in regular everyday use, free content is legally very similar, if not like an identical twin, to open content . An analogy is the use of the rival terms free software and open source , which describe ideological differences rather than legal ones. [3] [4] [5] For instance, the Open Knowledge Foundation 's Open Definition describes "open" as synonymous to the definition of free in the "Definition of Free Cultural Works" (as also in the Open Source Definition and Free Software Definition ). [6] For such free/open content both movements recommend the same three Creative Commons licenses , the CC BY , CC BY-SA , and CC0 . [7] [8] [9] [10]

Legal matters

Copyright
Copyright is a legal concept, which gives the author or creator of a work legal control over the duplication and public performance of his or her work. In many jurisdictions, this is limited by a time period after which the works then enter the public domain . Copyright laws are a balance between the rights of creators of intellectual and artistic works and the rights of others to build upon those works. During the time period of copyright the author's work may only be copied, modified, or publicly performed with the consent of the author, unless the use is a fair use . Traditional copyright control limits the use of the work of the author to those who either pay royalties to the author for usage of the authors content, or limit their use to fair use. Secondly it limits the use of content whose author cannot be found. [11] Finally it creates a perceived barrier between authors by limiting derivative works, such as mashups and collaborative content [12]

Public domain
The public domain is a range of creative works whose copyright has expired, or was never established; as well as ideas and facts [nb 1] which are ineligible for copyright. A public domain work is a work whose author has either relinquished to the public, or no longer can claim control over, the distribution and usage of the work. As such any person may manipulate, distribute, or otherwise utilize the work, without legal ramifications. A work in the public domain or released under a permissive licence may be referred to as " copycenter ". [13]

Copyleft
Copyleft is a play on the word copyright and describes the practice of using copyright law to remove restrictions on distributing copies and modified versions of a work. [14] The aim of copyleft is to use the legal framework of copyright to enable non-author parties to be able to reuse and, in many licensing schemes, modify content that is created by an author. Unlike works in the public domain, the author still maintains copyright over the material, however the author has granted a non-exclusive license to any person to distribute, and often modify, the work. Copyleft licenses require that any derivative works be distributed under the same terms, and that the original copyright notices be maintained. A symbol commonly associated with copyleft is a reversal of the copyright symbol , facing the other way; the opening of the C points left rather than right. Unlike the copyright symbol, the copyleft symbol does not have a codified meaning. [15]

Usage
Projects that provide free content exist in several areas of interest, such as software, academic literature, general literature, music, images, video, and engineering . Technology has reduced the cost of publication and reduced the entry barrier sufficiently to allow for the production of widely disseminated materials by individuals or small groups. Projects to provide free literature and multimedia content have become increasingly prominent owing to the ease of dissemination of materials that is associated with the development of computer technology. Such dissemination may have been too costly prior to these technological developments.

Media
In media, which includes textual, audio, and visual content, free licensing schemes such as some of the licenses made by Creative Commons have allowed for the dissemination of works under a clear set of legal permissions. Not all of the Creative Commons’ licenses are entirely free: their permissions may range from very liberal general redistribution and modification of the work to a more restrictive redistribution-only licensing. Since February 2008, Creative Commons licenses which are entirely free carry a badge indicating that they are "approved for free cultural works". [16] Repositories exist which exclusively feature free material provide content such as photographs, clip art , music, [17] and literature,. [18] While extensive reuse of free content from one website in another website is legal, it is usually not sensible because of the duplicate content problem. Wikipedia is amongst the most well known databases of user uploaded free content on the web. While the vast majority of content on Wikipedia is free content, some copyrighted material is hosted under Fair-use criteria .

Software
Free and open source software , which is also often referred to as open source software and free software , is a maturing technology with major companies utilising free software to provide both services and technology to both end users and technical consumers. The ease of dissemination has allowed for increased modularity, which allows for smaller groups to contribute to projects as well as simplifying collaboration. Open source development models have been classified as having a similar peer-recognition and collaborative benefit incentives that are typified by more classical fields such as scientific research, with the social structures that result from this incentive model decreasing production cost. [19] Given sufficient interest in a software component, by using peer-to-peer distribution methods, distribution costs of software may be reduced, removing the burden of infrastructure maintenance from developers. As distribution resources are simultaneously provided by consumers, these software distribution models are scalable, that is the method is feasible regardless of the number of consumers. In some cases, free software vendors may use peer-to-peer technology as a method of dissemination. [20] In general, project hosting and code distribution is not a problem for the most of free projects as a number of providers offer them these services free.

Engineering and technology
Free content principles have been translated into fields such as engineering, where designs and engineering knowledge can be readily shared and duplicated, in order to reduce overheads associated with project development. Open design principles can be applied in engineering and technological applications, with projects in mobile telephony , small-scale manufacture, [21] the automotive industry, [22] [23] and even agricultural areas. [24] Technologies such as distributed manufacturing can allow computer-aided manufacturing and computer-aided design techniques to be able to develop small-scale production of components for the development of new, or repair of existing, devices. Rapid fabrication technologies underpin these developments, which allow end users of technology to be able to construct devices from pre-existing blueprints, using software and manufacturing hardware to convert information into physical objects.

Academia
In academic work, the majority of works are not free, although the percentage of works that are open access is growing rapidly. Open access refers to online research outputs that are free of all restrictions on access (e.g. access tolls) and free of many restrictions on use (e.g. certain copyright and license restrictions). [25] Authors may see open access publishing as a method of expanding the audience that is able to access their work to allow for greater impact of the publication, or may support it for ideological reasons. [26] [27] [28] Open access publishers such as PLOS and Biomed Central provide capacity for review and publishing of free works; though such publications are currently more common in science than humanities. Various funding institutions and governing research bodies have mandated that academics must produce their works to be open-access, in order to qualify for funding, such as the National Institutes of Health , RCUK (effective 2016) and the EU (effective 2020). [29] [30] [31] [32] At an institutional level some universities, such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), have adopted open access publishing by default by introducing their own mandates. [33] Some mandates may permit delayed publication and may charge researchers for open access publishing. [34] [35] Open content publication has been seen as a method of reducing costs associated with information retrieval in research, as universities typically pay to subscribe for access to content that is published through traditional means [10] [36] [37] whilst improving journal quality by discouraging the submission of research articles of reduced quality. [10] Subscriptions for non-free content journals may be expensive for universities to purchase, though the article are written and peer-reviewed by academics themselves at no cost to the publisher. This has led to disputes between publishers and some universities over subscription costs, such as the one which occurred between the University of California and the Nature Publishing Group . [38] [39] For teaching purposes, some universities, including MIT, provide freely available course content, such as lecture notes, video resources and tutorials. This content is distributed via Internet resources to the general public. Publication of such resources may be either by a formal institution-wide program, [40] or alternately via informal content provided by individual academics or departments.

Legislation
Any country has its own law and legal system, sustained by its legislation, a set of law-documents — documents containing statutory obligation rules , usually law and created by legislatures . In a democratic country , each law-document is published as open media content , is in principle a free content; but in general there are no explicit license attributed for each law-document, so the license must be interpreted, is a implied license . Only few countries have explicit licenses in its law-documents, as the UK's Open Government Licence (a CC-BY compatible license). In the other countries, the implied license comes from its proper rules (general laws and rules about copyright in government works). The automatic protection provided by Berne Convention not apply to law-documents: Article 2.4 excludes the official texts from the automatic protection. It is also possible to "inherit" the license from context. The set of country's law-documents is made available through national repositories. Examples of law-document open repositories: LexML Brazil , Legislation.gov.uk , N-Lex of EU countries . In general a law-document is offered in more than one (open) official version, but the main one is that published by a government gazette . So, law-documents can eventually inherit license expressed by the repository or by the gazette that contains it.

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00001
Akodon
Akodon is a genus consisting of South American grass mice . They mostly occur south of the Amazon Basin and along the Andes north to Venezuela , but are absent from much of the basin itself, the far south of the continent, and the lowlands west of the Andes. Akodon is one of the most species-rich genera of Neotropical rodents. Species of Akodon are known to inhabit a variety of habitats from tropical and tropical moist forests to altiplano and desert. Fossils are known from the late Pliocene onwards. [2]

Taxonomy
Akodon is the largest genus in the tribe Akodontini . Three of its synonyms — Chalcomys , Hypsimys , and particularly Microxus —have sometimes been regarded as distinct genera. Previously associated with Akodon , the genera Abrothrix , Deltamys , Necromys , Thalpomys , and Thaptomys are currently recognized as distinct. Some species of the tribe Abrotrichini are called akodons.
The genus contains the following species: [3]

Footnotes
WebPage index: 00002
Least-concern species
A least concern ( LC ) species is one which has been categorized by the International Union for Conservation of Nature as evaluated but not qualified for any other category. As such they do not qualify as threatened , near threatened , or (before 2001) conservation dependent .
Species cannot be assigned the Least Concern category unless they have had their population status evaluated. That is, adequate information is needed to make a direct, or indirect, assessment of its risk of extinction based on its distribution or population status.
Since 2001 the category has had the abbreviation "LC", following the IUCN 2001 Categories & Criteria (version 3.1). [1] However, around 20% of least concern taxa (3261 of 15636) in the IUCN database use the code "LR/lc", which indicates they have not been re-evaluated since 2000. Prior to 2001 "least concern" was a subcategory of the "Lower Risk" category and assigned the code "LR/lc" or (lc).
While "least concern" is not considered a red listed category by the IUCN, the 2006 Red List still assigns the category to 15636 taxa. The number of animal species listed in this category totals 14033 (which includes several undescribed species such as a frog from the genus Philautus [2] ). There are also 101 animal subspecies listed and 1500 plant taxa (1410 species, 55 subspecies, and 35 varieties). There are also two animal subpopulations listed: the Australasian and Southern African subpopulations of spiny dogfish . No fungi or protista have the classification, though only four species in those kingdoms have been evaluated by the IUCN. Humans qualify for this category, and in 2008 were formally assessed [3] as such by the IUCN.

See also

Notes and references

External links
WebPage index: 00003
Arp Schnitger
Arp Schnitger (July 2, 1648 – July 28, 1719 (buried)) was a highly influential German organ builder.
Schnitger was born in Schmalenfleth , and was baptized on July 9, 1648, in Golzwarden . He was primarily active in Northern Europe , especially the Netherlands and Germany , where a number of his instruments survive to the present day; his organs can also be found as far away as Portugal and Brazil. He died in Neuenfelde , aged 71.
Notable examples of his work still in use include the organ at St. Pancratiuskirche, Neuenfelde , Hamburg [1] (completed in 1688, his largest two-manual instrument); St. Jacobikirche, Hamburg (perhaps the most famous surviving Schnitger organ, completed in 1693) [2] ; St. Martinikerk , Groningen, the Netherlands (1692) [3] ; St. Ludgerikirche, Norden (1688) [4] ; St. Cosmae und Damianikirche, Stade (Schnitger's first organ, completed in 1676 after the death of his teacher Berendt Huss) [5] ; St. Peter und Paulkirche, Cappel (perhaps the most authentic of Schnitger's organs still in existence, originally in the Johanniskirche, Hamburg, 1680) [6] ; and St. Michaeliskerk, Zwolle, the Netherlands (completed by his son Franz Caspar after Schnitger's death) [7] . Organs like this are credited with inspiring the renaissance in organ building during the early twentieth century, with a return to tracker action and smaller, more cohesive instruments, as distinct from the late-Romantic trend of extremely large symphonic organs. In particular, the organ at the Jacobikirche, Hamburg, played a pivotal role in the organ reform movement beginning in 1925, as a series of conferences taking place at historical organ sites in Germany and Alsace was inaugurated there.
The importance of Schnitger to the history of organ building cannot be overestimated. Schnitger was one of the most prolific builders of his time, completing more than 150 instruments and running several shops. His organ designs typify the essential North German organ: multiple divisions, usually with a rückpositif (division on the gallery rail, behind the player's back); large, independent pedal divisions, often placed in towers on either side of the main case; well-developed principal choruses in each division with abundant reeds, flutes, and mutation stops; and meantone temperament . All of these features could be found on North German organs prior to Schnitger's activity; Schnitger's genius lay in his ability to synthesize these elements into a prototypical style of organ building, and in his prolific output. The latter was made possible by his good business sense: Schnitger was one of the first builders to use cost-cutting measures on a large scale to ensure the affordability of organs for small village churches.
Many of Schnitger's landmark instruments were actually rebuilds or expansions of existing organs (as at St. Jacobikirche, Hamburg, a renovation and enlargement of an earlier instrument by Fritzsche, 1635). Often, the expansion of the pedal division required the addition of pedal towers on either side of the case. This feature has come to be one of the most-typically associated with the North German style, despite the fact that a majority of smaller organs did not have pedal towers.
A number of Schnitger's organs were featured on recordings by E. Power Biggs , who is generally credited with reintroducing them to modern listeners. More recently, Schnitger's organs can be heard on several recordings by German organist Harald Vogel . Schnitger's instruments in Groningen, Uithuizen, Noordbroek and Nieuw Scheemda were featured in the documentary Martinikerk Rondeau , in which Jurgen Ahrend , Cor Edskes and Bernhardt Edskes detail Schnitger's life and demonstrate his working methods. Schnitger's organs have also served as inspiration for many modern builders; GOArt , a Swedish organ building consortium, has even gone so far as to build an exact copy of a Schnitger organ for research purposes.

Surviving Schnitger organs

See also
WebPage index: 00004
Kediri campaign (1678)
The Kediri campaign (also, for the Dutch, Hurdt's Expedition or Kediri Expedition [3] ) took place from August to December 1678 during the Trunajaya rebellion . The forces of Mataram Sultanate led by Amangkurat II and the Dutch East India Company (VOC) led by Anthonio Hurdt marched into inland eastern Java against Trunajaya's forces. After a series of marches beset by logistical difficulties, the Mataram–VOC forces crossed the Brantas River on the night of 16–17 November. They then marched on Trunajaya's capital and stronghold at Kediri , and took it by direct assault on 25 November. The capture of Kediri was followed by its plunder by the Dutch and Javanese victors. Trunajaya himself fled Kediri and continued his rebellion—now greatly weakened—until his capture at the end of 1679.
During the march to Kediri, the Mataram–VOC army purposely split itself and the columns took different indirect routes to Kediri, as suggested by Amangkurat. This was so that the army encountered more factions and to win over those with wavering allegiance. The army marched through areas previously unexplored by the Dutch, and the Dutch account was recorded in a journal by Hurdt's secretary Johan Jurgen Briel . Javanese chronicles ( babad ) also wrote about the campaign.

Background
In the Battle of Surabaya fought in May 1677, the Dutch East India Company (known by its Dutch acronym, the "VOC") drove Trunajaya out of his court in Surabaya. [4] He then retreated inland to establish a new capital in Kediri , the capital city of the ancient Kediri Kingdom . [4] [5] However, one month later Trunajaya's forces overran the Mataram court in Plered . The capital was sacked, the entire treasury was taken by the rebels, and King Amangkurat I died during his retreat, throwing the Mataram government into disarray. [6] He was succeeded by his son, Amangkurat II , who fled with him. [7] Lacking an army, treasury and a working government, [8] Amangkurat II then went to Jepara, the headquarters of a VOC fleet under Admiral Cornelis Speelman , and in October signed a treaty renewing their alliance. [9] In exchange for helping Mataram against his enemies, the king promised to pay the VOC 310,000 Spanish reals and about 5,000 metric tons of rice (this covered previous all VOC campaigns on Mataram's behalf up to October). [10] In further agreements, he agreed to cede districts east of Batavia, as well as Semarang, Salatiga and its surrounding districts, and awarded monopolies of textiles, opium, and sugar to the company. [10]
With the agreement concluded, Speelman and Amangkurat were eager to quickly march against the rebels, but this was prevented by the cautious policy of the VOC Governor-General Joan Maetsuycker , internal strife between in the Mataram court, and some courtiers' opposition against the Dutch involvement. [10] In November and December, there were only limited operations by Mataram forces with VOC support in the north coast, which saw partial successes. [11] However, in January 1678, Maetsuycker died and was succeeded by Rijklof van Goens and by mid-1678 various challengers of the King or the VOC-Mataram alliance died, paving the way for a more aggressive campaign. [12] Speelman himself became Director-General to replace van Goens. [12] He left for Batavia and the VOC appointed Anthonio Hurdt , a former governor of Ambon to replace him as commander, granting him the title "Superintendent, Admiral, Campaign- and War-Commander." [13] The VOC also brought the forces of Arung Palakka , its Bugis allies in the Makassar War (1666–69). [13]

Forces involved
When the campaign began, the Mataram forces numbered 3,000 armed men and 1,000 porters. [14] As the march progressed, new troops were levied on the way and some lords declared their allegiance to the king, enlarging the royal army to 13,000 men. [14] However, desertion and upcoming harvest reduced this army again, and during the assault on Kediri, the Mataram forces had only about 1,000 armed men. [2] [15] The initial 3,000 was armed with pikes, but some of the latter levies had firearms. [14]
Before the start of the campaign, the VOC had 900 soldiers in Java's north coast, deployed as garrisons in various towns. [16] An additional expeditionary force of 1,400 arrived at the start of the campaign. [16] As the army marched, it was joined by the garrisons in the cities they passed. [14] Indonesians of various ethnicity made up the majority of the VOC forces; Europeans soldiers, marines and officers made up the minority. [17] Desertion and diseases dwindled the forces. [1] At the time of the assault on Kediri, the VOC had 1,750 men, 659 of which were Europeans. [2] Many of them had dysentery [2] and only about 1,200 joined the assault. [18] The VOC-Mataram forces had artillery, but limited supply meant that they were saved only for the final assault. [2]
The size of Trunajaya's forces was uncertain. [2] VOC-Mataram reports put the number at 1,000, but later Trunajaya's uncle Pangeran Sampang said that Trunajaya's followers numbered 14,500 just before the assault on Kediri. [2] This force include "hundreds" [19] of cavalry with chain armour. [20] Trunajaya also built fortifications along the Brantas (Kediri is on the east bank of this river), and his artillery generally outgunned the loyalists. [2]

Campaign

Planning
Hurdt wanted to attack Trunajaya's stronghold Kediri from Surabaya in coastal East Java, which would be the shortest route. [22] However, Amangkurat II proposed that the troops be divided into columns and march through a long overland route. [21] He wanted the VOC-Mataram forces to slowly march through more areas, in order to impress factions who were wavering on which side to take. [21] This argument convinced Hurdt, and they decided to split the army into three different columns travelling via different overland routes from coastal Central Java to Kediri in inland East Java. [17] In addition, a VOC merchant Willem Bastinck was to go to Surabaya to seek out Karaeng Galesong —a former Trunajaya ally whose allegiance was wavering and whose help Mataram and the VOC hoped to enlist—and his followers. [14]

March to Kediri
The VOC and Mataram forces marched from coastal central Java in three columns. A column led by Captain François Tack left Jepara on 21 August for Semarang where he started his overland march. [14] Another column led by Captains Abraham Daniel van Renesse and Frederik Hendrik Mulder left Rembang on 26 August. [14] Meanwhile, the main column was mobilized in Jepara, led by Hurdt and Amangkurat. This force sent advance detachments southwards on 27 August and 2 September, while Hurdt and Amangkurat departed on 5 September. [14]
Tack's column was reinforced by the garrison of Semarang and marched southward to the Pajang district, where it fought the followers of Trunajaya's ally Raden Kajoran . [16] Hurdt and Amangkurat's column re-assembled in Godong on the Serang River and stayed there for six days. [14] Their artillery and supplies were brought there by river, but had now to join the southward march overland through enemy territory. Then this column joined Tack's column in the Solo River valley (the river was then called Semanggi River). [16] Meanwhile, the column of van Renesse and Mulder passed Pati, was joined by the VOC troops there, and marched through a different route towards Kediri. [2]
Throughout the march, the loyalist forces faced problems such as desertions, lack of discipline, illness, food shortage, and poor navigation. [14] [17] The march included several river crossings, which were made difficult by the lack of bridges, river swelling due to rain, as well as bogged wagons and cannons. [14] [17] It is particularly difficult for the VOC forces, who was unfamiliar with the terrain of the Javanese interior. Hurdt wanted to stay in the Solo River valley and to continue the campaign in the next year. Amangkurat preferred to keep marching, and his opinion prevailed. [17] As the loyalist forces marched eastwards, the rebel forces avoided major battle but fought in skirmishes and continued to endanger the loyalists's foragers and stragglers. [14] The loyalists scoured the countryside to collect food, causing panic among its inhabitants. [17]
During the march, Amangkurat I tried to gain the loyalty of the lords in the territories he passed. [17] Many were previously loyal to Kajoran, who sided with Trunajaya, or were wavering between the two sides. [17] The presence of the king and his forces, as well as the possibly booty to be gained in the campaign, motivated them to declare allegiance to Amangkurat and join the forces. [17] [14] At some point, the Javanese forces in the column reached 13,000. [14]

Crossing of the Brantas
The Hurdt-Amangkurat army arrived at Singkal, on the west bank of the Brantas River north of Kediri, on 13 October. Finding a way to cross the river proved a major challenge for the loyalists. The Brantas was swollen by monsoon rains, and the army did not have the boats necessary to cross it. Rain, desertion and lack of supplies continued to plague them. Money, food, and women available in Trunajaya's stronghold tempted many, Indonesians and Europeans alike to switch side. [23] Desertion in the Javanese army also accelerated due to the harvest. [15] Amangkurat's forces dropped to about 1,000, while the VOC had 1,750 soldiers left, 659 among them Europeans. [15] [2]
Meanwhile, Trunajaya's forces harassed the loyalist army. They had fortified posts along the river, especially on the east bank. [2] The posts were equipped with cannons of various sizes up to twelve-pounders . [2] Trunajaya's artillery continuously pounded the loyalists, reaching even the lodgings of Hurdt and Amangkurat themselves, as well as the army's field hospital. [2] The loyalists army had cannons too, but they did not fire back; their limited ammunition means they had to save them only for the eventual attack on Kediri. [2] In addition, Trunajaya's cavalry also engaged in skirmishes with the loyalists, causing casualties and undermined their morale. [2] On 21 October, a night attack led by Raden Suradipa burned the quarters of the VOC's Malay troops. [2] The attack was however repelled and Suradipa—a brother of Trunajaya—was fatally wounded. [24] On the night of 2–3 November, Trunajaya's skirmishers intimidated the VOC's sentries with the music of gamelan and mocking voices. [25]
On 3 November, Hurdt and Amangkurat were joined by a column led by Willem Bastinck from Surabaya, accompanied by 800 ox-carts of supplies. [25] [17] This convoy was sent with help from the Duke of Tumapel, the VOC's Javanese ally, and Karaeng Galesong , a former ally of Trunajaya whose allegiance was wavering. [17] On 6 November, rebel forces raided these carts, burnt around ten of them and killed some people. [25] The VOC later moved these supplies inside a palisade fortifications built in the aftermath of Suradipa's attack. [25]
With the arrival of fresh supplies, Hurdt and Amangkurat were emboldened to find ways to cross the river. [25] Forces led by Dutch commander Isaac de Saint Martin drove Trunajaya's forces from Manukan , on the west bank further south from Singkal. [25] They then tried to cross the river there, but it was unsuccessful due to heavy opposing fire and the depth of the water. [25] They made another attempt on the night of 6–7 November, but their boats were sunk and it failed too. [25] Hurdt was frustrated by the lack of progress, and gave Amangkurat an ultimatum that the VOC would withdraw unless the king supplied pontoons for the crossing and matches for its soldiers's matchlocks . [25]
The river dropped during the night of 16–17 November. [18] Javanese traditions ( babad ) attributed this to Amangkurat's supranatural powers, and said that this happened as Amangkurat personally rode across the river leading his troops. [18] In any case, the river dropped, the army crossed at Curing, just south of Singkal. [18] Those on horses did not need boats, while foot soldiers crossed on boats. [18] The river was about 115 metres wide at the crossing. [18] Trunajaya's forces bombarded them with artillery as they crossed, before being driven out, leaving eleven cannon pieces behind. [18]

Capture of Kediri
With the bridgehead successfully established at Curing, the loyalist army marched southward towards Kediri. At this point the VOC troops numbered 1,200 and Amangkurat's troops about 1,000. They were split into to columns under the respective commands of Hurdt and de Saint Martin. Amangkurat himself returned to the relative safety of Singkal. Trunajaya's forces unsuccessfully tried to stop this advance. On 25 November the army attacked Kediri itself. The city was about 8.5 kilometres (5.3 mi) in circumference, defended by 43 artillery batteries and by walls of up to 6 metres high and 2 metres thick. Hurdt's column entered the city from the east, while de Saint Martin entered from the northwest. De Saint Martin arrived first in the alun-alun (city square) of Kediri, near Trunajaya's residence. The defenders put up fierce resistance. Four VOC companies, under the command of Captain Tack engaged in a "courtyard-by-courtyard" fighting to conquer Trunajaya's residential compound in the city center. VOC troops made use of hand grenades which proved very useful in city fighting. [18]
The loyalist troops were victorious. Trunjaya fled southwards into the countryside, and his side suffered heavy losses. [18] The VOC suffered light casualties of 7 dead and 27 wounded. [18] Among Mataram troops, two senior noblemen died in the fighting; the first was Tumenggung Mangkuyuda , and sources disagreed on the second, variously naming Tumenggung Melayu , Demang Mangunjaya or Tumenggung Mataram . [26] The victorious army then plundered Trunajaya's abandoned court. [18] The Mataram treasury, brought to Kediri by the rebels after their sack of the Mataram capital in 1677, was among the target of the looting. [18] Amangkurat and the VOC had hoped to recover this treasury and use it to pay for the VOC's assistance in the war, but it was instead looted by the soldiers in entirety. [18] The VOC found ten Europeans who had deserted to Trunajaya's side, and executed them. [27] The victors also found abducted Mataram women, horses and holy regalia ( pusaka ). [18] A special cannon, named "Nyai Setomi" and called mriyem berkat ("blessed cannon") and wasiyat Mataram ("Mataram's heirloom") was found among the recovered regalia. [28]

The golden crown
The victors also found a golden crown among the booty. [18] The crown was reputed to be a crown from the time of the fifteenth-century Majapahit empire , during which there were reports of the use of a golden crown. [18] The crown was handed to Captain Tack of the VOC, who insisted on requiring 1,000 Rds. before giving it to the king. [18] This behaviour seemed to offend the king and might have contributed to his death at the Mataram court in 1686. [29] On November 27, Hurdt presented the crown to the king, who proceeded to wear it. [30] In an act of cultural misunderstanding, the VOC fired musket and cannon salutes, imagining the event to be a coronation in the European sense. [30] In reality, crowns did not have ceremonial importance in the Javanese royal protocol. [30] [17] This episode attracted much attention among later historians. [30] Dutch historian H. J. de Graaf opined that the king would later consider this event as a symbol of the European's condescension that they were instrumental to the king's legitimacy. [30]

Evacuation
With Trunajaya expelled and the looting finished, the loyalist army left Kediri for Surabaya, the principal city and port of East Java. [30] Kediri's fortifications was dismantled and a governor was installed to rule the city. [31] A river convoy left on 15 December, which include Hurdt, Tack, van Renesse, 288 VOC sick and wounded, field cannons and their ammunition. [30] The rest, including Amangkurat and de Saint Martin left overland on 18 December. [30] Heavy currents and the rain season made this journey difficult. [30] The river convoy arrived in Surabaya after on 17 December losing some boats and men. [30] The overland march was even more difficult. [30] Many roads were flooded and impassable. Many died from sheer exhaustion, "hungry, tired and spent like beasts along the road and indeed in the water," according to the journal. [30] [31] The army reached Perning on December 24, upriver from Surabaya, and was cut off by floods. [30] Some managed to reach Surabaya by boats, and the rest only arrived on January 5 overland. [30]
Amangkurat and his retinue established the royal court in Surabaya. [31] He was familiar with the city; he was descended from the former dynasty of Surabaya through his mother, and was once a viceroy of East Java during his father's rule. [31] Subsequently, Hurdt and other V.O.C. officers left for Batavia. [31] Christiaan Poleman took over the command of the V.O.C. forces in East Java. [31]

Aftermath
The Dutch-Mataram victory at Kediri weakened Trunajaya's rebellion. However, the war was not over. Trunajaya and his retinue was still at large in the highlands of Malang around east Java; he was not captured until December 1679. His ally Raden Kajoran established a new base in Mlambang, Central Java and engaged in successful operations there up to his death in September 1679. [32] [33] Amangkurat's brother Pangeran Puger still held Mataram's court at Plered where he maintained a rival claim to the throne until 1681. [30] Amangkurat also faced difficulty in establishing his authority in Cirebon and Madura. [30]
With this campaign, the VOC was now fully associated with Amangkurat. [34] However, the king could not pay the VOC as promised because his treasury—which he hoped to recover in Kediri—was looted by the VOC's and his own soldiers. [30] The VOC also perceived incompetence in the king and the lack of loyalty in his people. Nevertheless, the VOC continued to fight on his side until the end of the war. [35]

Legacy
Johan Jurgen Briel , the Dutch commander Hurdt's secretary, wrote a 240-page journal of the campaign. [36] In 1971, the journal was edited by the historian H. J. de Graaf and published in the Linschoten-Vereeniging ( nl ) . [37] Previously, in 1890 J. Hendrik van Balen and Willem Steelink Jr. published a children's book De Kroon van Mataram ("The Crown of Mataram"), depicting the campaign based on Briel's account. [38] The Dutch book emphasises the European soldiers' role, and depicts the Javanese as having minimal significance in the VOC's victory. [38]
The campaign also appears in Javanese chronicles ( babad ), including the Babad Kraton written by Raden Tumenggung Jayengrat in Yogyakarta during 1777–78. [39]
WebPage index: 00005
White woodpecker
The white woodpecker ( Melanerpes candidus ) is a species of woodpecker ( family Picidae ) found in South America. It is native to the wooded grasslands of Suriname , French Guiana , Brazil , Bolivia , Paraguay , Uruguay and Argentina . Besides being a bright white bird with black wings, the white woodpecker has a distinctive, small bright yellow eye patch. The IUCN has rated it as a " least-concern species ".

Taxonomy
The species was first described as Melanerpes candidus in 1796 by the French naturalist Bernhard Christian Otto , the type locality being Cayenne . It is sometimes placed in its own genus Leuconerpes , but shows many similarities in morphology to Melanerpes . No subspecies are known (monotypic). [2]

Description
This woodpecker grows to a length of 24 to 27 cm (9.4 to 10.6 in). The mantle, back, wings and tail of the adult are black, the flight feathers being brownish-black above and the underside of the wings being greyish-black. The crown, face, rump and underparts are white, sometimes with some buff shading. The male has some yellowing of the breast and nape which the female lacks, and both sexes have a certain amount of yellow on the belly. A narrow black stripe runs from behind the eye to the nape . There is a bare ring of yellow skin around the eye which has a yellowish iris. The beak is long and grey, paler near the base, and the legs are grey. Juveniles are browner and less glossy than the adults, with the pale areas being buff rather than white. The orbital ring on juveniles is grey rather than yellow, and both sexes may have some yellow on the nape. [3]

Distribution and habitat
The white woodpecker has a large distribution in South America to the east of the Andes . Its range extends from Suriname and French Guiana, through much of Brazil to southeastern Peru, Bolivia, Paraguay, Uruguay and northern Argentina. It is found at altitudes of up to about 2,000 m (6,600 ft), and is non-migratory, but prone to making short distance movements. Its habitat is forest edges, open dry woodland, wooded savannah, scrubland with scattered trees, plantations, orchards, parkland and mangroves. It is opportunistic and adaptable, being seen in city suburbs, and expanding its range into areas of felled timber. [3]

Ecology
Groups of up to ten white woodpeckers are sometimes seen flying with floppy wing-beats in procession. The diet is varied and includes fruits, berries and seeds, the bird being a significant disperser of some species of seed. It forages in noisy family groups [3] and also raids wild bee and wasp nests, feeding on the adult insects, larvae and honey. [2] It breeds between September and November. It may sometimes nest communally, but very little is known of its breeding habits. [2]

Status
M. candidus has an extremely large range estimated at over 10,000,000 km 2 (3,900,000 sq mi), and seems to be extending its range at the southern end of its distribution. Although it is a generally uncommon bird with a somewhat patchy distribution, the total population is thought to be increasing, and the International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed its conservation status as being of " least concern ". [1]
WebPage index: 00006
Mary Ann Harris Gay
Mary Ann Harris Gay (March 18, 1829 – November 21, 1918) was an American writer and poet from Decatur, Georgia known for her Civil War memoir Life in Dixie During the War . The book was the inspiration for some of the scenes in Gone with the Wind . She also wrote a book of poetry which was quoted by Mark Twain in The Adventures of Tom Sawyer . In 1997 she was named a Georgia Woman of Achievement . Her home during and after the Civil War, the Mary Gay House, is a historic building in downtown Decatur, Georgia. It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on May 6, 1975.

Biography
Gay was born the daughter of William and Mary Stevens Gay on March 18, 1829 in Jones County, Georgia . Her newly widowed mother moved back to be with her family near Milledgeville, Georgia shortly after Mary was born. [1] There she lived in the house of her grandfather Thomas Stevens, a slave owner depicted harshly in the book A Slave Life in Georgia by John Brown . [1] Stevens owned property around the state, including in DeKalb County , and when he died in 1850 Gay moved (with her mother and sister) to Decatur, Georgia to a house on Marshall Street . [2]
During the Civil War she was a loyal supporter of the Confederate side, and refused to leave her house even when Union Army soldiers took over the area. Gen. Kenner Garrard occupied her house at one point, and his troops camped in her yard. [3] Her only brother served under Gen. John Bell Hood in the Confederate Army and died in the Battle of Franklin in late 1864. [4]
After the war she worked to preserve Confederate battlefields and raise memorials to the war [4] as well as to fundraise for the construction of a new building for the local Baptist church in Decatur. [4] One such project was to rebury the Confederate dead in Franklin, Tennessee , including her brother who had died there. She traveled to Texas and raised several thousand dollars to support the creation of McGavock Confederate Cemetery . The funds were enough to enclose the cemetery with an iron fence and gate, which was marked with a plaque with her name. [5] She also successfully campaigned for a memorial to Alexander H. Stephens at his grave at Liberty Hall . [6]
She reprinted her 1858 book Prose and Poetry and marketed it "aggressively" after the war in order to support her family. [4] The book came to the attention of Mark Twain who quoted it "with disdain" [7] in Chapter 21 of The Adventures of Tom Sawyer . He wrote that the work was "after the school-girl pattern." [8]
Undaunted, in 1892 she published her war memoir Life in Dixie During the War based on her memories, her sister's journal and letters from her brother. [4] It became her best known work. It even influenced Margaret Mitchell 's book Gone With the Wind : some scenes are drawn "directly from Gay's memoir". [9]
Gay never married. [10] After the death of her sister in 1909 she suffered from dementia and was committed to the Georgia State Sanitarium in 1915, where she died [6] on November 21, 1918. [11] She is buried in Decatur Cemetery .
In 1997 she was inducted into the Georgia Women of Achievement Hall of Fame. [9]

Works

Mary Gay House
The Mary Gay House is a historic building in downtown Decatur, Georgia which was the home of Mary Ann Harris Gay during the Civil War and afterwards. It was built approximately 1850 and is one of a very few pre- Civil War buildings in the area which are still standing. [14] It was entered into the National Register of Historic Places on May 6, 1975. [15]
The house has been moved at least twice. In the early twentieth century it was moved eastward and oriented to face Marshall St. It was while still at this location (524 Marshall St.) that it earned its NRHP status. [14]
In the late 1970s development in Decatur threatened the structure. While it originally sat on "several acres" of property, [14] by 1979 the house was on a 100' by 200' lot bordered mostly by businesses and accessible only by a narrow street with no parking nearby. The Junior League of Dekalb County preserved the structure by arranging to have it moved to its current location at 716 West Trinity Place. This location was less than a mile away in Adair Park and immediately adjacent to the historic Swanton House (which had also been moved). The group also successfully petitioned the NRHP for the Gay house to retain its historic status after the move. [16]
After restoration, the basement of the house is the headquarters for the Junior League [17] and the house itself is an event facility for receptions, parties, weddings and so on. [18]
WebPage index: 00007
Maute group
The Maute group , also known as the Islamic State of Lanao , [2] is a radical Islamist group composed of former Moro Islamic Liberation Front guerrillas and some foreign fighters [3] led by Abdullah Maute, the alleged founder of a Dawlah Islamiya , or Islamic state based in Lanao del Sur , Mindanao , Philippines . [4] The group figured in a clash with Philippine Army troops in February 2016 that ended with the capture of their headquarters in Butig, Lanao del Sur . [5] [6] There are reports that Omar Maute, Abdullah's brother, was killed in that clash. [7] There are also reports to the contrary, claiming that he escaped before the camp was overrun and is still alive. [8] Since then the group, which a Philippine Army brigade commander characterized as terrorist , [9] has been conducting a protection racket in the remote settlements of Butig. [4]

Background
Philippine Army sources state that their initial encounter with the Maute group involved a firefight in 2013 when the insurgents attacked a security checkpoint the government troops were manning in Madalum, Lanao del Sur . The group is thought to have over 100 members and were supplied with equipment by a foreign terrorist. [9] They are said to be affiliated with Jemaah Islamiya , [5] a Southeast Asian Islamist terrorist group.
Although some reports indicate that the Maute group is regularly seen carrying black flags bearing the insignia of the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria , [4] Butig town mayor Ibrahim Macadato has stated that the group is not affiliated with ISIS, but are merely armed residents. [10] However, training manuals and other documents for militants under the Islamic State were recovered from their captured camp, indicating that the group may be trying to link up with ISIS. [11]
Butig, the headquarters of the Maute group, is also a stronghold of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front and both groups are tied by blood or marriage. Brothers Omar and Abdullah Maute are first cousins of Azisa Romato, the wife of the late MILF Vice Chairman for Military Affairs Alim Abdul Aziz Mimbantas, who is buried in Butig. The Maute brothers themselves were once members of the MILF. [12]

Activities
The Maute group is said to be actively recruiting minors for service as child warriors [13] and using the non-passage of the Bangsamoro Basic Law as propaganda. [9] In April 2016, they abducted six sawmill workers from Butig, [14] two of whom were later found beheaded. [4]
On October 4, 2016, three men linked to the Maute Group were arrested in connection with the 2016 Davao City bombing . The men were TJ Tagadaya Macabalang, Wendel Apostol Facturan, and Musali Mustapha. Defence Secretary Delfin Lorenzana said that the Maute Group has already established links with the Abu Sayyaf and that there are "indications" that the group is aligning themselves with ISIS . [15] On November 28, the Philippine government finally officially acknowledged that Maute is linked to ISIS under a live televised comment by President Rodrigo Duterte . [16]
On May 23, 2017, the Maute group attacked the city of Marawi in the Philippines. The attack resulted in the destruction of homes, the death of five soldiers, two policemen, two civilians and the wounding of civilians, the torching of a mosque, and a hospital being overrun. The former leader of Abu Sayyaf, Isnilon Hapilon was seen with the group during the attack. The attack resulted in President Duterte declaring a state of martial law across the entire island of Mindanao with the possibility that it be expanded nationwide. [17] [18]
WebPage index: 00008
Mumbai Indians
The Mumbai Indians (abbreviated as MI ) are a franchise cricket team representing the city of Mumbai , Maharashtra , in the Indian Premier League (IPL). The franchise is owned by India's biggest conglomerate, Reliance Industries , through its 100% subsidiary IndiaWin Sports. The primary home ground of the Mumbai Indians is the Wankhede Stadium .
The Mumbai Indians are the most successful team in the IPL. They won the 2011 Champions League Twenty20 after beating Royal Challengers Bangalore by 31 runs in the final. The team won its first IPL title, in 2013 , by defeating Chennai Super Kings by 23 runs in the final, and then defeated the Rajasthan Royals by 33 runs to win its second Champions League Twenty20 title later that year. [2] [3] They won their second IPL title on 24 May 2015 by defeating the Chennai Super Kings by 41 runs in the final and became the third team to win more than one IPL title. On 21 May 2017, they won their third IPL title by defeating the Rising Pune Supergiants by 1 run in the final, thus becoming the first team to win three IPL titles. [4] While playing the tournament, they won their 100th T20, becoming the first team to do so.
The Mumbai Indians are currently captained by Rohit Sharma . Mahela Jayawardene has been appointed as the new head coach of Mumbai Indians for the 2017 season. [5] Sharma is the leading run scorer of the team while Lasith Malinga is the leading wicket-taker.

Franchise history
The Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) announced in September 2007 the establishment of the Indian Premier League, a Twenty20 competition to be started in 2008. [6] In January 2008, the BCCI unveiled the owners of eight city-based franchises. The Mumbai franchise was sold to the Reliance Industries Ltd (RIL) for $111.9 million, making it the most expensive team to be sold in the league. [7] RIL, owned by Mukesh Ambani acquired the rights to the franchise for a period of 10 years. The franchise was eventually named "Mumbai Indians".

Team history

2008–2009: Struggle in the initial seasons
The Indian Premier League named four players as icon players for their respective city franchises which made the players unavailable to play for any team other than their city team. Sachin Tendulkar was named Mumbai's icon player. The icon player was also entitled to earn 15% more than the next-best paid player in their team. At first player auctions for the inaugural IPL season conducted in February 2008, the Mumbai franchise bought several star international cricketers such as Sanath Jayasuriya , Harbhajan Singh , Shaun Pollock , Lasith Malinga and Robin Uthappa . [8] The franchise named Sachin Tendulkar as the captain of the team and appointed former India cricketer Lalchand Rajput as the head coach. However, Tendulkar was injured before the start of the 2008 season due to which Harbhajan Singh took over as the captain in the initial stage of the season. The team got off to a bad start in the season losing their first four games by some comprehensive margins. Their first match was a five-wicket defeat to the Royal Challengers Bangalore on 20 April 2008 at the Wankhede . Their stand-in captain, Harbhajan, was suspended from the tournament for reportedly slapping Sreesanth during Mumbai's league match against Kings XI Punjab . After Harbhajan's suspension, Shaun Pollock assumed the leadership duties until Tendulkar's return on 24 May. Under Pollock's captaincy, Mumbai won six out of their next six games which left them needing to win two more out of the remaining four matches to qualify for the semifinals. Mumbai suffered three last-over defeats in the next three games, including two off the last ball, before winning their last league match. They finished fifth in the points table with 7 wins and 7 losses, missing out on a semifinal spot by just one point. [9]
The 2009 season was played in South Africa as it coincided with multi-phase 2009 Indian general elections due to which the Government of India refused to commit the Indian paramilitary forces to provide security for the IPL. Before the start of the season, Mumbai Indians traded Robin Uthappa for Zaheer Khan with Royal Challengers Bangalore, and Ashish Nehra for Shikhar Dhawan with the Delhi Daredevils . Shaun Pollock retired after the first season and became the head coach of the team. Lasith Malinga , who missed the previous season due to an injury, returned to the team. At the player auction , Mumbai bought South African batsman JP Duminy to strengthen their batting department. After winning their opening match against the Chennai Super Kings , Mumbai struggled to put up consistent performances during the season. They relied heavily on Duminy and Tendulkar's batting, and Malinga's bowling along with minimal contributions from other players. With only five wins from 14 matches, Mumbai finished on seventh place in the league table.

2010–2012: Rise as a strong team
At the 2010 players auction , Mumbai Indians bought Trinidadian all-rounder Kieron Pollard for $750,000 following a secret tie-breaker. After the auction, they signed up ten uncapped Indian players out whom seven were former ICL players. Former India cricketer Robin Singh was named as the head coach of the team as Pollock took up the role of bowling coach. Mumbai had to shift their home venue to Brabourne Stadium for the season since the Wankhede was undergoing renovation to host some matches of the 2011 ICC Cricket World Cup . Mumbai won seven of their first eight games to take the top spot in the points table. Their success was mainly due to the efforts of Tendulkar, Malinga, Harbhajan, Ambati Rayudu and Saurabh Tiwary . They won three of the remaining six league games and finished with 20 points from 14 games at the top of the points table. They beat the Royal Challengers Bangalore by 35 runs in the semifinal, thanks to Pollard's all-round efforts (33* from 13 balls, and 3/17). At the final, they were defeated by the Chennai Super Kings by 22 runs. The Mumbai team management was criticised for the "strategic errors" during the final such as sending Abhishek Nayar and Harbhajan at batting positions 3 and 4 respectively while Duminy and Pollard were sent at 7 and 8. Mumbai skipper Sachin Tendulkar, who scored 618 runs at an average of 47.53 and strike rate of 132.6, won the Orange Cap for scoring most runs in the season. Mumbai qualified for the 2010 Champions League Twenty20 where they were eliminated in the group stage with two wins and two defeats in four matches.
In 2011 , with the addition of two new teams to the IPL, the IPL Governing Council declared that each franchise could retain a maximum of four players of their 2010 squad, and the rest of the international players would be auctioned. Mumbai Indians retained Tendulkar, Harbhajan, Pollard and Malinga for a sum of $4.5 million. This retention left the franchise with the power of spending $4.5 million at the auction where they purchased Indian batsman Rohit Sharma for $2 million, former Australian all-rounder Andrew Symonds for $850,000, and pacer Munaf Patel for $700,000. Mumbai won eight of their first ten league games following which they suffered a loss of form that led to three consecutive defeats and a last-ball win in their last league match. They finished third on the points table with 18 points from 14 games and qualified for the Eliminator. The Eliminator was played at the Wankhede where Mumbai faced the Kolkata Knight Riders . After winning the toss and electing to bowl first, Mumbai restricted Kolkata to 147 in 20 overs and chased down the target for the loss of six wickets with four balls to spare. Munaf Patel won the Man of the Match for his bowling figures of 3/27. With this win, Mumbai qualified for the Qualifying final against Royal Challengers Bangalore, the winner of which would play the Super Kings in the final. Mumbai skipper Tendulkar won the toss once again and put their opposition into bat who set Mumbai a target of 186. Mumbai kept losing wickets at regular intervals from the start of their innings and could score only 142/8, falling short by 43 runs. The top two leading wicket-takers of the season were Mumbai Indians pacers Lasith Malinga and Munaf Patel with 28 and 22 wickets respectively.
Mumbai qualified for the 2011 Champions League Twenty20 held in India. Before the start of the tournament, six first-choice Indian players in the Mumbai squad including Tendulkar, Sharma and Patel were ruled out of the tournament due to injuries and two more Indian players were ruled out based on medical reports. This left their 14-member squad with only six Indian players, while the tournament allowed a maximum of four overseas players and minimum of seven local players in the playing eleven. An exception was made for the Mumbai Indians which permitted them to field five overseas players during the tournament. Harbhajan was named the stand-in captain in the absence of Tendulkar. Mumbai were placed in Group A alongside Chennai Super Kings, New South Wales Blues , Cape Cobras and Trinidad & Tobago . Mumbai had two wins, one defeat and one no result in the group stage which gave them the second place on the group points table with five points. They qualified for the semifinal and Mumbai batsman Suryakumar Yadav returned to the squad after recovering from his injury. This led to the withdrawal of the concession given by the Champions League for the Mumbai Indians to field five overseas players. Mumbai faced Somerset County Cricket Club in the semifinal at Chennai. Batting first, Mumbai made 160/5 in 20 overs. Somerset's chase was dented by Malinga who picked four wickets for 20 (all bowled ) to help Mumbai restrict Somerset to 150 and win the match by 10 runs. The final was also played in Chennai where Mumbai met Royal Challengers Bangalore. Mumbai batted first and managed only 139 in 20 overs. Bangalore started strongly in the run-chase putting 38 for the first wicket before Malinga broke the partnership. Harbhajan then picked up the key wickets of Chris Gayle and Virat Kohli triggering a batting collapse and eventually Bangalore were bowled out for 108, giving Mumbai a 31-run victory and their first-ever title. Harbahajan was named player of the match and Malinga won the man of the tournament award. Andrew Symonds retired from all forms of cricket in early 2012.
Before the start of the 2012 season , the Mumbai Indians traded Dinesh Karthik from Kings XI Punjab and Pragyan Ojha from the Deccan Chargers for undisclosed sums. At the auction , the franchise bought five players including R. P. Singh , Thisara Perera (both for $600,000) and Mitchell Johnson . Tendulkar stepped down from captaincy hours before the season's first game following which Harbhajan was appointed as the captain. In the first half of the league stage, Mumbai had four wins and four defeats, including three losses at home. Mumbai did not have a fixed opening combination, with Tendulkar missing out four matches due to an injury and other opening batsmen failing to show consistency. Johnson was ruled out of rest of the season in late-April with an injury and Dwayne Smith was named his replacement in the squad. Mumbai fared better in the second half of the league stage, winning six of their eight matches. They finished third on the points table with 20 points from 16 matches and qualified for the Eliminator against the fourth-placed Chennai Super Kings at Bangalore. Mumbai won the toss and put Chennai in to bat first. After losing two wickets inside the first two overs, Chennai managed to put up 187/5 in 20 overs mainly because of their captain MS Dhoni 's unbeaten 20-ball 51. Mumbai's chase had started solidly with the score reading 47/0 in the fifth over, before they started losing wickets at regular intervals to end at 149/9 and lose the match by 38 runs. They gained direct qualification to the 2012 Champions League Twenty20 in South Africa, along with the three IPL teams that finished at the top that season. Mumbai, placed in Group B, were winless in the tournament with three defeats and one no result.

2013–present: Success and comebacks after setbacks
The 2013 IPL saw Anil Kumble being appointed as the chief mentor, after he quit a similar position from Royal Challengers Bangalore . With a slump in batting form of Ricky Ponting , he was eventually dropped from the playing eleven and Rohit Sharma took lead of the team. Having the experienced advice of the likes of Anil Kumble, Jonty Rhodes and Sachin Tendulkar, the team emerged victorious in IPL 2013.
In the year 2013 Mumbai Indians started off by losing against the Royal Challengers Bangalore because of the efforts of Chris Gayle and pace bowler Vinay Kumar but they were able to make a comeback in that match because of Dinesh Karthik due to which Mumbai lost by just one run. In the second match against the Chennai Super Kings the openers went off cheaply but because of the efforts of Dinesh Karthik and Kieron Pollard Mumbai had put a defend able score on the board. The Mumbai Indians bowlers started off well by dismissing Murali Vijay cheaply and the match went off till the last over with the Super Kings needing 16 off the last over with MS Dhoni on strike and Munaf Patel to bowl; Patel dismissed Dhoni on the first ball and Mumbai won the match comfortably by 9 runs. In their third match against the Delhi Daredevils Mumbai once again lost their openers Ricky Ponting and Sachin Tendulkar cheaply and this time it was again Dinesh Karthik who brought the match in Mumbai's grasp, but this time it was not Kieron Pollard , but it was Rohit Sharma with him which helped the Mumbai Indians reach the formidable score of 209/5. At one stage it looked that David Warner would snatch the game away from Mumbai but the Mumbai Indians bowlers got rid of David Warner by dismissing him and then the Delhi Daredevils collapsed due to which Mumbai Indians won comfortably by 44 runs. In the next match against the Pune Warriors India Mumbai got off to a flying start with a 54-run opening stand between the so-called Pon-dulkar(Ricky Ponting and Sachin Tendulkar) and then it was followed by Rohit Sharma due to which Mumbai scored 183/3 and won the match comfortably by 41 runs. In the next match against the Rajasthan Royals Mumbai were bundled out for just 92 giving the Rajasthan Royals an 83-run victory due to which Ricky Ponting stepped down as a captain and retired from all forms of cricket. With Rohit Sharma in good batting form, he was made the captain. Under his captaincy the Mumbai Indians improved a lot and won their first IPL title.
They continued their winning streak in the Champions League. But in the Champions league too they had quite slow start which saw them having to win their final match of the league stage against the Perth Scorchers by a margin; they did it by the combined efforts of Nathan Coulter-Nile , Dwayne Smith and skipper Rohit Sharma . In the final Glenn Maxwell scored a quick fire 14-ball 37. Mumbai posted 202/6 and won the match comfortably by 33 runs.
In 2014 Mumbai didn't start off well losing 5 of their matches in the UAE leg against Kolkata Knight Riders , Royal Challengers Bangalore , Chennai Super Kings and Delhi Daredevils by big margins but did well in their 5th match against Sunrisers Hyderabad but consequently lost the matches against respective opponents.
In the Indian leg they made a comeback by beating Kings XI Punjab who were at the top of the table at that time. After that they were inconsistent with their performance. They won against Royal Challengers Bangalore but lost against Chennai Super Kings . They won against the Sunrisers Hyderabad and again lost against Kolkata Knight Riders . But after losing against the Kolkata Knight Riders they won against Kings XI Punjab and the Delhi Daredevils respectively.
In the match against Kings XI Punjab , Lendl Simmons scored a hundred due to which they won comfortably by seven wickets.
In the match against Rajasthan Royals they needed to score 190 runs in 14.3 overs while chasing but they just managed a tie with the Rajasthan Royals in 14.3 overs so they needed a boundary of the next ball and Aditya Tare hit a six to a full toss bowled by James Faulkner . Due to that six they reached the eliminator stage of the IPL but lost against the Chennai Super Kings which ended their IPL campaign of 2014.
The Mumbai Indians qualified in the qualifier round of the clt20 2014. Due to injury to their skipper Rohit Sharma , Kieron Pollard was named as their captain.
In the first match they faced the first the fbt20 2014 champions Lahore Lions but they lost against them with Lahore Lions winning by 6 wickets in 18.4 overs. In the second match they faced the Southern Express . Southern Express had a slow start and lost wickets regularly but somehow managed to score 161/6 in 20 overs. The Mumbai Indians started off with an excellent opening partnership of 139 runs in just 14 overs but lost their first wicket on the 4th ball of the 15th over but skipper Kieron Pollard ended things off in blistering way with scoring 20 runs from just 7 balls. But in the last match against the Northern Knights they just managed 132 runs which the Northern Knights won comfortably 6 wickets with 16 balls to spare. In this way Mumbai's clt20 2014 campaign ended.
Mumbai Indians won their second IPL title in 2015 after they defeated Chennai Super Kings by 41 runs. They started the season with 4 IPL defeats mainly due to their bowling. They even lost Aaron Finch and Corey Anderson due to injury for the rest of the season. That is when Lendl Simmons got a chance back into the team and with the help of 6 half-centuries, gave the team solid starts throughout the season. He was the top scorer for Mumbai with 540 runs and joint second (with Ajinkya Rahane ) in total for the season behind David Warner. The introduction of another strike bowler Mitchell McClenaghan in the team provided good support to Lasith Malinga upfront. Mumbai then went on to win 9 out of their last 10 Matches to win the title thanks to solid batting performances from Simmons, Rohit Sharma, Ambati Rayudu and Kieron Pollard and good bowling from Malinga, McClenaghan and Harbhajan Singh .
In the Vivo IPL 2016 Auction they bought Tim Southee , Nathu Singh , Jos Buttler , Jitesh Sharma , KP Kamath, Krunal Pandya and Deepak Punia .
In IPL 2017 , the Mumbai Indians finished at the top of the points table, winning 10 out of 14 matches. They went on to win the trophy after beating Rising Pune Supergiant in a nail-biting finish. This was their third IPL title.

Home ground
The Mumbai Indians used to play home games at the DY Patil Stadium in Navi Mumbai for the first 2 IPL seasons. In the 3rd season in 2010 they played at the Brabourne Stadium.Mumbai Indians now play their home games at Wankhede Stadium in Mumbai . The stadium is named after former BCCI President S. K. Wankhede . The stadium is owned by the Mumbai Cricket Association and has a seating capacity of more than 30,000. In 2010, the Mumbai Indians played all seven home games at the Brabourne Stadium while the Wankhede Stadium underwent renovation for hosting a few matches of group stage as well as the final of the 2011 ICC Cricket World Cup . Mumbai Indians won six out of the seven matches at the Brabourne Stadium that season.h

Team identity
The Mumbai Indians were the most watched team on television in the first and last season of the IPL, totaling to 239 million viewers. [11] After posting a revenue of ₹ 69 crore and expenditure of ₹ 85 crore, the first season left the owners with net loss of INR 16 crore and were expected to break even in the 2009 season. [12]

Team name, motto and logo design
The motto of the team is "Duniya Hila Denge Hum...", which translates to We will rock the world . [13] The first anthem of Mumbai Indian was based on this motto, wherein the Bollywood actor Hrithik Roshan was roped in for a promotional video campaign. [14]
The team logo is the Sudarshan Chakra (or Razor) as initially the name of the team was supposed to be "Mumbai Razors" before Sachin Tendulkar suggested to keep it Mumbai Indians.

Jersey colours
The team's primary colour is blue with silver stripes on either sides of the jersey. The team colours was almost the same in 2008 and 2009, with Idea as the principal sponsor, except for the colour shade and additional sponsors. In 2010, a new kit with golden stripes was unveiled. In 2011, kit used in 2010 is being used with Hero Honda as the main sponsor. The 2011 jersey also has three gold stripes going towards the back on the side of the jersey for the new players in the team. The kit manufacturer was Adidas from the start of IPL in 2008 till 2014. [15] In 2015, Performax , an in-house brand of Reliance Trends , replaced Adidas as the kit manufacturer.

Theme song
The current theme song of the Mumbai Indians is the famous Ala Re . However, after every boundary or a wicket by the team, a fan-made music titled "Akkha Mumbai Khelega" is always played by the stadium disc jockey .

Players
During the player auction in 2008, the Mumbai Indians successfully bid for 7 players, including two members of the Indian Twenty-20 World cup winning side in Harbhajan Singh , Robin Uthappa . Sanath Jayasuriya , Lasith Malinga , Luke Ronchi , Dilhara Fernando and Shaun Pollock were other cricketers who were successfully bid for by the franchise. [16]
Outside of the player auction, the franchise also signed up Ajinkya Rahane and Abhishek Nayar (from Mumbai), Yogesh Takawale (WK-Batsman from Maharashtra) and Pinal Shah (WK-Batsman from Baroda). [17] Saurabh Tiwary and Manish Pandey , the members of the U-19 world-cup winning team were the random picks drafted in during the BCCI held second auction. Dominic Thornely was also signed by the Mumbai Indians for a sum of $30,000. André Nel the South African fast bowler was signed on in the place of Dwayne Bravo who left the tournament early. [18]
In the 2009 player auction, the Mumbai Indians signed up South African player, JP Duminy for $950,000. He was the third most expensive pick after Kevin Pietersen and Andrew Flintoff (both signed up for $1.55m by Bangalore Royal Challengers and Chennai Super Kings respectively). In addition Kyle Mills and Mohammad Ashraful for $150,000 and $75,000 respectively were bought by MI management. The team also signed Graham Napier and Ryan McLaren at the pre-auction signings.
In the IPL 2010 Mumbai Indians bought West Indian all-rounder Kieron Pollard for $750,000 ($2,750,000) after a silent tie-breaker with Chennai Super Kings , Royal Challengers Bangalore and the Kolkata Knight Riders .as he impressed everyone with his performances at Big Bash and Champions League .
In 2011 , as two new teams were added to the IPL, the IPL Governing Council declared that each franchise could retain a maximum of four players of their squad, only three of whom can be Indian players, and the rest of the international players would be put in the mega-auction. The Mumbai franchise, keen to have the same set of core players, retained captain Sachin Tendulkar , Vice-Captain Harbhajan Singh , All-Rounder Kieron Pollard and Fast Bowler Lasith Malinga for a total of $4.5 million. The retention left them with the power of spending only $4.5 million at the mega-auction. At the auction , they purchased Rohit Sharma as one of the costliest player in the auction along with Munaf Patel , Andrew Symonds , Aiden Blizzard, a hard-hitting Australian batsman and James Franklin , an all rounder from New Zealand.
At the 2012 IPL player auction , Mumbai Indians bought South Africans Richard Levi and Robin Peterson for $50,000 and $100,000 respectively, Australian fast bowler Mitchell Johnson for $300,000, Indian fast bowler R. P. Singh for $600,000 and Sri Lankan all-rounder Thisara Perera for $650,000.
After the auctions, Mumbai Indians managed to get South African explosive opener Richard Levi, who shot into limelight after hitting the fastest century in T20 international cricket and hitting a record 13 sixes, after a bidding war with Pune Warriors India. Richard Levi was brought in as a replacement for Andrew Symonds, who retired from all forms of the game citing family reasons. Sachin Tendulkar stepped down as Mumbai Indians captain ahead of the IPL 2012 season-opener against Chennai.
At the 2013 IPL player auction , Former Australian Captain Ricky Ponting was purchased by Mumbai Indians for $400,000 and he became the new captain for sixth edition of IPL. Also at the auction, Glenn Maxwell was purchased by Mumbai Indians. Also Phillip Hughes, Nathan Coulter - Nile, Jacob Oram was purchased by MI Management.

Transfers
In the 2008–2009 transfer window, Mumbai Indians conducted two straight swap deals, with no money exchanged. Ashish Nehra was swapped with Shikhar Dhawan of Delhi Daredevils [19] and on the last day of the transfer window, Robin Uthappa was swapped with Zaheer Khan of Royal Challengers Bangalore , [20] who plays for Mumbai in the Ranji Trophy . In a three-way trade, Jaydev Shah of the Rajasthan Royals – captain of the Saurashtra Ranji squad that made it to the semi-finals and son of former cricket board secretary Niranjan Shah – will move to the Mumbai Indians.
During the transfer window, Mumbai Indians was the first team to induct a new player in their squad. Tamil Nadu wicket-keeper Dinesh Karthik transferred to Mumbai Indians for $2.35 million (Rs 12.4 crores approximately). [21] Also making a switch was Rajagopal Sathish , who moved to Kings XI Punjab for an undisclosed amount. In their latest trade, Indian left-arm spinner Pragyan Ojha has transferred to Mumbai Indians from Deccan Chargers for an undisclosed amount., [22] while letting Ali Murtaza move to Pune Warriors India .
On 4 November 2014, Mumbai Indians acquired Unmukt Chand, Aaron Finch and Vinay Kumar for 2015 IPL. [23] Parthiv Patel also joined the Mumbai Indians squad for the 8th edition of IPL in the transfer window period. Aaron Finch along with Mitchell Mcclenaghan joined Mumbai Indians in the 2015 IPL Auction.

Seasons

Current squad

Administration and support staff

Head coach record
As of 2017 season
Note: Record also includes matches played in Champions League T20

Kit Manufacturers and Sponsors
American multinational corporation – MasterCard was the official founding sponsor of the Mumbai Indians, [26] while Adidas was their official apparel sponsor until 2014. [27] Since then UAE's national carrier Etihad Airways signed a 3 years contract and took over as one of the principle sponsor of Mumbai Indians. In 2015, Performax the in-house brand of Reliance Trends took over as the apperal sponsors. Associate sponsors and official partners include Bridgestone , Dheeraj and East Coast LLC , Kingfisher , Wrigley's Orbit , Wrigley's Boomer, Royal Stag, Air India , Msn , Jet Airways and Red FM 93.5 . [28] Hero Motocorp was also one of the main sponsors of Mumbai Indians for 2011 and 2012 seasons. The principle sponsors of Mumbai Indians are Videocon d2h since 2013. In 2015, companies such as USHA , Jack & Jones , HTC , Tiny Owl , Paytm , Ola Cabs , DNA and Fever 104 FM came on board. From 2016, DHFL and Samsung joined as the new Associate Sponsors along with them Pepsi , yatra.com , Radio City , LYF smartphones and Guvera came in as the new official sponsors. The global fashion brand Diesel 's first ever association with cricket to produce a limited edition collection which will be available globally across popular cricket playing nations.

Philanthropy
Mumbai Indians have supported the social cause of education to the underprivileged. Mumbai Indians have raised funds for the cause via selling merchandise like wristbands signed by their Players. The NGOs supported are Pratham, Ummeed, Akanksha, Teach For India and Nanhi Kali. [29]

Statistics

Overall results in the IPL

By opposition
WebPage index: 00009
Iranian presidential election, 2017
Presidential elections were held in Iran on 19 May 2017, the twelfth such election in Iran . Local elections were held simultaneously.
Candidates ' registration took place from 11 to 15 April 2017. Incumbent president Hassan Rouhani was eligible to run for re-election. His rivals were the conservatives ' top candidate Ebrahim Raisi , the Islamic Coalition Party 's Mostafa Mir-Salim and Mostafa Hashemitaba who ran with no partisan support. [2]
Rouhani was re-elected for a second term. According to results announced by the Interior Ministry , Rouhani received 23.5 of 41 million votes counted. His closest rival, Ebrahim Raisi, received 15.7 million votes. [3]

Electoral system

Eligibility
Any Iranian citizen above 18 years of age was able to register as a presidential candidate. An institution called the Election Monitoring Agency (EMA) and managed by the Guardian Council vets registered candidates and approves a handful to run in the election. The Guardian Council does not publicly announce the reason a particular candidate is rejected, although those reasons are explained to each candidate. Women who register as candidates have invariably been excluded from standing for election by the Council. [4] [5]

Timeline
According to the official dates announced on 1 April 2017 by the Ministry of Interior : [6]

Candidates

Registration and vetting process
During the five days period, a total of 1,636 individuals put their name to run for president, an increase over the 686 candidates in the previous election in 2013. Among the candidates was a record number of 137 women. [7] Hundreds of the applicants were ordinary people with no political background [8] and clearly lacked the criteria cited in the article 115 of the constitution , which is being considered among “religious and political rejal ("men" or "personalities", according to different interpretations)” [9] . Many criticized the law, which allows almost anyone to register to run. [7] Some intended to gain public attention, including political prisoners Mehdi Khazali and former MP Ghasem Sholeh-Saadi , [10] and some women tried to challenge the judicial interpretation of word rejal as "men", most notably Azam Taleghani . [7] [10] On 20 April 2017, the Guardian Council announced a list of 6 approved candidates. The list contains incumbent president Hassan Rouhani , incumbent vice president Eshaq Jahangiri , Astan Quds Razavi custodian Ebrahim Raisi , Tehran Mayor Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf , Mostafa Mir-Salim and Mostafa Hashemitaba . [11]
Former president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and his vice president Hamid Baghaei were disqualified. [12] Ahmadinejad, who was advised by the Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei not to run for the election, [13] wrote a letter in September 2016 to him, pledging that he would not run. [14] On 11 February 2017, he officially declared that he would not back any candidate, however, in a video released on 19 March 2017 he announced his support for Hamid Baghaei [15] and surprised observers by himself registering to run. [16]
Mohammad Gharazi was also among those disqualified, despite being approved as a candidate in 2013. [17]

Approved candidates

Withdrawals
In his statement, Ghalibaf accused current president Hassan Rouhani of financial mismanagement and asserted that he and his supporters were "revolutionary opportunists." [19] The statement read:

Campaign

Debates and TV programs
Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting (IRIB) provides each candidate with 210 minutes for campaign talks on TV, [23] and there would be three debate sessions on politics, economics, and social pressing issues aired on Channel 1 . [24] On 20 April 2017, Election Campaign Monitoring Commission announced that there would be no live debates and it will broadcast prerecorded, [25] however, after vast criticism from candidates and Iranian people the commission revoked its decision two days later. [26] Candidates are scheduled to air dedicated programmes on IRIB TV channels and radio stations, 555 minutes for each per candidate, and a sum of 1,470 minutes including the debates. [27]

Campaigning techniques
The election was characterised for usage of populist practices [28] [29] and mudslinging . [30]
The conservatives launched smear campaigns against the reformist -backed candidate Hassan Rouhani, [2] [28] while he initially maintained positive campaigning. Rouhani later changed strategy by straightly attacking his rivals [31] and the incumbent administration used fearmongering tactics. [32]

Role of social media
Social media was traditionally a tool for the reformists to campaign, but the presence of conservatives during the election was unprecedented in Iranian political history. [34]
Telegram instant messaging service, the most widely used messaging application in Iran, reportedly has more than 45 million users in a country of nearly 80 million as of April 2016. [35] It serves as a platform for Iranians to express their political opinions [36] and played an important role in the campaigns for the elections held in 2016 for Parliament and Assembly of Experts . [37] Twitter is blocked in Iran , however, Iranians use proxies to tweet and those that create a buzz, then travel to Telegram channels, where "they can potentially reach a much wider audience" according to BBC. [38]
Two months before election, Iranian Judiciary arrested some pro- Hassan Rouhani Telegram channel administrators for “crimes against public morals and publishing obscenity ”. [35]
The campaigners also heavily used Instagram [38] and its feature of airing live videos to stream real-time campaign developments. [39]

Tactical nomination of Jahangiri
President Rouhani's ally and first vice president Eshaq Jahangiri is standing in the election to support him during the campaign and in TV debates, [41] being called as a ‘fender’ or ‘cover candidate’ by Iranian media, [42] and will possibly later withdraw in support of the incumbent president. [43] The idea was allegedly recommended by Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani , [42] who was a key backer of Rouhani before his death in January 2017. [41] Another reason for the nomination was to have an ‘alternative candidate’ in case the Guardian Council disqualified Rouhani [44] or raise his profile for a bid in 2021. [40]
Jahangiri withdrew in favor of Rouhani on 16 May 2017. [22]

Hashemitaba's endorsement of Rouhani
Candidate Mostafa Hashemitaba released a statement on 15 May 2017 and endorsed Rouhani, but refused to quit the race. He said he “will vote for the current president to help extension of this government 's constructive approach.” [45]

Conservative consensus candidate
Among the approved candidates, Ebrahim Raisi , Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf and Mostafa Mir-Salim are regarded as figures of the conservative camp , which intended to bring one single candidate for the election. [46] Popular Front of Islamic Revolution Forces endorsed both Raisi and Ghalibaf, [2] and it was unclear if any of them would drop out in favor of a fellow conservative. [47]
On 15 May 2017, Ghalibaf gave up his bid in favor of Raisi. [18]
Islamic Coalition Party released a statement on 18 May 2017, announcing it supports Raisi's bid for presidency following the withdrawal of Mostafa Mir-Salim , [48] despite the fact that Mir-Salim denied that he is withdrawing from the race. [49]

Endorsements and positions

Opinion polls

Voter demographics

Polling process
The election was kicked off at 8 a.m. ( IRST ) on Friday, 29 May 2017. It was held in domestic 63,429 polling stations, in addition to some 14,000 mobile ballot boxes. It involved around 1.5 million executive forces and monitors, 350,000 security forces, 70,000 inspectors, and around 100,000 representatives of local governors. [87]
After a “huge rush” of citizens to vote, [88] the polling time was extended for several extra hours until midnight which is the latest possible time allowed by the law. [89]

Polling stations abroad
Among the citizens eligible to vote in the election, about 2.5 million lived abroad and the elections were held in 103 countries, including the United States. [90]
Canada , which hosts at least 400,000 Iranians, [90] does not have diplomatic relations with Iran , a situation which hindered participation of Iranian citizens. [91] However, some traveled to the United States in order to vote. [92]

Results
According to final results, 41,220,131 voted from a registered electorate of 56,410,234. Turnout was 73.07%. The Ministry of Interior announced results gradually after midnight (local time), after polls closed. Final results were announced at 14:00.
Split percentages are from the Ministry of Interior of Iran, based on all votes cast. This is because 50%+ of all votes is needed to win the first round.

Provincial votes
The table below displays the official vote tallies by province:

International votes
The table below displays the official vote tallies by country:

Protests
On 21 May 2017, Ebrahim Raisi wrote a letter to the Guardian Council , objecting to the results. [93]

Allegations of foreign interference

Judiciary head remarks
The head of Iran's judicial system , Sadeq Larijani , warned that enemies made a "huge investment" to undermine and exploit the elections: "The enemies may want to deal a blow to the Iranian political system during the elections". [94]

President of Tatarstan visit
On 20 April 2017, Rustam Minnikhanov - President of Tatarstan and Vladimir Putin 's envoy, met with candidate Ebrahim Raisi in Mashhad in Raisi's capacity as Head of Astan Quds Razavi . MP Alireza Rahimi questioned the meeting and asked for explanations about the reasons for it, citing alleged Russian interference in 2016 U.S. election . “The recent meeting raises the suspicion of interference in the elections, which is not appropriate”, he said. [95] [96]
According to the official Islamic Republic News Agency , Minnikhanov also met vice president Eshaq Jahangiri in Tehran one day earlier, discussing bilateral relations. [97]

Reactions

Domestic
Tens of thousands of supporters of President Hassan Rouhani have poured into the streets of Tehran as night falls to celebrate the incumbent's re-election. [98] The Tehran Stock Exchange rallied after the election results came out, extending a recent winning streak to close almost 1% higher at its highest level in three months. [99]

Individuals

Organizations

International
WebPage index: 00010
Amar pelos dois
WebPage index: 00011
Deaths in 2017
This is a chronology of deaths in 2017 . Names are reported under the date of death. Names under each date are reported in alphabetical order by surname or pseudonym.
A typical entry reports information in the following sequence:

May

26

25

24

23

22

21

20

19

18

17

16

15

14

13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

Earlier months

See also
WebPage index: 00012
May 26
May 26 is the 146th day of the year (147th in leap years ) in the Gregorian calendar . There are 219 days remaining until the end of the year. This date is slightly more likely to fall on a Tuesday, Thursday or Saturday (58 in 400 years each) than on Sunday or Monday (57), and slightly less likely to occur on a Wednesday or Friday (56).

Events

Births

Deaths

Holidays and observances

External links
WebPage index: 00013
Church of England
The Church of England ( C of E ) is the state church of England . [3] [4] [5] The Archbishop of Canterbury (currently Justin Welby ) is the most senior cleric, although the monarch is the supreme governor . The Church of England is also the mother church of the international Anglican Communion . It dates its establishment as a national church to the 6th-century Gregorian mission to Kent led by Augustine of Canterbury . [6] [7]
The English church renounced papal authority when Henry VIII failed to secure an annulment of his marriage to Catherine of Aragon in the 1530s. [8] The English Reformation accelerated under Edward VI 's regents before a brief restoration of papal authority under Queen Mary I and King Philip . The Act of Supremacy 1558 renewed the breach and the Elizabethan Settlement charted a course whereby the English church was to be both Catholic and Reformed:
In the earlier phase of the English Reformation there were both Catholic martyrs and radical Protestant martyrs. The later phases saw the Penal Laws punish Roman Catholic and nonconforming Protestants . In the 17th century, political and religious disputes raised the Puritan and Presbyterian faction to control of the church, but this ended with the Restoration . Papal recognition of George III in 1766 led to greater religious tolerance.
Since the English Reformation, the Church of England has used a liturgy in English. The church contains several doctrinal strands, the main three known as Anglo-Catholic , Evangelical and Broad Church . Tensions between theological conservatives and progressives find expression in debates over the ordination of women and homosexuality . The church includes both liberal and conservative clergy and members. [10]
The governing structure of the church is based on dioceses , each presided over by a bishop. Within each diocese are local parishes. The General Synod of the Church of England is the legislative body for the church and comprises bishops, other clergy and laity . Its measures must be approved by both Houses of Parliament .

History

Early Christianity in England
According to tradition, Christianity arrived in Britain in the 1st or 2nd century , during which time southern Britain became part of the Roman Empire . The earliest historical evidence of Christianity among the native Britons is found in the writings of such early Christian Fathers as Tertullian and Origen in the first years of the 3rd century . Three Romano-British bishops, including Restitutus , are known to have been present at the Council of Arles in 314. [11] Others attended the Council of Sardica in 347 and that of Ariminum in 360, and a number of references to the church in Roman Britain are found in the writings of 4th century Christian fathers. Britain was the home of Pelagius , who opposed Augustine of Hippo 's doctrine of original sin . [12]
While Christianity was long established as the religion of the Britons at the time of the Anglo-Saxon invasion , Christian Britons made little progress in converting the newcomers from their native paganism . Consequently, in 597, Pope Gregory I sent the prior of the Abbey of St Andrew's (later canonised as Augustine of Canterbury ) from Rome to evangelise the Angles . This event is known as the Gregorian mission and is the date the Church of England generally marks as the beginning of its formal history. With the help of Christians already residing in Kent , Augustine established his church at Canterbury , the capital of the Kingdom of Kent , and became the first in the series of Archbishops of Canterbury in 598. A later archbishop, the Greek Theodore of Tarsus , also contributed to the organisation of Christianity in England. The Church of England has been in continuous existence since the days of St Augustine, with the Archbishop of Canterbury as its episcopal head. Despite the various disruptions of the Reformation and the English Civil War , the Church of England considers itself to be the same church which was more formally organised by Augustine. [13]
While some Celtic Christian practices were changed at the Synod of Whitby , the Christian Church in the British Isles was under papal authority from earliest times. [14] Queen Bertha of Kent was among the Christians in England who recognised papal authority before Augustine arrived [15] and Celtic Christians were carrying out missionary work with papal approval long before the Synod of Whitby.
The Synod of Whitby established the Roman date for Easter and the Roman style of monastic tonsure in England. This meeting of the ecclesiastics with Roman customs with local bishops was summoned in 664 at Saint Hilda's double monastery of Streonshalh (Streanæshalch), later called Whitby Abbey. It was presided over by King Oswiu, who did not engage in the debate but made the final ruling.

Separation from Rome
In 1534, King Henry VIII separated the English Church from Rome. [8] A theological separation had been foreshadowed by various movements within the English Church, such as Lollardy , but the English Reformation gained political support when Henry VIII wanted an annulment of his marriage to Catherine of Aragon so he could marry Anne Boleyn . Pope Clement VII , considering that the earlier marriage had been entered under a papal dispensation and how Catherine's nephew, Emperor Charles V , might react to such a move, refused the annulment. Eventually, Henry, although theologically opposed to Protestantism, took the position of Supreme Head of the Church of England to ensure the annulment of his marriage. He was excommunicated by Pope Paul III . [16]
In 1536–40 Henry VIII engaged in the Dissolution of the Monasteries , which controlled much of the richest land. He disbanded monasteries , priories , convents and friaries in England, Wales and Ireland, appropriated their income, disposed of their assets, and provided pensions for the former residents. The properties were sold to pay for the wars. Bernard argues:
Henry maintained a strong preference for traditional Catholic practices and, during his reign, Protestant reformers were unable to make many changes to the practices of the Church of England. Indeed, this part of Henry's reign saw the trial for heresy of Protestants as well as Roman Catholics.
Under his son, King Edward VI , more Protestant-influenced forms of worship were adopted. Under the leadership of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Cranmer , a more radical reformation proceeded. A new pattern of worship was set out in the Book of Common Prayer (1549 and 1552). These were based on the older liturgy but influenced by Protestant principles. The confession of the reformed Church of England was set out in the Forty-two Articles (later revised to thirty-nine). The reformation however was cut short by the death of the king. Queen Mary I , who succeeded him, returned England again to the authority of the papacy, thereby ending the first attempt at an independent Church of England. During her co-reign with her husband, King Philip , many leaders and common people were burnt for their refusal to recant of their reformed faith. These are known as the Marian martyrs and the persecution led to her nickname of "Bloody Mary".
Mary also died childless and so it was left to the new regime of her half-sister Elizabeth to resolve the direction of the church. The settlement under Queen Elizabeth I (from 1558), known as the Elizabethan Settlement , developed the via media (middle way) character of the Church of England, a church moderately Reformed in doctrine, as expressed in the Thirty-Nine Articles , but also emphasising continuity with the Catholic and Apostolic traditions of the Church Fathers . It was also an established church (constitutionally established by the state with the head of state as its supreme governor ). The exact nature of the relationship between church and state would be a source of continued friction into the next century.

Stuart period
For the next century, through the reigns of James I , who ordered the creation of what became known as the King James Bible , [18] and Charles I , culminating in the English Civil War and the Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell , there were significant swings back and forth between two factions: the Puritans (and other radicals) who sought more far-reaching Protestant reforms, and the more conservative churchmen who aimed to keep closer to traditional beliefs and Catholic practices. The failure of political and ecclesiastical authorities to submit to Puritan demands for more extensive reform was one of the causes of open warfare. By Continental standards, the level of violence over religion was not high, but the casualties included King Charles I and the Archbishop of Canterbury, William Laud . Under the Commonwealth and the Protectorate of England from 1649 to 1660, the bishops were dethroned and former practices were outlawed, and Presbyterian ecclesiology was introduced in place of the episcopate. The 39 Articles were replaced by the Westminster Confession , the Book of Common Prayer by the Directory of Public Worship. Despite this, about one quarter of English clergy refused to conform to this form of State Presbyterianism.
With the Restoration of Charles II, Parliament restored the Church of England to a form not far removed from the Elizabethan version. One difference was that the ideal of encompassing all the people of England in one religious organisation, taken for granted by the Tudors, had to be abandoned. The religious landscape of England assumed its present form, with the Anglican established church occupying the middle ground, and those Puritans and Protestants who dissented from the Anglican establishment, and Roman Catholics, too strong to be suppressed altogether, having to continue their existence outside the national church rather than controlling it. Continuing official suspicion and legal restrictions continued well into the 19th century.

19th century
By the Fifth Article of the Union with Ireland 1800 , the Church of England and Church of Ireland were united into "one Protestant Episcopal church, to be called, the United Church of England and Ireland". [19] Although this union was declared "an essential and fundamental Part of the Union", [20] the Irish Church Act 1869 separated the Irish part of the church again and disestablished it, the Act coming into effect on 1 January 1871.

Overseas developments
As the British Empire expanded, British colonists and colonial administrators took the established church doctrines and practices together with ordained ministry and formed overseas branches of the Church of England. As they developed or, beginning with the United States of America, became sovereign or independent states, many of their churches became separate organisationally but remained linked to the Church of England through the Anglican Communion .
In Bermuda, the oldest remaining English colony (now designated a British Overseas Territory ), the first Church of England services were performed by the Reverend Richard Buck, one of the survivors of the 1609 wreck of the Sea Venture that began Bermuda's permanent settlement. The nine parishes of the Church of England in Bermuda , each with its own church and glebe land , rarely had more than a pair of ordained ministers to share between them until the Nineteenth Century. From 1825 to 1839, Bermuda's parishes were attached to the See of Nova Scotia . Bermuda was then grouped into the new Diocese of Newfoundland and Bermuda from 1839. In 1879, the Synod of the Church of England in Bermuda was formed. At the same time, a Diocese of Bermuda became separate from the Diocese of Newfoundland , but both continued to be grouped under the Bishop of Newfoundland and Bermuda until 1919, when Newfoundland and Bermuda each received its own Bishop.
The Church of England in Bermuda was renamed in 1978 as the Anglican Church of Bermuda , which is an extra-provincial diocese , [21] with both metropolitan and primatial authority coming directly from the Archbishop of Canterbury. Among its parish churches is St Peter's Church in the UNESCO World Heritage Site of St George's Town , which is both the oldest Anglican and the oldest non-Roman Catholic church in the New World.

21st century

Deposition from holy orders overturned
Under the guidance of Rowan Williams and with significant pressure from clergy union representatives, the ecclesiastical penalty for convicted felons to be defrocked was set aside from the Clergy Discipline Measure 2003 . The clergy union argued that the penalty was unfair to victims of hypothetical miscarriages of criminal justice, because the ecclesiastical penalty is considered irreversible. Although clerics can still be banned for life from ministry, they remain ordained as priests. [22]

Dwindling congregations
The archbishops of Canterbury and York warned in January 2015 that the Church of England will no longer be able to carry on in its current form unless the downward spiral in membership is somehow reversed as typical Sunday attendances have halved to 800,000 in the last 40 years: [23]
However, Sarah Mullally , the fourth woman chosen to become a bishop in the Church of England, insisted in June 2015 that declining numbers at services should not necessarily be a cause of despair for churches because people will still "encounter God" without ever taking their place in a pew, saying that people might hear the Christian message through social media sites such as Facebook or in a café run as a community project. [24] Additionally, the church's own statistics reveal that 9.7 million people visit an Anglican church every year and 1 million students are educated at Anglican schools. [25]

Low salaries
In 2015 the Church of England admitted that it was embarrassed to be paying staff under the living wage. The Church of England had previously campaigned for all employers to pay this minimum amount. The archbishop acknowledged it was not the only area where the church "fell short of its standards". [26]

Doctrine and practice
The canon law of the Church of England identifies the Christian scriptures as the source of its doctrine. In addition, doctrine is also derived from the teachings of the Church Fathers and ecumenical councils (as well as the ecumenical creeds ) in so far as these agree with scripture. This doctrine is expressed in the Thirty-Nine Articles of Religion , the Book of Common Prayer , and the Ordinal containing the rites for the ordination of deacons , priests , and the consecration of bishops. [27] Unlike other traditions, the Church of England has no single theologian that it can look to as a founder. However, Richard Hooker 's appeal to scripture, church tradition , and reason as sources of authority continue to inform Anglican identity. [28]
The Church of England's doctrinal character today is largely the result of the Elizabethan Settlement, which sought to establish a comprehensive middle way between Roman Catholicism and Protestantism. The Church of England affirms the Protestant Reformation principle that scripture contains all things necessary to salvation and is the final arbiter in doctrinal matters. The Thirty-nine Articles are the church's only official confessional statement. Though not a complete system of doctrine, the articles highlight areas of agreement with Lutheran and Reformed positions, while differentiating Anglicanism from Roman Catholicism and Anabaptism . [28]
While embracing some themes of the Protestant Reformation, the Church of England also maintains Catholic traditions of the ancient church and teachings of the Church Fathers, unless these are considered contrary to scripture. It accepts the decisions of the first four ecumenical councils concerning the Trinity and the Incarnation . The Church of England also preserves Catholic order by adhering to episcopal polity , with ordained orders of bishops, priests and deacons. There are differences of opinion within the Church of England over the necessity of episcopacy. Some consider it essential, while others feel it is needed for the proper ordering of the church. [28]
The Church of England has, as one of its distinguishing marks, a breadth and "open-mindedness". This tolerance has allowed Anglicans who emphasise the Catholic tradition and others who emphasise the Reformed tradition to coexist. The three "parties" (see Churchmanship ) in the Church of England are sometimes called high church (or Anglo-Catholic ), low church (or evangelical Anglicanism ) and broad church (or liberal ). The high church party places importance on the Church of England's continuity with the pre-Reformation Catholic Church, adherence to ancient liturgical usages and the sacerdotal nature of the priesthood. As their name suggests, Anglo-Catholics maintain many traditional Catholic practices and liturgical forms. [29] The low church party is more Protestant in both ceremony and theology. [30] Historically, broad church has been used to describe those of middle-of-the-road ceremonial preferences who lean theologically towards liberal Protestantism. [31] The balance between these strands of churchmanship is not static: in 2013, 40% of Church of England worshippers attended evangelical churches (compared with 26% in 1989), and 83% of very large congregations were evangelical. Such churches were also reported to attract higher numbers of men and young adults than others. [32]

Worship and liturgy
The Church of England's official book of liturgy as established in English Law is the Book of Common Prayer . In addition to this book the General Synod has also legislated for a modern liturgical book , Common Worship , dating from 2000, which can be used as an alternative to the BCP. Like its predecessor, the 1980 Alternative Service Book , it differs from the Book of Common Prayer in providing a range of alternative services, mostly in modern language, although it does include some BCP-based forms as well, for example Order Two for Holy Communion. (This is a revision of the BCP service, altering some words and allowing the insertion of some other liturgical texts such as the Agnus Dei before communion.) The Order One rite follows the pattern of more modern liturgical scholarship.
The liturgies are organised according to the traditional liturgical year and the calendar of saints . The sacraments of baptism and the Eucharist are generally thought necessary to salvation. Infant baptism is practised. At a later age, individuals baptised as infants receive confirmation by a bishop, at which time they reaffirm the baptismal promises made by their parents or sponsors. The Eucharist, consecrated by a thanksgiving prayer including Christ's Words of Institution , is believed to be "a memorial of Christ's once-for-all redemptive acts in which Christ is objectively present and effectually received in faith". [33]
The use of hymns and music in the Church of England has changed dramatically over the centuries. Traditional Choral evensong is a staple of most cathedrals. [ citation needed ] The style of psalm chanting harks back to the Church of England's pre-reformation roots. During the 18th century, clergy such as Charles Wesley introduced their own styles of worship with poetic hymns.
In the latter half of the 20th century, the influence of the Charismatic Movement significantly altered the worship traditions of numerous Church of England parishes, primarily affecting those of evangelical persuasion. These churches now adopt a contemporary worship form of service, with minimal liturgical or ritual elements, and incorporating contemporary worship music .

Women's ministry
Women were appointed as deaconesses from 1861 but they could not function fully as deacons and were not considered ordained clergy. Women have been lay readers for a long time. During the First World War, some women were appointed as lay readers, known as " bishop's messengers ", who also led missions and ran churches in the absence of men. After that no more lay readers were appointed until 1969.
Legislation authorising the ordination of women as deacons was passed in 1986 and they were first ordained in 1987. The ordination of women as priests was passed by the General Synod in 1992 and began in 1994 . In 2010, for the first time in the history of the Church of England, more women than men were ordained as priests (290 women and 273 men). [34]
In July 2005, the synod voted to "set in train" the process of allowing the consecration of women as bishops. In February 2006, the synod voted overwhelmingly for the "further exploration" of possible arrangements for parishes that did not want to be directly under the authority of a bishop who is a woman. [35] On 7 July 2008, the synod voted to approve the ordination of women as bishops and rejected moves for alternative episcopal oversight for those who do not accept the ministry of bishops who are women. [36] Actual ordinations of women to the episcopate required further legislation, which was narrowly rejected in a vote at General Synod in November 2012. [37] [38]
On 20 November 2013, the General Synod voted overwhelmingly in support of a plan to allow the ordination of women as bishops, with 378 in favour, 8 against and 25 abstentions. [39]
On 14 July 2014, the General Synod approved the ordination of women as bishops. The House of Bishops recorded 37 votes in favour, two against with one abstention. The House of Clergy had 162 in favour, 25 against and four abstentions. The House of Laity voted 152 for, 45 against with five abstentions. [40] This legislation had to be approved by the Ecclesiastical Committee of the Parliament before it could be finally implemented at the November 2014 synod.
In December 2014, Libby Lane was announced as the first woman to become a bishop in the Church of England. She was consecrated as a bishop in January 2015. [41] [42]
In July 2015, Rachel Treweek was the first woman to become a diocesan bishop in the Church of England when she became the Bishop of Gloucester . [43] She and Sarah Mullally , Bishop of Crediton, were the first women to be ordained as bishops at Canterbury Cathedral . [43] Treweek later made headlines by calling for gender-inclusive language, saying that "God is not to be seen as male. God is God." [44]
After the consecration of the first women as bishops, Women and the Church (WATCH), a group supporting the ministries of women in the Church of England, called for language referring to God as "Mother". [45] This call for more gender inclusive language has receive the outspoken support of the Rt Rev Alan Wilson, the Bishop of Buckingham. [46] In 2015, the Rev Jody Stowell, from WATCH, expressed her support for female images saying "we're not restricted to understanding God with one gender. I would encourage people to explore those kinds of images. They're wholly Biblical." [47]

Same-sex unions and LGBT clergy
The Church of England has been discussing same-sex marriages and LGBT clergy. The official position, although not allowing same-sex marriage, is that "Same-sex relationships often embody genuine mutuality and fidelity." [48] Within guidelines, "the law prevents ministers of the Church of England from carrying out same-sex marriages. And although there are no authorised services for blessing a same-sex civil marriage, your local church can still support you with prayer." [49] The Archbishop's Council said that "clergy in the Church of England are permitted to offer prayers of support on a pastoral basis for people in same-sex relationships;" [50] As such, many Anglican churches, with clergy open to it, "already bless same-sex couples on an unofficial basis." [51] [52]
Civil Partnerships for clergy have been allowed since 2005. [53] [54] By 2010, the General Synod voted in favour of extending pensions and other employee rights to clergy in civil unions. [55] In a missive to clergy, the church communicated that "there was a need for committed same-sex couples to be given recognition and 'compassionate attention' from the Church, including special prayers." [56] As such, some congregations have published "Prayers for a Same Sex Commitment" as allowed within the guidelines. [57] After same-sex marriage was legalised, the Archbishop's Council asked for the government to continue to offer civil unions saying "The Church of England recognises that same-sex relationships often embody fidelity and mutuality...Civil partnerships enable these Christian virtues to be recognised socially and legally in a proper framework." [58]
In 2014, the Bishops released guidelines that permit "more informal kind of prayer" for couples. [59] Some congregations invite same-sex couples to receive "services of thanksgiving" after a civil marriage. [60] In the guidelines, "gay couples who get married will be able to ask for special prayers in the Church of England after their wedding, the bishops have agreed." [61] In 2016, The Bishop of Grantham, the Rt Rev Nicholas Chamberlain , announced he is gay, in a same-sex relationship and celibate; becoming the first bishop to do so in the church. [62] The church had decided in 2013 that gay clergy in civil partnerships could become bishops. [54]
In 2017, the House of Clergy voted against the motion to 'take note' of the Bishops' report defining marriage as between a man and a woman. [63] Due to passage in all three houses being required for passage, the motion was rejected. [64] After General Synod rejected the motion, the Archbishops of Canterbury and York called for "radical new Christian inclusion" that is "based on good, healthy, flourishing relationships, and in a proper 21st century understanding of being human and of being sexual." [65]
Regarding transgender issues, the General Synod received proposals submitted to offer naming ceremonies for transgender members in their transitions. [66] The Diocese of Blackburn has already begun recognising the ceremony. [67] Since 2000, the church has allowed priests to undergo gender transition and remain in office. [68] The church has ordained openly transgender clergy since 2005. [69]

Liberal theology
Just as the Church of England has a large conservative or "traditionalist" wing, it also has many liberal members and clergy. Approximately one third of clergy "doubt or disbelieve in the physical resurrection". [70] Others, such as the Revd Giles Fraser , a contributor to The Guardian , have argued for an allegorical interpretation of the virgin birth of Jesus . [71] The Independent reported in 2014 that, according to a YouGov survey of Church of England clergy, "as many as 16 per cent are unclear about God and two per cent think it is no more than a human construct." [72] [73] Moreover, many congregations are seeker-friendly environments. For example, one report from the Church Mission Society suggested that the church open up "a pagan church where Christianity [is] very much in the centre" to reach out to spiritual people. [74]

Bioethics issues
The Church of England is generally opposed to abortion but recognises that "there can be - strictly limited - conditions under which it may be morally preferable to any available alternative". [75] The church also opposes euthanasia. Its official stance is that "While acknowledging the complexity of the issues involved in assisted dying/suicide and voluntary euthanasia, the Church of England is opposed to any change in the law or in medical practice that would make assisted dying/suicide or voluntary euthanasia permissible in law or acceptable in practice." It also states that "Equally, the Church shares the desire to alleviate physical and psychological suffering, but believes that assisted dying/suicide and voluntary euthanasia are not acceptable means of achieving these laudable goals." [76] However, George Carey, a former Archbishop of Canterbury, announced that he had changed his stance on euthanasia in 2014 and now advocated legalising "assisted dying". [77] On embryonic stem-cell research, the church has announced "cautious acceptance to the proposal to produce cytoplasmic hybrid embryos for research". [78]

Poverty

Church Urban Fund
The Church of England set up the Church Urban Fund in the 1980s to tackle poverty and deprivation . They see poverty as trapping individuals and communities with some people in urgent need. This leads to dependency , homelessness , hunger , isolation , low income , mental health problems, social exclusion and violence. They feel that poverty reduces confidence and life expectancy and that people born in poor conditions have difficulty escaping their disadvantaged circumstances. [79]

Child poverty
In parts of Liverpool , Manchester and Newcastle two-thirds of babies are born to poverty and have poorer life chances, also life expectancy 15 years lower than babies born in most fortunate communities. South Shore, Blackpool , has lowest life expectancy at 66 years for men. [80]

Action on hunger
Many prominent people in the Church of England have spoken out against poverty and welfare cuts in the United Kingdom. Twenty-seven bishops are among 43 Christian leaders who signed a letter which urged David Cameron to make sure people have enough to eat .
Benefit cuts, failures and "punitive sanctions" force thousands of UK citizens to use food banks . The campaign to end hunger considers this "truly shocking" and calls for a national day of fasting on 4 April 2014. [82]

Membership
Official figures from 2005 showed there were 25 million baptised Anglicans in England and Wales. [83] Due to its status as the established church, in general, anyone may be married, have their children baptised or their funeral in their local parish church , regardless of whether they are baptised or regular churchgoers. [84]
Between 1890 and 2001, churchgoing in the United Kingdom declined steadily. [85] In the years 1968 to 1999, Anglican Sunday church attendances almost halved, from 3.5 per cent of the population to just 1.9 per cent. [86] One study published in 2008 suggested that if current trends were to continue, Sunday attendances could fall to 350,000 in 2030 and just 87,800 in 2050. [87]
In 2011, the Church of England published statistics showing 1.7 million people attending at least one of its services each month, a level maintained since the turn of the millennium; approximately one million participating each Sunday and three million taking part in a Church of England service on Christmas Day or Christmas Eve. The church also claimed that 30% attend Sunday worship at least once a year; more than 40% attend a wedding in their local church and still more attend a funeral there. [88] Nationally the Church of England baptises one child in eight. [89] In 2015, the church's statistics showed that 2.6 million people attended a special Advent service, 2.4 million attended a Christmas service, 1.3 million attended an Easter service, and 980,000 attended service during an average week. [90]
The Church of England has 18,000 active ordained clergy and 10,000 licensed lay ministers. [91] In 2009, 491 people were recommended for ordination training, maintaining the level at the turn of the millennium, and 564 new clergy (266 women and 298 men) were ordained. More than half of those ordained (193 men and 116 women) were appointed to full-time paid ministry. [92] In 2011, 504 new clergy were ordained, including 264 to paid ministry, and 349 lay readers were admitted to ministry; and the mode age-range of those recommended for ordination training had remained 40–49 since 1999. [93]

Structure
Article XIX ('Of the Church') of the 39 Articles defines the church as follows:
The British monarch has the constitutional title of Supreme Governor of the Church of England . The canon law of the Church of England states, "We acknowledge that the Queen's most excellent Majesty, acting according to the laws of the realm, is the highest power under God in this kingdom, and has supreme authority over all persons in all causes, as well ecclesiastical as civil." [95] In practice this power is often exercised through Parliament and the Prime Minister .
The Church of Ireland and the Church in Wales separated from the Church of England in 1869 [96] and 1920 [97] respectively and are autonomous churches in the Anglican Communion; Scotland's national church, the Church of Scotland , is Presbyterian but the Scottish Episcopal Church is in the Anglican Communion. [98]
In addition to England, the jurisdiction of the Church of England extends to the Isle of Man , the Channel Islands and a few parishes in Flintshire , Monmouthshire , Powys and Radnorshire in Wales which voted to remain with the Church of England rather than joining the Church in Wales . [99] Expatriate congregations on the continent of Europe have become the Diocese of Gibraltar in Europe .
The church is structured as follows (from the lowest level upwards):
All rectors and vicars are appointed by patrons , who may be private individuals, corporate bodies such as cathedrals, colleges or trusts, or by the bishop or directly by the Crown. No clergy can be instituted and inducted into a parish without swearing the Oath of Allegiance to Her Majesty, and taking the Oath of Canonical Obedience "in all things lawful and honest" to the bishop. Usually they are instituted to the benefice by the bishop and then inducted by the archdeacon into the possession of the benefice property—church and parsonage. Curates (assistant clergy) are appointed by rectors and vicars, or if priests-in-charge by the bishop after consultation with the patron. Cathedral clergy (normally a dean and a varying number of residentiary canons who constitute the cathedral chapter) are appointed either by the Crown, the bishop, or by the dean and chapter themselves. Clergy officiate in a diocese either because they hold office as beneficed clergy or are licensed by the bishop when appointed, or simply with permission.

Primates
The most senior bishop of the Church of England is the Archbishop of Canterbury , who is the metropolitan of the southern province of England, the Province of Canterbury. He has the status of Primate of All England. He is the focus of unity for the worldwide Anglican Communion of independent national or regional churches. Justin Welby has been Archbishop of Canterbury since the confirmation of his election on 4 February 2013. [100]
The second most senior bishop is the Archbishop of York , who is the metropolitan of the northern province of England, the Province of York. For historical reasons (relating to the time of York's control by the Danes ) he is referred to as the Primate of England. John Sentamu became Archbishop of York in 2005. The Bishop of London, the Bishop of Durham and the Bishop of Winchester are ranked in the next three positions.

Diocesan bishops
The process of appointing diocesan bishops is complex and is handled by the Crown Nominations Committee which submits names to the Prime Minister (acting on behalf of the Crown) for consideration.

Representative bodies
The Church of England has a legislative body, the General Synod . Synod can create two types of legislation, measures and canons . Measures have to be approved but cannot be amended by the British Parliament before receiving the Royal Assent and becoming part of the law of England. [101] Although it is the established church in England only, its measures must be approved by both Houses of Parliament including the non-English members. Canons require Royal Licence and Royal Assent, but form the law of the church, rather than the law of the land. [102]
Another assembly is the Convocation of the English Clergy , which is older than the General Synod and its predecessor the Church Assembly. By the 1969 Synodical Government Measure almost all of the Convocations' functions were transferred to the General Synod. Additionally, there are Diocesan Synods and deanery synods , which are the governing bodies of the divisions of the Church.

House of Lords
Of the 42 diocesan archbishops and bishops in the Church of England, 26 are permitted to sit in the House of Lords . The Archbishops of Canterbury and York automatically have seats, as do the Bishops of London , Durham and Winchester . The remaining 21 seats are filled in order of seniority by consecration . It may take a diocesan bishop a number of years to reach the House of Lords, at which point he becomes a Lord Spiritual . The Bishop of Sodor and Man and the Bishop of Gibraltar in Europe are not eligible to sit in the House of Lords as their dioceses lie outside the United Kingdom. [103]

Crown Dependencies
Although they are not part of England or the United Kingdom , the Church of England is also the Established Church in the Crown Dependencies of the Isle of Man , the Bailiwick of Jersey and the Bailiwick of Guernsey . The Isle of Man has its own diocese of Sodor and Man , and the Bishop of Sodor and Man is an ex officio member of the Legislative Council of the Tynwald on the island. [104] The Channel Islands are part of the Diocese of Winchester , and in Jersey the Dean of Jersey is a non-voting member of the States of Jersey . In Guernsey the Church of England is the Established Church , although the Dean of Guernsey is not a member of the States of Guernsey . [105]

Sex abuse
The Archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby , has taken strong action in an effort to prevent complaints of sex abuse cases being covered up. Independent investigators are examining files as far back as the 1950s and Welby hopes this independence will prevent any possibility of a cover-up . [106]
The personal files of all Anglican clergy since the 1950s are being audited in an effort to ensure no cover-up. Welby emphasised repeatedly that no cover-up would be acceptable. [107]
Despite such assurances there is concern that not enough may be done and historic abuse may still sometimes be covered up. Keith Porteous Wood of the National Secular Society stated:
Bishop Peter Ball was convicted in October 2015 on several charges of indecent assault against young adult men. [109] There are allegations of large-scale earlier cover-ups involving many British establishment figures which prevented Ball's earlier prosecution. There have also been allegations of child sex abuse , for example Robert Waddington . A complainant, known only as "Joe", tried for decades to have action taken over sadistic sex abuse which Garth Moore perpetrated against him in 1976 when "Joe" was 15 years old. None of the high ranking clergy who "Joe" spoke to recall being told about the abuse, which "Joe" considers incredible. [110] A representative of the solicitors firm representing "Joe" said:

Financial situation
Although an established church , the Church of England does not receive any direct government support. Donations comprise its largest source of income, and it also relies heavily on the income from its various historic endowments. In 2005, the Church of England had estimated total outgoings of around £900 million. [112]
The Church of England manages an investment portfolio which is worth more than £8000 million. [113]

Online church directory
The Church of England supports A Church Near You , an online directory of churches. A user-edited resource, it currently lists 16,400 churches and has 7,000 editors in 42 dioceses. [114] The directory enables parishes to maintain accurate location, contact and event information which is shared with other websites and mobile apps . In 2012, the directory formed the data backbone of Christmas Near You [115] and in 2014 was used to promote the church's Harvest Near You initiative. [116]

See also
WebPage index: 00014
1940
1940 ( MCMXL )
was a leap year starting on Monday ( dominical letter GF) of the Gregorian calendar , the 1940th year of the Common Era (CE) and Anno Domini (AD) designations, the 940th year of the 2nd millennium , the 40th year of the 20th century , and the 1st year of the 1940s decade.

Events
Below, the events of World War II have the "WWII" prefix.

January

February

March

April

May

June

July

August

September

October

November

December

Undated

Births

January

February

March

April

May

June

July

August

September

October

November

December

Date unknown

Deaths

January

February

March

April

May

June

July

August

September

October

November

December

Nobel Prizes
WebPage index: 00015
Battle of Dunkirk
The Battle of Dunkirk took place in Dunkirk (Dunkerque) , France, during the Second World War between the Allies and Nazi Germany . As part of the Battle of France on the Western Front , the Battle of Dunkirk was the defence and evacuation of British and Allied forces in Europe from 26 May to 4 June 1940.
After the Phoney War , the Battle of France began in earnest on 10 May 1940. To the east, the German Army Group B invaded the Netherlands and advanced westward. In response, the Supreme Allied Commander—French General Maurice Gamelin —initiated "Plan D" and entered Belgium to engage the Germans in the Netherlands. The plan relied heavily on the Maginot Line fortifications along the German-French border, but German forces had already crossed through most of the Netherlands before the French forces arrived. Gamelin instead committed the forces under his command, three mechanised armies, the French First and Seventh Armies and the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) to the River Dyle . On 14 May, German Army Group A burst through the Ardennes and advanced rapidly to the west toward Sedan , then turned northward to the English Channel , in what Generalfeldmarschall Erich von Manstein called the "Sickle Cut" (known as "Plan Yellow" or the Manstein Plan ), effectively flanking the Allied forces. [11]
A series of Allied counter-attacks—including the Battle of Arras —failed to sever the German spearhead, which reached the coast on 20 May, separating the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) near Armentières , the French First Army , and the Belgian Army further to the north from the majority of French troops south of the German penetration. After reaching the Channel, the German forces swung north along the coast, threatening to capture the ports and trap the British and French forces before they could evacuate to Britain.
In one of the most widely debated decisions of the war, the Germans halted their advance on Dunkirk. Contrary to popular belief, what became known as the "Halt Order" did not originate with Adolf Hitler . Field Marshals Gerd von Rundstedt and Günther von Kluge suggested that the German forces around the Dunkirk pocket should cease their advance on the port and consolidate, to avoid an Allied breakout. Hitler sanctioned the order on 24 May with the support of the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht (OKW). The army was to halt for three days, which gave the Allies sufficient time to organise the Dunkirk evacuation and build a defensive line. Despite the Allies' gloomy estimates of the situation, with Britain even discussing a conditional surrender to Germany, in the end more than 330,000 Allied troops were rescued. [12]

Prelude
On 10 May 1940, Winston Churchill became Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. By 26 May, the BEF and the French 1st Army were bottled up in a corridor to the sea, about 60 mi (97 km) deep and 15–25 mi (24–40 km) wide. Most of the British forces were still around Lille , over 40 mi (64 km) from Dunkirk, with the French further south. Two massive German armies flanked them. General Fedor von Bock 's Army Group B was to the east, and General Gerd von Rundstedt 's Army Group A to the west. (Both these officers were later promoted to field marshal.) [11]

Halt order
On 24 May, Hitler had visited General von Rundstedt's headquarters at Charleville . Von Rundstedt advised him the infantry should attack the British forces at Arras, where the British had proved capable of significant action, while Kleist's armour held the line west and south of Dunkirk to pounce on the Allied forces retreating before Army Group B. This order allowed the Germans to consolidate their gains and prepare for a southward advance against the remaining French forces. The terrain around Dunkirk was thought unsuitable for armour; Hitler was familiar with Flanders' marshes from the First World War . Although his pilots had fought for two consecutive weeks, they were aided by synthetic methamphetamine , and Luftwaffe commander Hermann Göring asked for the chance to destroy the forces in Dunkirk. The Allied forces' destruction was thus initially assigned to the air force and the German infantry organised in Army Group B . Von Rundstedt later called this "one of the great turning points of the war." [3] [16] [17] [18]
The true reason for the decision to halt the German armour on 24 May is still debated. One theory is that Von Rundstedt and Hitler agreed to conserve the armour for Fall Rot , an operation to the south. It is possible that the Luftwaffe's closer ties than the army's to the Nazi Party contributed to Hitler's approval of Göring's request. Another theory—which few historians have given credence—is that Hitler was still trying to establish diplomatic peace with Britain before Operation Barbarossa (the invasion of the Soviet Union). Although von Rundstedt after the war stated his suspicions that Hitler wanted "to help the British", based on alleged praise of the British Empire during a visit to his headquarters, no evidence exists that Hitler wanted to let the Allies escape. [16] [18] [19] The historian Brian Bond stated:
Whatever the reasons for Hitler's decision, the Germans confidently believed the Allied troops were doomed. American journalist William Shirer reported on 25 May, "German military circles here tonight put it flatly. They said the fate of the great Allied army bottled up in Flanders is sealed." BEF commander Lord Gort agreed, writing to Anthony Eden , "I must not conceal from you that a great part of the BEF and its equipment will inevitably be lost in the best of circumstances". [18] Hitler did not rescind the Halt Order until the evening of 26 May. The three days thus gained gave a vital breathing space to the Royal Navy to arrange the evacuation of the British and Allied troops. About 338,000 men were rescued in about 11 days. Of these some 215,000 were British and 123,000 were French, of whom 102,250 escaped in British ships. [21]

Battle

"Fight back to the west"
On 26 May, Anthony Eden told General Lord Gort , Commander-in-Chief (C-in-C) of the BEF, that he might need to "fight back to the west", and ordered him to prepare plans for the evacuation, but without telling the French or the Belgians. Gort replied, "I must not conceal from you a great part of the BEF and its equipment will inevitably be lost". He had foreseen the order and preliminary plans were already in hand. The first such plan, for a defence along the Lys Canal, could not be carried out because of German advances on 26 May, with 2nd and 50th Divisions pinned down, and 1st , 5th and 48th Divisions under heavy attack. The 2nd Division took heavy casualties trying to keep a corridor open, being reduced to brigade strength, but they succeeded; 1st, 3rd , 4th and 42nd Divisions escaped along the corridor that day, as did about one-third of the French First Army. As the Allies fell back, they disabled their artillery and vehicles and destroyed their stores. [22] [23] [24]
On 27 May, the British fought back to the Dunkirk perimeter line. The Le Paradis massacre took place that day, when the 3. SS Division Totenkopf machine-gunned 97 British and French prisoners near the La Bassée Canal. The British prisoners were from the 2nd Battalion, Royal Norfolk Regiment , part of the 4th Brigade of the 2nd Division. The SS men lined them up against the wall of a barn and shot them all; only two survived. Meanwhile, the Luftwaffe dropped bombs and leaflets on the Allied armies. The leaflets showed a map of the situation. They read, in English and French: "British soldiers! Look at the map: it gives your true situation! Your troops are entirely surrounded – stop fighting! Put down your arms!" To the land and air-minded Germans, the sea seemed an impassable barrier, so they believed the Allies were surrounded; but the British saw the sea as a route to safety. [25] [26]
As well as the Luftwaffe ' s bombs, German heavy artillery (which had just come within range) also fired high-explosive shells into Dunkirk. By this time, the town contained the bodies of over 1,000 civilian casualties. This bombardment continued until the evacuation was over. [23]

Battle of Wytschaete
Gort had sent Lieutenant General Ronald Adam , commanding III Corps , ahead to build the defensive perimeter around Dunkirk. Lieutenant General Alan Brooke , commanding II Corps , was to conduct a holding action with the 3rd, 4th, 5th, and 50th Divisions along the Ypres-Comines canal as far as Yser, while the rest of the BEF fell back. The battle of Wytschaete , over the border in Belgium, was the toughest action Brooke faced in this role. [27]
On 26 May, the Germans made a reconnaissance in force against the British position. At mid-day on 27 May, they launched a full-scale attack with three divisions south of Ypres . A confused battle followed, where visibility was low because of forested or urban terrain, and communications were poor because the British at that time used no radios below battalion level and the telephone wires had been cut. The Germans used infiltration tactics to get among the British, who were beaten back. [28]
The heaviest fighting was in the 5th Division's sector. Still on 27 May, Brooke ordered the 3rd Division commander, Major-General Bernard Montgomery [Notes 1] to extend his division's line to the left, thereby freeing the 10th and 11th Brigades , both of the 4th Division, to join the 5th Division at Messines Ridge. The 10th Brigade arrived first, to find the enemy had advanced so far they were closing on the British field artillery. Between them, the 10th and 11th Brigades cleared the ridge of Germans, and by 28 May they were securely dug in east of Wytschaete. [29]
That day, Brooke ordered a counterattack. This was to be spearheaded by two battalions, the 3rd Grenadier Guards and 2nd North Staffordshire Regiment , both of Major-General Harold Alexander 's 1st Division. The North Staffords advanced as far as the Kortekeer River, while the Grenadiers reached the canal itself, but could not hold it. The counterattack's effect was to disrupt the Germans, holding them back a little longer while the BEF retreated. [30]

Action at Poperinge
The route back from Brooke's position to Dunkirk passed through the town of Poperinge (known to most British sources as "Poperinghe"), where there was a bottleneck at a bridge over the Yser canal. Most of the main roads in the area converged on that bridge. On 27 May, the Luftwaffe bombed the resulting traffic jam thoroughly for two hours, destroying or immobilising about 80% of the vehicles. Another Luftwaffe raid—on the night of 28/29 May—was illuminated by flares as well as the light from burning vehicles. The British 44th Division in particular had to abandon many guns and lorries, losing almost all of them between Poperinge and the Mont. [31]
The German 6. Panzerdivision could probably have destroyed 44th Division at Poperinge on 29 May, thereby cutting off the 3rd and 50th Divisions as well. The historian and author Julian Thompson calls it "astonishing" that they did not, but they were distracted, investing the nearby town of Cassel . [32]

Belgian surrender
Gort had ordered Lieutenant General Adam, commanding III Corps, and French General Fagalde , to prepare a perimeter defence of Dunkirk. The perimeter was semicircular, with French troops manning the western sector and British troops the eastern. It ran along the Belgian coastline from Nieuport in the east via Furnes , Bulskamp and Bergues to Gravelines in the west. The line was as strong as it could be made under the circumstances, but on 28 May the Belgian army, who were largely outnumbered by the attacking Germans, and still under the direct command of King Leopold , who had refused to abandon his troops and the Belgian refugees inside the little enclave of what remained of unoccupied Belgium, surrendered. This left a 20 mi (32 km) gap on Gort's eastern flank between the British and the sea. The British were surprised by the Belgian capitulation, although King Leopold had warned them in advance. [33] [34] As a constitutional monarch, Leopold's decision to surrender without consulting the Belgian government led to his condemnation by the Belgian and French Prime Ministers, Hubert Pierlot and Paul Reynaud .
King George VI sent Gort a telegram that read:
Gort sent the battle-worn 3rd, 4th and 50th Divisions into the line to fill the space the Belgians had held. [35]

Defence of the perimeter
While they were still moving into position, they ran headlong into the German 256th Division , who were trying to flank Gort. Armoured cars of the 12th Lancers stopped the Germans at Nieuport itself. A confused battle raged all along the perimeter throughout 28 May. Command control on the British side disintegrated, and the perimeter was driven slowly inwards toward Dunkirk. [35]
Meanwhile, Erwin Rommel had surrounded five divisions of the French First Army near Lille. Although completely cut off, the French fought on for four days under General Molinié, thereby keeping seven German divisions from the assault on Dunkirk and saving an estimated 100,000 Allied troops. [35]
The defence of the perimeter held throughout 29–30 May, with the Allies falling back by degrees. On 31 May, the Germans nearly punched through at Nieuport, and the situation grew so desperate that two British battalion commanders had to personally man a Bren gun, with one colonel firing and the other loading. A few hours later, the 2nd Battalion, Coldstream Guards , of the 3rd Division, rushed to reinforce the line near Furnes, where the British troops had been routed. The Guards restored order by shooting some of the fleeing troops, and turning others around at bayonet point. The British troops returned to the line, and the German assault was beaten back. [36]
In the afternoon of the same day, the Germans breached the perimeter near the canal at Bulskamp , but the boggy ground on the far side of the canal, with sporadic fire from the Durham Light Infantry , halted them. As night fell, the Germans massed for another attack at Nieuport. Eighteen RAF bombers found the Germans while they were still assembling, and scattered them with an accurate bombing run. [37]

Retreat to Dunkirk
Also on 31 May, General Von Kuechler assumed command of all the German forces at Dunkirk. His plan was simple: he would launch an all-out attack across the whole front at 11:00 on 1 June. Strangely, Von Kuechler ignored a radio intercept telling him the British were abandoning the eastern end of the line to fall back to Dunkirk itself. [38]
The morning of 1 June was clear–good flying weather, in contrast to the bad weather that had hindered airborne operations on 30 and 31 May. (There were only two and a half good flying days in the whole operation.) Although Churchill had promised the French that the British would cover their escape, on the ground it was the French who held the line while the last remaining British soldiers were evacuated. Enduring concentrated German artillery fire and Luftwaffe strafing and bombs, the French stood their ground. On 2 June (the day the last of the British units embarked onto the ships), [Notes 2] the French began to fall back slowly, and by 3 June the Germans were about two miles (3 km) from Dunkirk. The night of 3 June was the last night of evacuations. At 10:20 on 4 June, the Germans hoisted the swastika over the docks from which so many British and French troops had escaped under their noses. [40] [41] [42]
The desperate resistance of Allied forces, especially the French 12th Motorised Infantry Division from the Fort des Dunes , bought time for the evacuation of the bulk of the troops. The Wehrmacht captured some 35,000 soldiers, almost all of them French. These men had protected the evacuation until the last moment and were unable to embark. The same fate was reserved for the survivors of the French 12th Motorised Infantry Division (composed in particular of the French 150th Regiment of Infantry ); they were taken prisoner on the morning of 4 June on the beach of Malo-les-Bains. The flag of this regiment was burnt so as not to fall into the hands of the enemy. [ citation needed ]

Evacuation
The War Office made the decision to evacuate British forces on 25 May. In the nine days from 27 May–4 June, 338,226 men escaped, including 139,997 French, Polish, and Belgian troops, together with a small number of Dutch soldiers, aboard 861 vessels (of which 243 were sunk during the operation). The historian Basil Liddell Hart says British Fighter Command lost 106 aircraft dogfighting over Dunkirk, the Luftwaffe lost about 135 – some of which were shot down by the French Navy and the Royal Navy; but MacDonald says the British lost 177 aircraft and the Germans lost 240. [40] [42] [43]
The docks at Dunkirk were too badly damaged to be used, but the East and West Moles (sea walls protecting the harbour entrance) were intact. Captain William Tennant —in charge of the evacuation—decided to use the beaches and the East Mole to land the ships. This highly successful idea hugely increased the number of troops that could be embarked each day, and indeed at the rescue operation's peak, on 31 May, over 68,000 men were taken off. [23] [40]
The last of the British Army left on 3 June, and at 10:50, Tennant signalled Ramsay to say "Operation completed. Returning to Dover." However, Churchill insisted on coming back for the French, so the Royal Navy returned on 4 June in an attempt to rescue as many as possible of the French rearguard. Over 26,000 French soldiers were evacuated on that last day, but between 30,000 and 40,000 more were left behind and forced to surrender to the Germans. [44]

Aftermath
Following the events at Dunkirk, the German forces regrouped before commencing an operation called Fall Rot ("Case Red"), a renewed assault southward, starting on 5 June. Although two fresh British divisions had begun moving to France in an attempt to form a Second BEF , the decision was taken on 14 June to withdraw all the remaining British troops; an evacuation called Operation Ariel . By 25 June, almost 192,000 Allied personnel, 144,000 of them British, had been evacuated through various French ports. [45] Although the French Army fought on, German troops entered Paris on 14 June. The French government was forced to negotiate an armistice at Compiègne on 22 June.
The loss of materiel on the beaches was huge. The British Army left enough equipment behind to equip about eight to ten divisions. Discarded in France were, among huge supplies of ammunition, 880 field guns, 310 guns of large calibre, some 500 anti-aircraft guns, about 850 anti-tank guns, 11,000 machine guns, nearly 700 tanks, 20,000 motorcycles, and 45,000 motor cars and lorries. Army equipment available at home was only just sufficient to equip two divisions. The British Army needed months to re-supply properly and some planned introductions of new equipment were halted while industrial resources concentrated on making good the losses. Officers told troops falling back from Dunkirk to burn or otherwise disable their trucks (so as not to let them benefit the advancing German forces). The shortage of army vehicles after Dunkirk was so severe that the Royal Army Service Corps (RASC) was reduced to retrieving and refurbishing numbers of obsolete buses and coaches from British scrapyards to press them into use as troop transports. Some of these antique workhorses were still in use as late as the North African campaign of 1942. [46]
The Dean of St Paul's , Walter Matthews was the first to call the evacuation the "Miracle of Dunkirk" (on 2 June). [47]
A marble memorial to the battle stands at Dunkirk. The French inscription is translated as: "To the glorious memory of the pilots, mariners, and soldiers of the French and Allied armies who sacrificed themselves in the Battle of Dunkirk, May–June 1940."
The missing dead of the BEF are commemorated on the Dunkirk Memorial .

"Dunkirk Spirit"
British propaganda later exploited the successful evacuation of Dunkirk in 1940, and particularly the role of the "Dunkirk little ships", very effectively. Many of them were private vessels such as fishing boats and pleasure cruisers, but commercial vessels such as ferries also contributed to the force, including a number from as far away as the Isle of Man and Glasgow . These smaller vessels—guided by naval craft across the Channel from the Thames Estuary and from Dover—assisted in the official evacuation. Being able to move closer into the beachfront shallows than larger craft, the "little ships" acted as shuttles to and from the larger ships, lifting troops who were queuing in the water, many waiting shoulder-deep in water for hours. The term "Dunkirk Spirit" refers to the solidarity of the British people in times of adversity. [48]

Dunkirk Medal
A commemorative medal was established in 1960 by the French National Association of Veterans of the Fortified Sector of Flanders and Dunkirk on behalf of the town of Dunkirk. The medal was initially awarded only to the French defenders of Dunkirk but in 1970 the qualification was expanded to include British forces who served in the Dunkirk sector and their rescue forces, including the civilians who volunteered to man the "little ships".
The design of the bronze medal included the arms of the town of Dunkirk with "Dunkerque 1940" on the reverse.

See also
WebPage index: 00016
Miles Davis
Miles Dewey Davis III (May 26, 1926 – September 28, 1991) was an American jazz trumpeter, bandleader, and composer. He is among the most influential and acclaimed figures in the history of jazz and 20th century music. Davis adopted a variety of musical directions in his five-decade career which kept him at the forefront of a number of major stylistic developments in jazz. [1]
Born and raised in Illinois, Davis left his studies at The Juilliard School in New York City and made his professional debut as a member of saxophonist Charlie Parker 's bebop quintet from 1944 to 1948. Shortly after, he recorded the Birth of the Cool sessions for Capitol Records , which were instrumental to the development of cool jazz . In the early 1950s, Davis recorded some of the earliest hard bop music while on Prestige Records but did so haphazardly due to a heroin addiction. After a widely acclaimed comeback performance at the Newport Jazz Festival in 1955, he signed a long-term contract with Columbia Records and recorded the 1957 album 'Round About Midnight . [2] It was his first work with saxophonist John Coltrane and bassist Paul Chambers , key members of the sextet he led into the early 1960s. During this period, he alternated between orchestral jazz collaborations with arranger Gil Evans , such as the Spanish music -influenced Sketches of Spain (1960), and band recordings, such as Milestones (1958) and Kind of Blue (1959). [3] The latter recording remains one of the most popular jazz albums of all time, [4] having sold over four million copies in the U.S.
Davis made several line-up changes while recording Someday My Prince Will Come (1961), his 1961 Blackhawk concerts , and Seven Steps to Heaven (1963), another mainstream success that introduced bassist Ron Carter , pianist Herbie Hancock , and drummer Tony Williams . [3] After adding saxophonist Wayne Shorter to his new quintet in 1964, [3] Davis led them on a series of more abstract recordings often composed by the band members, helping pioneer the post-bop genre with albums such as E.S.P (1965) and Miles Smiles (1967), [5] before transitioning into his electric period. During the 1970s, he radically experimented with rock , funk , African rhythms , emerging electronic music technology , and an ever-changing line-up of musicians, including keyboardist Joe Zawinul , drummer Al Foster , and guitarist John McLaughlin . [6] This period, beginning with Davis' 1969 studio album In a Silent Way and concluding with the 1975 concert recording Agharta , was the most controversial in his career, alienating and challenging many in jazz. [7] His million-selling 1970 record Bitches Brew helped spark a resurgence in the genre's commercial popularity with jazz fusion as the decade progressed. [8]
After a five-year retirement due to poor health, Davis resumed his career in the 1980s, employing younger musicians and pop music sounds on albums such as The Man with the Horn (1981) and Tutu (1986). Critics were generally unreceptive but the decade garnered the trumpeter his highest level of commercial recognition. He performed sold-out concerts worldwide while branching out into visual arts, film, and television work, before his death in 1991 from the combined effects of a stroke, pneumonia and respiratory failure. [9] In 2006, Davis was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , [10] which recognized him as "one of the key figures in the history of jazz". [10] Rolling Stone described him as "the most revered jazz trumpeter of all time, not to mention one of the most important musicians of the 20th century," [9] while Gerald Early called him inarguably one of the most influential and innovative musicians of that period. [11]

Early life
Miles Dewey Davis III was born on May 26, 1926 into an affluent middle class African-American family in Alton, Illinois , fifteen miles north of St. Louis . [12] [13] He had an older sister, Dorothy Mae (b. 1925), and a younger brother, Vernon (b. 1929). His father, Miles Dewey Davis II of Arkansas, was a successful dental surgeon who earned three college degrees, and his mother Cleota Mae Davis ( née Henry), also of Arkansas, was a music teacher and violinist. [14] [13] They owned a 200-acre estate near Pine Bluff, Arkansas that housed a profitable pig farm where Davis and his siblings would ride horses, fish, and hunt. [15] [14] In 1927, the family moved to East St. Louis, Illinois , living on the second floor of a commercial building in a predominantly white neighborhood behind a dental office. By 1941, his parents divorced. [16] From 1932 to 1934, Davis attended John Robinson Elementary School, an all-black institution, [13] followed by Crispus Attucks School where he performed well in mathematics, music, and sports. [14] As a youngster Davis developed his earliest appreciation for music, citing the blues, big bands, and gospel music. [15]
In 1935, Davis received his first trumpet as a gift from John Eubanks, a friend of his father, [17] and later took weekly lessons with his father's patient, teacher and musician Elwood Buchanan . [12] His mother objected the choice of instrument as she preferred her son took up the violin. [18] Against the fashion of the time, Buchanan stressed the importance of playing without vibrato and encouraged him to adopt a more clear, mid-range tone; Davis claimed he would slap his knuckles every time he started using heavy vibrato. [18] [12] [19] Davis would carry his clear signature tone throughout his career. He once remarked on its importance to him, saying, "I prefer a round sound with no attitude in it, like a round voice with not too much tremolo and not too much bass. Just right in the middle. If I can't get that sound I can't play anything." [20] In 1939, the family moved to 1701 Kansas Avenue in East St. Louis. For his thirteenth birthday held that year, Davis' father bought his son a new trumpet, [17] and Davis began to play in local bands, earning as much as $85 a week. [12] Around this time, Davis took additional trumpet lessons from Joseph Gustat, principal trumpeter of the St. Louis Symphony Orchestra . [17]
In 1941, the 15-year-old Davis began at East St. Louis Lincoln High School where he joined the school's marching band directed by Buchanan and entered music competitions. Davis claimed the contests he did not win was largely down to prejudice over his race, but cited such experiences to become a better musician. [14] Davis proceeded to improve his understanding of music after a drummer he played with around this time suggested Davis play a passage from the previous night, yet Davis was unable to comprehend what he meant. "That hit me ... I went and got everything, every book I could get to learn about theory ". [21] It was at Lincoln High where Davis met his first girlfriend, Irene Birth (later Cawthon). [22] Davis had formed his own group by this time, performing in various local venues such as Elks Club and Huff's Beer Garden with hits such as " In the Mood " by Glenn Miller . [23] A portion of his earnings went towards his sister's education at Fisk University . [16] Davis also befriended trumpeter Clark Terry , who also suggested he play without vibrato and performed together in various capacities for several years. [17] [16]
In 1943, at Buchanan's recommendation and Cawthon's persuasion, Davis filled a vacant spot in Eddie Randle's Rhumboogie Orchestra, also known as the Blue Devils, and eventually became its musical director which involved the scheduling of rehearsals and hiring newcomers. [24] [16] Davis later acknowledged his tenure as one of the most important of his career. [21] During this time, Sonny Stitt tried to persuade him to join the Tiny Bradshaw band, then passing through town, but Davis' mother insisted that he finish his final year of high school before he could tour. He said, "I didn't talk to her for two weeks. And I didn't go with the band either". [25] In January 1944, Davis finished his studies at East St. Louis Lincoln High School and graduated in absentia in June. The following month, Cawthon gave birth to a daughter, Cheryl. [16]
In July 1944, Billy Eckstine and his big band, which featured Dizzy Gillespie , Charlie Parker , and Art Blakey , visited St. Louis for a series of performances. They needed a stand-in after third trumpeter Buddy Anderson was too ill to attend. [12] They invited Davis, who accepted and played with the group for two weeks at Club Riviera. [16] [26] The experience was a profound one on Davis, after which he "had to be in New York, where the action was". [27] However, his mother wished for him to continue with his education and study the piano or violin at Fisk University with his sister, which Davis declined. [25]

Career

1944–1948: New York City and the bebop years
In September 1944, Davis accepted his father's idea of studying at the Institute of Musical Arts , later known as the Juilliard School, in New York City. [16] Davis passed his audition and attended classes in music theory, piano and dictation, [28] but soon lost focus and spent much of his time in the club scene and locating Parker, despite being advised against doing so by several people he met in his search, including Coleman Hawkins . [26] [29] After finally locating his idol, Davis became one of the cadre of musicians who held nightly jam sessions at two Harlem nightclubs, Minton's Playhouse and Monroe's . The group included many of the future leaders of the bebop revolution such as Fats Navarro , Freddie Webster , and J. J. Johnson . Established musicians including Thelonious Monk and Kenny Clarke were also regular participants. In December 1944, Davis reunited with Cawthon and their daughter when they relocated to New York City, the three living in the same building as Parker who eventually became a roommate. [26] [16]
In mid-1945, Davis failed to register for the year's autumn term of study at Juilliard and dropped out after three semesters [15] [30] [16] as he wished to commit to jazz performance full-time. [31] His father advised his son to avoid sounding like everyone else and find his own style yet remained supportive and continued to send over money until Davis could earn enough on his own. [32] Davis later criticized the school's classes for centering too much on the classical European and "white" repertoire, but credited the institution for his education in music theory and improving his trumpet playing technique. Davis began playing professionally, performing in several 52nd Street clubs with Hawkins and Eddie "Lockjaw" Davis and, on 24 April 1945, recorded his first sessions in a recording studio as part of Herbie Fields 's group with Henry "Rubberlegs" Williams , [16] his first of many as a sideman. [26] Davis' first recording as leader came in 1946 with an occasional group named the Miles Davis Sextet plus Earl Coleman and Ann Hathaway—one of the rare occasions when Davis is heard accompanying singers. [33] Davis would not record another session as leader until 1947.
After Gillespie split from Parker's quintet in 1945, Davis took his place in October and the group performed a residency at various clubs on 52nd Street. On November 26, Davis took part several recording sessions as part of Parker's group Reboppers that also involved Gillespie and Roach, [16] displaying hints of the style he would become known for. During a take of Parker's signature song "Now's the Time", Davis takes a melodic solo, whose unbop-like quality anticipates the cool jazz period that followed. In 1946, Davis played in a big and small band led by Benny Carter in St. Louis and travels with the group for performances in California. During his time on the west coast, Davis performed with Parker who had also travelled there with Gillespie. [34] During a stop in Los Angeles, Parker suffered from a nervous breakdown that landed him in hospital for several months, leaving Davis stranded. Davis secured a spot on Eckstine's California tour which eventually brought him back to New York City in late 1946. [34] [35] In March 1946, Davis played in studio sessions with Parker and began a collaboration with bassist Charles Mingus that summer, during which Cawthon gives birth to Davis' second child, Gregory, in East St. Louis before reuniting with Davis in New York City the following year. [34] Davis noted that by this time "I was still so much into the music that I was even ignoring Irene", and was drinking and doing cocaine. [36]
Following the break-up of Eckstine's band in early 1947, Davis secured work by playing in a big band led by Gillespie and Illinois Jacquet , and joining a new quintet led by Parker in April that also included Roach. Together they performed live with Duke Jordan and Tommy Potter for much of the year, including several studio sessions. [34] In one session that May, Davis penned the tune "Cheryl", named after his daughter. Davis' first session as a leader followed in August 1947, playing as the Miles Davis All Stars that included Parker, pianist John Lewis , and bassist Nelson Boyd ; together they recorded "Milestones", "Half Nelson", and "Sippin' at Bells". [37] [34] After touring Chicago and Detroit with Parker's quintet, Davis returned to New York City in March 1948 and joined the Jazz at the Philharmonic tour which included a stop in St. Louis on April 30. [34]

1948–1950: Miles Davis Nonet and birth of the cool
In August 1948, Davis declined an offer to join Duke Ellington 's orchestra as he had entered rehearsals with a new, nine-piece band with pianist and arranger Gil Evans and baritone saxophonist Gerry Mulligan , taking an active role that soon became his own project. [38] [34] Evans' Manhattan apartment had become the meeting place for several young musicians and composers such as Davis, Roach, Lewis, and Mulligan who were unhappy with the increasingly virtuoso instrumental techniques that dominated the bebop scene. [39] This led to the formation of The Miles Davis Nonet which featured a more unusual line-up with a French horn and tuba . The objective was to achieve a sound similar to the human voice, through carefully arranged compositions and by emphasizing a relaxed, melodic approach to the improvisations. In September, the band completed their sole engagement as the openers for Count Basie at the Royal Roost for two weeks. Davis had to persuade the venue's manager to word the advertising sign as "Miles Davis Nonet. Arrangements by Gil Evans, John Lewis and Gerry Mulligan". He prevailed only with the help of Monte Kay , the club's artistic director. Davis rejoined Parker's quintet soon after, but relationships within the quintet were growing tense mainly due to Parker's erratic behavior caused by his drug addiction. [34] Early into his tenure with Parker, Davis had adopted a lifestyle of drug abstinence, a vegetarian diet, and spoke of the benefits of water and juice. [40] Matters worsened when Davis and Roach objected to the addition of pianist Duke Jordan [29] and preferred to hire Bud Powell . The situation culminated in December 1948 when Davis quit, [34] claiming he was not being paid.
Davis' split from Parker marked the beginning of a period when he worked mainly as a freelancer and sideman in some of the most important combos in the New York City jazz scene. His nonet remained active until the end of 1949; after landing a recording deal with Capitol Records they recorded sessions in January and April 1949, including the singles "Move" and "Boplicity" which sold little but became influential pieces of music on the "cool" or "west coast" style of jazz. [34] The line-up changed throughout the year and included the additions of tuba player Bill Barber , alto saxophonist Lee Konitz , who had been preferred to Sonny Stitt as his style was considered too bop-oriented, pianist Al Haig , trombone players Mike Zwerin with Kai Winding , French horn players Junior Collins with Sandy Siegelstein and Gunther Schuller , and bassists Al McKibbon and Joe Shulman . One track featured singer Kenny Hagood . The presence of white musicians in the group angered some black players, many of whom were unemployed at the time, yet Davis rebuffed their criticisms. [41] Recording sessions with the nonet for Capital Records continued until April 1950; much of it remained unreleased until the issue of Birth of the Cool (1957), its name given to the cool jazz movement that had developed and the musical direction the group had taken.
In May 1949, Davis performed with the Tadd Dameron Quintet with Kenny Clarke and James Moody at the Paris International Jazz Festival , his first trip abroad. Davis took a strong liking for Paris and its cultural environment, where black jazz musicians, and African Americans in general, were better respected than America. The trip, he described, "changed the way I looked at things forever". [42] During his time there Davis began a love affair with singer and actress Juliette Gréco which lasted for several years.

1949–1955: Hard bop and the "Blue Period"
The early 1950s was a period of great difficulty for Davis. Upon his return from Paris in mid-1949, he became depressed and could only secure little amounts of work which included a short engagement with Powell in October, and guest spots in New York City, Chicago, and Detroit until January 1950. [43] To make matters worse, Davis was falling behind in hotel rent and numerous attempts were made to repossess his car. His heroin use became an expensive addition, and Davis, yet to reach 24 years old, "lost my sense of discipline, lost my sense of control over my life, and started to drift". [44] [34] In August 1950, during a family trip to East St. Louis and Chicago in an attempt to improve their fortunes, Cawthon gave birth to Davis' second son, Miles IV, in Chicago. The latter was where Davis befriended boxer Johnny Bratton and began his strong interest in the sport. Soon after, Davis left Cawthon and his three children in New York City in the hands of his friend and jazz singer Betty Carter who allowed his family to move in with her and looked after the children. Davis remained thankful to Carter for the rest of his life. [43] Davis then toured with Eckstine and Billie Holiday in their backing bands, during which he was arrested for heroin possession in Los Angeles. The story was reported in Down Beat magazine, which caused a further reduction of work for Davis, though he was acquitted weeks later. [45]
In January 1951, Davis' fortunes improved when he secured a one-year recording contract with Prestige Records , an independent jazz label, after owner Bob Weinstock became a fan of Davis' nonet. [46] Davis chose Lewis, trombone player Bennie Green , bassist Percy Heath , saxophonist Sonny Rollins , and drummer Roy Hanes ; together they recorded what became a portion of Miles Davis and Horns (1956). Davis secured further studio dates for other artists in March, June, and September 1951, [45] and had started taking up work transcribing scores for record labels to fund his heroin addiction. The following month, Davis recorded his second session for Prestige as band leader, the material of which was later released on The New Sounds (1951), Dig (1956), and Conception (1956). [47]
During his heroin addiction, Davis supported his habit partly with his music and partly by living the life of a hustler, exploiting prostitutes and receiving money from friends. By 1953, his addiction began to impair his playing ability and his drug habit became public in a Down Beat interview with Cab Calloway , who Davis never forgave as it brought him "all pain and suffering". [48] After learning of his father's support, Davis returned to St. Louis and stayed with him for several months to aid his recovery. [48] Though he continued to score heroin out of boredom, Davis caught up with Roach and Mingus in September 1953 who were on their way to Los Angeles for performances. Davis joined them, but the trip caused numerous arguments and problems. [49] Davis returned to his father's home, "determined to kick my habit ... that was the only thing on my mind". [50] He locked himself inside the guest house and stayed inside "for about seven or eight days" until he had gone through the painful and illness-inducing withdrawals. After the ordeal, Davis "sat down and started thinking about how I was going to get my life back together". [51]
After kicking his heroin addiction Davis stayed in Detroit for around six months, avoiding New York City where it was easy to score drugs. Though he did take heroin during his stay, he was healthy enough to resume live performances in local venues, playing with drummer Elvin Jones and pianist Tommy Flanagan as part of Billy Mitchell 's house band at the Blue Bird club. He was also "pimping a little" at this time. [52] A widely related story, attributed to Richard "Prophet" Jennings, [53] [54] was that Davis stumbled into Baker's Keyboard Lounge out of the rain, carrying his trumpet in a paper bag under his coat, walked to the bandstand and interrupted Roach and Clifford Brown in the midst of performing " Sweet Georgia Brown " and played " My Funny Valentine " before leaving. Davis was supposedly embarrassed into getting clean by this incident. Davis later disputed this account, stating that Roach had invited him to play and that his decision to finally quit heroin was unrelated to the incident, citing his idol boxer Sugar Ray Robinson as an inspiration to get clean and resume his career. [55]
In February 1954 a clean Davis returned to New York City, feeling good "for the first time in a long time" and mentally and physically stronger, and joined a gym. [56] He informed Weinstock and management at Blue Note Records that he was ready to record music with a quintet, which he was granted and set the task of recording more music than before to make up for lost time. Davis considered two albums with sessions recorded from this time, Miles Davis Quartet (1954) for Prestige and Miles Davis Volume 2 (1956) for Blue Note, as "very important" to him as he felt his performances were particularly strong. [57] Davis was paid roughly $750 for each album and denied to give away all his publishing rights. [58] By now he had abandoned the bebop style and got to know the music of pianist Ahmad Jamal , whose approach and use of space greatly influenced Davis. [59] When Davis returned to the studio in June 1955 to record Miles Davis Quartet and sought a new pianist, he wished for someone who played like Jamal and picked Red Garland . [59]
Between 1951 and 1954, Davis released many records on Prestige with varied line-ups, many with Rollins and Blakey. Such albums include Blue Haze (1956), Bags' Groove (1957), Walkin' (1957), and Miles Davis and the Modern Jazz Giants (1959), recorded after Davis' recovery from heroin addiction. They document the evolution of Davis' style and sound, including the fixture of the Harmon mute , also known as a wah-wah mute, onto his trumpet and placed close to the microphone which became his signature sound, and more spacious, melodic, and relaxed phrasing. Davis assumed a central position in what is known as hard bop , a contrast to bebop as hard bop included slower tempos and a less radical approach to harmony and melody, often adopting popular tunes and American standards as starting points for improvisation. Hard bop also distanced itself from cool jazz with its harder beat and blues-inspired music. [60] A few critics have named Walkin' (1957) the album that created the hard bop genre. [20]
In this period, Davis gained a reputation for being distant, cold, and withdrawn, and for having a quick temper. Davis later wrote that in 1954, Leonard "was the most important thing in my life besides music" and even took on his "arrogant attitude". [61] Factors that contributed to this reputation included his contempt for the critics and specialized press, and some well-publicized confrontations with the public and with fellow musicians. A near fight with Thelonious Monk during the recording of Bags' Groove received wide exposure in the specialized press. [62] In mid-1954, Davis reunited with Gréco for the first time since 1949 after she arrived in New York City for film prospects; the two had been in occasional contact since Davis left Paris. Though Davis was too busy to move to Spain with Gréco, the two "remained lovers for many years". [63]
Davis had an operation to remove polyps from his larynx in October 1955. [64] Even though he was not supposed to speak at all, he had an argument with somebody and raised his voice. This outburst damaged his vocal cords forever, giving him the characteristic raspy voice that came to be associated with him. "[It was] in February or March 1956 that I had my first throat operation and had to disband the group while recovering. During the course of the conversation I raised my voice to make a point and fucked up my voice. I wasn't even supposed to talk for at least ten days, and here I was not only talking, but talking loudly. After that incident my voice had this whisper that has been with me ever since." [29] The "nocturnal" quality of Davis' playing and his somber reputation, along with his whispering voice, [65] earned him the lasting moniker of "prince of darkness", adding a patina of mystery to his public persona. [66]

1955–1959: First great quintet, modal jazz, and sextet
In July 1955, Davis landed a last-minute booking to perform with his quintet at the second annual Newport Jazz Festival in Rhode Island on July 17. With a line-up of Monk, Heath, drummer Connie Kay , and horn players Zoot Sims and Gerry Mulligan , the performance was well received and marked a turn in fortune for Davis in the eyes of critics. In the 1955 Down Beat reader's poll, Davis tied first place with Gillespie in the trumpet category. [67] Following the success at Newport, Davis wrote "things began to happen to me". [68] He recorded a session for Mingus for his Debut label and performed a gig at Café Bohemia , New York City which included himself, Rollins, Garland, Chambers, and drummer Philly Joe Jones . This was followed by another session for Prestige in August. [69] Davis' final albums for the label followed: Cookin' with the Miles Davis Quintet (1957), Relaxin' with the Miles Davis Quintet (1958), Workin' with the Miles Davis Quintet (1959), and Steamin' with the Miles Davis Quintet (1961), each being instrumental in establishing Davis' quintet as one of the best on the scene.
In mid-1955, Davis recruited players for what became known as his "first great quintet" of Garland, Chambers, Jones, and tenor saxophonist John Coltrane , who was chosen after the unsuccessful attempt to recruit Julian "Cannonball" Adderley . Neither of Davis' picks were widely known at the time, nor had they received a great deal of exposure. The line-up complete, Davis secured a deal with Columbia Records after he met producer George Avakian following his Newport performance. After Avakin learned of Davis' existing contract with Prestige, he entered negotiations with Weinstock to buy him out of his deal that involved "a whole lot of money ... It was a good position, people talking good about you all over the place instead of bad-mouthing you". [68] The five debuted on record with the widely received 'Round About Midnight (1957). Their live repertoire included a mix of bebop mainstays, jazz standards from the Great American Songbook and pre-bop eras, and traditional tunes. The prevailing style of the group was a development of the Davis experience in the previous years—Davis playing long, legato , and essentially melodic lines, while Coltrane, who during these years emerged as a leading figure on the musical scene, contrasted by playing high-energy solos.
Davis' quintet disbanded for the first time in 1957 following a series of personal problems that Davis blamed on Jones' and Coltrane's drug addictions. [70] After a series of gigs at Cafe Bohemia with a modified line-up that included Rollins and drummer Art Taylor , Davis travelled to France where he recorded the score to Louis Malle 's film Ascenseur pour l'échafaud (1958). With the aid of French session musicians Barney Wilen , Pierre Michelot , and René Urtreger , and American drummer Kenny Clarke , the group recorded the soundtrack without relying on written material, instead the group improvised as they watched the film on a screen in the studio. In 1958, a performance of Les Ballets Africains from Guinea sparked Davis' interest in modal jazz , then new concept that called for a slower, deliberate pace of music and allowed the creation of solos out of harmony rather than chords. [71] Such music from the ballet featured the kalimba played for long periods of time on a single chord, weaving in and out of consonance and dissonance . [72]
Upon his return to New York City in early 1958, Davis revived his quintet after Jones and Coltrane had kicked their drug habits, and successfully recruited Adderley in the process. Now a sextet, the group recorded material released on Milestones (1958), an album anticipating the new modal directions Davis gave his music. Following Milestones , Davis fired Garland and, shortly afterwards, Jones, again over behavioral issues and replaced them with pianist Bill Evans , a young white musician with a classical background, and drummer Jimmy Cobb . With this revamped formation, Davis had the group tour extensively which was followed by an album, 1958 Miles , also known as 58 Sessions . Evans had a unique, impressionistic approach to the piano, and his musical ideas had a strong influence on Davis. After eight months of touring, however, Evans was burned out and left. He was replaced by Wynton Kelly who brought a swinging , bluesy approach that contrasted with Evans' more delicate playing.

1957–1963: Recordings with Gil Evans and 
From 1957 to 1962, Davis recorded a series of albums with arranger and composer Gil Evans , often playing the flugelhorn in addition to his trumpet. Miles Ahead (1957) showcased his playing with a big band and a horn section and included and "The Maids of Cadiz" by Léo Delibes , the first piece of European classical music that Davis recorded. Evans devised orchestral passages as transitions between each track were joined together with studio editing, turning each side of the album into a seamless piece of music. [73] Porgy and Bess (1959) features arrangements of pieces from George Gershwin 's opera of the same name which included Chambers, Jones, and Adderley. Sketches of Spain (1960) explored Spanish music with tracks by contemporary composers Joaquín Rodrigo and Manuel de Falla with originals from Evans. Recording was met with difficulties as the classical players were unable to improvise to what Evans wished for and the jazz musicians found the arrangements too difficult. "Solea" features a 10-minute trumpet solo by Davis. The album was a critical success, and sold over 120,000 copies in the US. [74] Davis performed with an orchestra conducted by Evans at Carnegie Hall in May 1961 to raise money for charity. [75] The pair's final album was Quiet Nights (1962), a collection of bossa novas released against their wishes; Evans stated it was only half an album and blamed the record company; Davis blamed producer Teo Macero , to whom he did not speak for more than two years. [76] Davis noted later that "my best friend is Gil Evans"; [77] their work was featured in the box set Miles Davis & Gil Evans: The Complete Columbia Studio Recordings (1996) which won a Grammy Award for Best Historical Album and Best Album Notes in 1997.
In March and April 1959, Davis recorded his what many critics consider his greatest album, Kind of Blue (1959). Davis named the album that described its overall mood. [78] He called back Bill Evans, months away from forming what would become his own seminal trio , for the album sessions, as the music had been planned around Evans' piano style. [79] Both Davis and Evans were acquainted with the ideas of pianist George Russell regarding modal jazz; Davis from discussions with Russell and others before the Birth of the Cool sessions, and Evans from study with Russell in 1956. [80] [81] Davis, however, had neglected to inform current pianist Wynton Kelly of Evans' role in the recordings; Kelly subsequently played only on the track " Freddie Freeloader " and was not present at the April dates for the album. [79] " So What " and " All Blues " had been played by the sextet at performances prior to the recording sessions, but for the other three compositions, Davis and Evans prepared skeletal harmonic frameworks that the other musicians saw for the first time on the day of recording, to allow a fresher approach to their improvisations. The resulting album has proven both highly popular and enormously influential. Released in August 1959, Kind of Blue was an instant success, with widespread radio airplay and rave reviews from critics. [78] It remains the best selling jazz album of all time; in October 2008, the album reached 4× platinum from the Recording Industry Association of America for selling over four million copies in the US alone. [82] In 2009, the US House of Representatives voted 409–0 to pass a resolution that honored it as a national treasure. [83] [84]
Among the success of Kind of Blue , Davis found himself involved with the law. On August 25, 1959, during a recording session at the Birdland nightclub in New York City for the US armed services , Davis took a break outside the club. As he was escorting a blonde woman across the sidewalk to a taxi, Davis was told by patrolman Gerald Kilduff to "move on". [85] [86] Davis explained that he was working at the club and refused to move, [87] yet Kilduff proceeded to arrest Davis and grabbed him as Davis tried to protect himself. [86] Witnesses said the patrolman punched Davis in the stomach with his nightstick without provocation. [86] Two detectives held the crowd back, while a third approached Davis from behind and beat him in the head. Davis was arrested and taken to jail where he was charged for assaulting an officer before he was taken to hospital where he received five stitches. [86] Davis was released on a $525 bail. [85] By January 1960, Davis was acquitted of disorderly conduct and third-degree assault. [72] He tried to pursue the case by bringing a suit against the New York City Police Department , but eventually dropped the proceedings [ citation needed ] in a plea bargain so he could recover his suspended cabaret card , then a required document for performers in order to work at New York City nightclubs. [86] Davis later stated the incident "changed my whole life and whole attitude again, made me feel bitter and cynical again when I was starting to feel good about the things that had changed in this country". [72]
Davis supported Kind of Blue with an extended tour with his sextet. [78] He persuaded Coltrane to play with the group on one final European tour in the spring of 1960. Coltrane then departed to form his classic quartet, although he returned for some of the tracks on Davis' album Someday My Prince Will Come (1961). Its front cover features a photograph of Taylor, after Davis demanded to Columbia that his future album covers depict black women. [88] By 1961, Ebony magazine estimated Davis was earning as much as $150,000 a year. [53] After Coltrane, Davis tried various saxophonists, including Jimmy Heath , Sonny Stitt , and Hank Mobley . The quintet with Hank Mobley was recorded in the studio and on several live engagements at Carnegie Hall and the Black Hawk jazz club in San Francisco . Stitt's playing with the group is found on a recording made in Olympia , Paris (where Davis and Coltrane had played a few months before) and the Live in Stockholm album.
On December 21, 1960, Davis married Frances Taylor, who left the Broadway production of West Side Story for him. [89] The relationship involved numerous incidents of Davis' domestic violence towards Taylor. Davis later wrote, "Every time I hit her, I felt bad because a lot of it really wasn't her fault but had to do with me being temperamental and jealous". [90] [91] [92] One reason for his behavior was that by early 1963, Davis had increased his abuse of alcohol and cocaine abuse in an attempt to reduce the pain from his hip and joint pain and discomfort caused from his recent diagnosis of sickle cell anemia . [93] [75] Davis also had hallucinations, "looking for this imaginery person" in his home to the point of searching the house wielding a kitchen knife. About a week after the photograph for Davis' album E.S.P. (1965) was taken, Taylor left Davis for the last time. [94] They remained separated until they officially divorced in February 1968. [95]

1963–1968: Second "great quintet"
After a performance in Chicago in December 1962, Davis and his line-up of Kelly, Chambers, Cobb and Rollins played together for the last time after the first three wished to leave and play as a trio. In early 1963, Rollins left to join them, leaving Davis to pay over $25,000 to cancel each upcoming gig and quickly assemble a new group. After numerous try outs with different musicians, Davis found his new group in tenor saxophonist George Coleman , bassist Ron Carter , pianist Victor Feldman , and drummer Frank Butler , and the five proceeded to record in the studio. [96] By May 1963, Feldman and Butler were replaced by pianist Herbie Hancock and the 17-year-old drummer Tony Williams who made Davis "excited all over again". [97] With the new line-up, Davis finished recording the rest of what became Seven Steps to Heaven (1963) and recorded the live albums Miles Davis in Europe (1964), My Funny Valentine (1965), and Four & More (1966). The quintet played essentially the same repertoire of bebop tunes and standards that earlier Davis bands had played, but tackled them with increasing structural and rhythmic freedom and, in the case of the up-tempo material, breakneck speed.
In mid-1964, Coleman left and was replaced by saxophonist Sam Rivers on the suggestion of Williams. Rivers' tenure was brief, but was recorded live with the quintet on Miles in Tokyo (1969), recorded in July 1964. Soon after, Davis persuaded saxophonist Wayne Shorter to end his tenure with Art Blakey and join his quintet, thus becoming what is known as Davis' second "great quintet" , lasting through 1968. Shorter became the group's principal composer and Davis' album E.S.P. (1965) was named after his composition recorded for it. While on tour in Europe, the group quickly made their first official recording, Miles in Berlin (1965). On returning to the US in late 1964 Davis, at Jackie DeShannon urging, was instrumental in getting the rock band The Byrds signed to Columbia. [98]
By 1965, Davis was in need of medical attention as the pain in his hip had worsened since his Japanese tour the previous year. [99] He underwent hip replacement surgery in April 1965 with bone taken from his shin, but it failed and after his third month in hospital, Davis discharged himself and went home due to boredom. He returned to hospital in August however, after he fell down in his home that required a plastic hip joint inserted in a second operation. [100] Davis had recovered enough to return to live performance with his quintet in November 1965 which included gigs at the Plugged Nickel in Chicago which marked the return of Macero as Davis' engineer and producer after their rift was healed. [101] [102] Unlike their studio albums, the quintet still played primarily jazz standards and bebop tunes, although some of the titles remain the same as the tunes played by Davis' first quintet, the quick tempos and musical departure from the framework of the tune are dramatic.
Davis sought medical attention in January 1966 when he contracted a liver infection which required a three-month break in activity. He recovered and resumed touring, playing more dates in colleges as he had got tired of performing in more typical jazz venues. [104] Columbia president Clive Davis noted that in 1966, his sales had declined to around 40,000–50,000 per album compared to as many as 100,000 per release a few years before. Matters were not helped by the press reporting Davis' apparent financial troubles and imminent demise. [105] After his appearance at the 1966 Newport Jazz Festival, Davis returned to the studio with his quintet in October 1966 which marked the first of a series of productive sessions that lasted until September 1968. During this time, Davis had entered a relationship with actress Cicely Tyson who became a positive influence on his life and mental well-being and helped the trumpeter reduce his alcohol consumption. [106]
Material from the 1966–1968 sessions were released on Miles Smiles (1966), Sorcerer (1967), Nefertiti (1967), Miles in the Sky (1968), and Filles de Kilimanjaro (1968). The quintet's approach to the new music became known as "time no changes", which referred to Davis' choice to depart from chordal sequences and adopt a more open approach with the rhythm section responding to the soloists' melodies. [107] Through Nefertiti the studio recordings consisted primarily of originals composed by Shorter, with occasional compositions by the other sidemen. In 1967, the group began to play their live concerts in continuous sets, each tune flowing into the next, with only the melody indicating any sort of demarcation. Davis' bands would continue to perform in this way until his hiatus in 1975.
Miles in the Sky and Filles de Kilimanjaro —which tentatively introduced electric bass, electric piano, and electric guitar on some tracks—pointed the way to the subsequent fusion phase of Davis' career. Davis also began experimenting with more rock-oriented rhythms on these records. By the time the second half of Filles de Kilimanjaro was recorded, bassist Dave Holland and pianist Chick Corea had replaced Carter and Hancock in the working band, though both Carter and Hancock occasionally contributed to future recording sessions. Davis soon began to take over the compositional duties of his sidemen.

1968–1975: The electric period
In September 1968, Davis married 23-year-old model and songwriter Betty Mabry . The marriage ended in divorce the following year, yet Mabry, a familiar face in the New York City scene and aware of the emerging counterculture audience, helped introduce Davis to popular rock, soul and funk artists and trending fashions of the day. [108] Jazz critic Leonard Feather recalled visiting Davis' apartment during this time and was shocked to see the trumpeter listen to albums by The Byrds , Aretha Franklin , and Dionne Warwick . Davis also took a liking to James Brown , Jimi Hendrix , and Sly and the Family Stone . [109] The musical transition required that Davis adapt to electric instruments in both live performances and in the studio and make music that would appeal to the younger audience.
Davis' first step in his electric period began with In a Silent Way (1969), recorded in a single studio session on February 18, 1969 with Shorter, Hancock, Holland, and Williams alongside keyboardists Chick Corea and Josef Zawinul , and guitarist John McLaughlin . The album features two side long tracks that Macero pieced together from different takes recorded at the session resembling elements of a classical sonata form . Released in July 1969, the album received a divided critical reception among jazz purists who accused Davis of "selling out" to the rock audience. Nevertheless, it reached number 134 on the US Billboard Top LPs chart, Davis's first album since My Funny Valentine to reach the chart. It marked the start of Davis' entry into jazz fusion .
In August 1969, Davis gathered an even larger group of musicians, this time with new drummer Jack DeJohnette with Airto Moreira and Bennie Maupin , to record his follow up, the double album Bitches Brew (1970). The album features extended compositions, some over 20 minutes in length, that, like In a Silent Way , were never played straight through in the studio but rather formed from several takes by Macero and Davis. Bitches Brew made greater use of studio recording techniques including splicing, multitrack recording , and tape loops ; the opening track, "Pharaoh's Dance", contains 19 edits. [110] Upon its release in March 1970, Bitches Brew peaked at number 35 on the Billboard Top LPs chart and, in 1976, reached gold certification by the RIAA in for 500,000 copies sold in the US. In 2003, it had sold one million copies. [82]
In March 1970, Davis began to perform as the opening act for various rock acts, allowing Columbia to market Bitches Brew to counterculture audiences. His touring band of 1969 included Shorter, Corea, Holland, and DeJohnette; the group never completed a studio recording which became subsequently known as the "lost quintet". [113] [114] According to biographer Paul Tingen , "Miles's newcomer status in this environment" led to "mixed audience reactions, often having to play for dramatically reduced fees, and enduring the ' sell-out ' accusations from the jazz world", as well as being "attacked by sections of the black press for supposedly genuflecting to white culture". [115] The 1970 tours included a spot at the 1970 Isle of Wight Festival which saw Davis perform to an estimated 350,000 people. Plans to have Davis record with Hendrix ended following the guitarist's death soon after; his funeral was the last that Davis attended. [116] Several live albums with a transitional sextet/septet including Corea, DeJohnette, Holland, Moreira, saxophonist Steve Grossman , and keyboardist Keith Jarrett were recorded for Live at the Fillmore East (1970) and Black Beauty (1973). [10]
By 1971, Davis had signed a new contract with Columbia that paid him $100,000 a year for three years including royalties. [117] He had recorded the soundtrack for the 1970 documentary film on heavyweight boxer Jack Johnson , containing two long pieces of 25 and 26 minutes in length that features Hancock, McLaughlin, Sonny Sharrock , and drummer Billy Cobham . The music, released on Jack Johnson (1971), gained critical acclaim. During this period, Davis was committed to making music for the young African-American audience drawn to the more commercial, groove-oriented style of popular music of the time; by November 1971, DeJohnette and Moreira had been replaced in the touring ensemble by drummer Leon "Ndugu" Chancler and percussionists James Mtume and Don Alias . [118] The studio and live album Live-Evil (1971) was released in the same month and Davis' ensemble—though retaining the exploratory imperative of Bitches Brew —had transformed into a much more funk-oriented group.
In 1972, composer Paul Buckmaster introduced Davis to the music of German avant-garde composer Karlheinz Stockhausen which led to a period of new creative exploration. Biographer J. K. Chambers wrote, "The effect of Davis' study of Stockhausen could not be repressed for long ... Davis' own ' space music ' shows Stockhausen's influence compositionally." [119] His recordings and performances during this period were described as "space music" by fans, Feather, and Buckmaster, who described it as "a lot of mood changes—heavy, dark, intense—definitely space music." [120] [121] These influences were incorporated on the studio album On the Corner (1972), blending Stockhausen and Buckmaster with funk elements which had Davis invite Buckmaster to New York City to oversee the writing and recording. [122] Davis stated that critics incorrectly labelled the album and complained that Colbumia had failed to promote it to the right crowd, instead to jazz traditionalists who could not understand it. [ citation needed ] In October 1972, Davis broke his ankles after in a car crash, for which he took painkillers and cocaine to numb the pain. [123]
After recording On the Corner , Davis put together a new group in 1972 with Henderson, Mtume, Carlos Garnett , guitarist Reggie Lucas , organist Lonnie Liston Smith , tabla player Badal Roy , sitarist Khalil Balakrishna , and drummer Al Foster . It was unusual in that only Smith was a major jazz instrumentalist; as a result, the music emphasized rhythmic density and shifting textures instead of individual solos. This group was recorded live for In Concert (1973), but Davis found it unsatisfactory, leading him to drop the tabla and sitar, take over keyboard duties, and added guitarist Pete Cosey . The compilation studio album Big Fun (1974) contains four long improvisations recorded between 1969 and 1972, including He Loved Him Madly", a tribute to Duke Ellington , as well as one of his most lauded pieces from this era, "Calypso Frelimo".
Davis' studio activity in the 1970s culminated in sessions throughout 1974 for the compilation album Get Up with It (1974). He then concentrated on live performance with a series of concerts that Columbia released on the double live albums Agharta (1975), Pangaea (1976), and Dark Magus (1977). The first two are recordings of two sets from February 1, 1975 in Osaka , by which time Davis was troubled with pneumonia, osteoarthritis , sickle-cell anemia, depression, bursitis , and stomach ulcers, and relied on alcohol, codeine and morphine to get through the engagements. His shows divided audiences and were routinely panned by critics which cited the trumpeter's tendency to perform with his back to the audience. [125] However, Cosey later asserted that "the band really advanced after the Japanese tour", [126] which involved a trek of the US opening for Hancock, during which Davis was once again hospitalized for his ulcers and a hernia . After his appearance at the 1975 Newport Jazz Festival in July, and the Schaefer Music Festival in New York City on September 5, Davis began a five-year period of inactivity from music. [125] [127]

1975–1980: Hiatus
In his autobiography, Davis openly wrote about his mental state during his break in activity, describing his New York City apartment as a wreck, his heavy drug and alcohol use, and his sexual encounters with many women. [29] [128] In December 1975, he had regained enough strength to undergo a much needed hip replacement operation. [129] In March 1976, Rolling Stone reported rumors of his imminent demise citing his numerous health problems during his previous tour and lifestyle. [130] In December 1976, Davis renewed his recording contract with Columbia for three years, but the label was initially reluctant to pay his usual large advances that they had done with his previous deals. This led to Davis' lawyer to enter negotiations with United Artists Records , causing Columbia to match the offer made by the rival label and complete the deal. They then established the Miles Davis Fund, paying the trumpeter on a regular basis thereafter. Pianist Vladimir Horowitz was the only other Columbia artist that had such a status with the label. [131] Columbia released a series of compilation albums to fulfil contractual obligations, including Water Babies (1976) and Circle in the Round (1979).
In early 1978, Davis moved in with Elena Steinberg in Norwalk, Connecticut after her friend, music reporter Julie Coryell, was granted an interview with the trumpeter and wanted him cared to health. [132] After working on some new music, including a tune co-written by him and guitarist Barry Finnerty , Davis got Coryell's husband, fusion guitarist Larry Coryell , to develop his work which was set for recording on March 2, 1978 with a line-up formed of Coryell, keyboardists Masabumi Kikuchi and George Pulis, bassist T. M. Stevens , and drummer Al Foster . [132] Davis proceeded to play the arranged piece in an uptempo fashion, abandoned his trumpet for the organ, and had Macero record the session without the band's knowledge. After Coryell declined a spot in a band that Davis was beginning to put together, Davis returned to his reclusive lifestyle in New York City. [133] [134] Not long after, Eskridge had Davis jailed for failing to pay maintenance to their son which cost Davis $10,000 for release on bail. [132] [129] A further recording session that involved Buckmaster and Gil Evans was shelved, [135] with Evans leaving after not receiving promised compensation. In August 1978, Davis took a step towards a comeback when he hired Mark Rothbaum, who had worked for Davis since 1972, as his new manager. [136] In 1979, Davis placed in the yearly top-ten trumpeter poll of Down Beat .
By 1979, Davis had rekindled his relationship with actress Cicely Tyson , with whom he overcame his cocaine addiction and regained his enthusiasm for music. The two married on November 26, 1981 in a ceremony officiated held in Bill Cosby 's home in Massachusetts and officiated by politician and civil rights activist Andrew Young ; [137] [138] the marriage ended in divorce that was finalized in 1989. [139]
In October 1979, Davis' contract with Columbia was up for negotiations. By this time, label president Clive Davis was replaced by George Butler , who had made several visits to Davis' home to for around the previous two years to encourage him back into the studio to record new material. To help his situation, Davis had Buckmaster come over to collaborate on new music. [140] Upon his arrival at Davis' home, Buckmaster organised an intervention for the trumpeter who by this time was living in squalor among pest and cockroach infestations and darkness, with his curtains constantly closed. His sister Dorothy took charge to clean his home with help from Buckmaster, Tyson, and neighbor Chaka Khan ; Davis later thanked Buckmaster in helping him. [141]

1980–1985: Re-emergence
Davis had not played trumpet for the better part of three years, and found the process of reclaiming embouchure difficult. His first studio appearance since his hiatus took place on May 1, 1980. [142] A day later, Davis was hospitalised for a month over a leg infection. [143] Davis then recorded The Man with the Horn (1981) from June 1980 to May 1981, with Macero assuming his role as producer. The album sees Davis playing mostly wah-wah with a younger, larger band. The initial large band was eventually abandoned in favor of a smaller combo featuring saxophonist Bill Evans , not to be confused with pianist Bill Evans, and bass player Marcus Miller , both of whom would be among Davis' most regular collaborators throughout the decade.
The Man with the Horn received a poor critical reception despite selling fairly well. In early June 1981, Davis returned to the stage, for the first time since 1975, for a ten-minute guest solo spot as part of Mel Lewis ' band and orchestra at the Village Vanguard , New York City. [144] This was followed by appearances with a new band, including a four-night run at Kik in Boston from 26–29 June, followed by two shows at Avery Fisher Hall on 5 July as part of the Kool Jazz Festival . [145] [146] Recordings from a mixture of dates from 1981, including the Kix and Avery Fisher Hall gigs, were released on We Want Miles (1982), [147] which earned Davis a Grammy Award for Best Jazz Instrumental Performance by a Soloist. [138]
In January 1982, while Tyson was working in Africa, Davis "went a little wild" with alcohol and suffered from a stroke which temporarily paralysed his right hand. [148] [149] Tyson returned home and cared for him; after three months of treatment with a Chinese acupuncturist Davis was able to play his trumpet, after which he took his doctor's warnings on board and began a lifestyle free of alcohol and drugs. He credits Tyson in his recovery which involved regular exercise, piano playing, and visits to spas, yet he lost weight and got a weave to cover his thinning scalp. Tyson also encouraged Davis to pursue drawing which the trumpeter took a particular liking to and worked on art for the rest of his life. [148]
Davis resumed touring in May 1982 with a line-up that included French percussionist Mino Cinelu and guitarist John Scofield , with whom he worked closely on his studio album Star People (1983). In mid-1983, while working on the tracks for Decoy , an album mixing soul music and electronica that was released in 1984, Davis brought in producer, composer and keyboardist Robert Irving III , who had earlier collaborated with him on The Man with the Horn . With a seven-piece band, including Scofield, Evans, keyboardist and music director Irving, drummer Al Foster and bassist Darryl Jones (later of the Rolling Stones ), Davis played a series of European gigs to positive receptions. In December 1984, during his stay in Denmark, Davis was awarded the Léonie Sonning Music Prize . During the event, Danish trumpeter Palle Mikkelborg had written a contemporary classical piece titled "Aura" for the event which impressed Davis to the point of returning to Denmark in early 1985 to record his next studio album, Aura (1989). [150] However, Columbia was dissatisfied with the recording and delayed its release for four years.
In May 1985, one month into a tour, Davis signed a new recording deal with Warner Bros. Records which included Davis signing over his entire publishing rights. [151] [152] Trumpeter Wynton Marsalis publicly dismissed Davis' more recent fusion recordings as not being "'true' jazz", comments Davis initially shrugged off, calling Marsalis "a nice young man, only confused." This changed after Marsalis appeared, unannounced, onstage in the midst of Davis' performance at the inaugural Vancouver International Jazz Festival in 1986. Marsalis whispered into Davis' ear that "someone" had told him to do so. Davis responded by ordering him off the stage. [153] Davis had become increasingly irritated at Columbia's delay releasing Aura . The breaking point in the label-artist relationship appears to have come when a Columbia jazz producer requested Davis place a goodwill birthday call to Marsalis. The 1985 tour included a performance in London in July that saw Davis on stage for five hours. Jazz critic John Fordham concluded: "The leader is clearly enjoying himself". [154] By 1985, Davis was a diabetic and required daily insulin injections. [155]
Davis released his final album for Columbia, You're Under Arrest , in September 1985. It included another brief stylistic detour, this time with his interpretations of Cyndi Lauper 's ballad " Time After Time ", and Michael Jackson 's pop hit " Human Nature ". Davis considered releasing an entire album of pop songs and recorded dozens of them, but the idea was scrapped. Davis noted that many of today's accepted jazz standards were in fact pop songs from Broadway theater , and that he was simply updating the "standards" repertoire with new material. 1985 also saw Davis guest-star on the TV show Miami Vice as pimp and minor criminal Ivory Jones in the episode titled "Junk Love" (first aired November 8, 1985). [156]
Davis collaborated with a number of figures from the British post-punk and new wave movements during this period, including Scritti Politti . [157] At the invitation of producer Bill Laswell , he recorded some trumpet parts during sessions for Public Image Ltd. 's Album , according to Public Image's John Lydon in the liner notes of their Plastic Box box set. In Lydon's words, however, "strangely enough, we didn't use [his contributions]." According to Lydon in the Plastic Box notes, Davis favorably compared Lydon's singing voice to his trumpet sound during these sessions. [158]

1986–1991: Final years
After taking part in the recording of the 1985 protest song " Sun City " as a member of Artists United Against Apartheid , Davis was featured on the instrumental "Don't Stop Me Now" by Toto for their album Fahrenheit (1986). For his next studio album, Davis intended to record as a collaboration with pop artist Prince , but the project was soon shelved. Instead, Davis chose to work with multi-instrumentalist Marcus Miller . The resulting album, Tutu (1986), was Davis' first to use modern studio tools including programmed synthesizers, sampling and drum loops, to create an entirely new setting for his music. Released in September 1986, its front cover features a striking portrait of Davis by Irving Penn . [152] The album was described as the modern counterpart of Sketches of Spain and, in 1987, won Davis his second of three Grammy Awards for Best Jazz Instrumental Performance, Soloist .
In 1988, Davis had a small part as a street musician in the Christmas comedy film Scrooged , starring Bill Murray . In November 1988, he was inducted into the Knights of Malta at a ceremony at the Alhambra Palace in Spain. [159] Later that month, Davis cut his European tour short after he collapsed and fainted after a two-hour show in Madrid and flew home. [160] Rumors of Davis' health were made public after the American tabloid magazine Star , in its February 21, 1989 edition, published that Davis had contracted AIDS , prompting Davis' manager Peter Shukat to issue a statement the following day to deny the claim. Shukat revealed Davis had been in hospital for a mild case of pneumonia and the removal of a benign polyp on his vocal cords, yet was resting comfortably in preparation for his 1989 tours. [161] Davis later blamed one of his former wives or girlfriends for starting the rumor and decided against taking legal action. [162] In 1989, Davis was interviewed on 60 Minutes by Harry Reasoner . In October 1989, Davis received a Grande Medaille de Vermeil from Paris mayor Jacques Chirac . [163] In 1990, Davis received a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award . [164] In early 1991, he appeared in the Rolf de Heer film Dingo as a jazz musician. In the film's opening sequence, Davis and his band unexpectedly land on a remote airstrip in the Australian outback and proceed to perform for the surprised locals.
Davis followed Tutu with Amandla (1989), another collaboration with Miller and George Duke plus the soundtracks to four films— Street Smart , Siesta , The Hot Spot (with bluesman John Lee Hooker ), and Dingo . He continued to tour in the late 1980s with a band of constantly rotating personnel. Davis' last albums, both released posthumously, were the hip hop -influenced studio album Doo-Bop (1992) and Miles & Quincy Live at Montreux (1993), a collaboration with Quincy Jones for the 1991 Montreux Jazz Festival where, for the first time in three decades, Davis performed songs from Miles Ahead , Porgy and Bess and Sketches of Spain . Some listeners and critics who had been disappointed with his experimental late period were happy that his career ended in such a way. [165] [166] [167]
On July 8, 1991, Davis returned to performing material from his past at the 1991 Montreux Jazz Festival with a band and orchestra conducted by Quincy Jones . [168] The set consisted of select arrangements from his albums recorded with Gil Evans. [169] The show was followed by a concert billed as Miles and Friends at the Grande halle de la Villette in Paris held two days later, featuring guest performances by artists he had worked with across his career, including John McLaughlin, Herbie Hancock and Josef Zawinul . [169] During his stay in Paris, Davis was awarded the Chevalier of the Legion of Honour . [164] Such retrospective concerts that Davis agreed to do in a short space of time led to the argument that the trumpeter knew he was dying, yet his road manager Gordon Meltzer believed Davis was unaware. [170] A week after Paris, Davis and his group performed at the Nice Jazz Festival, followed by a show in London on July 19. [171] Upon his return to the US, he stopped off in New York City to record material on his next album, Doo-Bop , and returned to California where he played at the Hollywood Bowl on August 25, his final live performance. [168] [172]

Death
In early September 1991, Davis checked into St. John's Hospital near his home in Santa Monica, California, for routine tests. [173] During his stay, his doctors suggested he have a tracheal tube implanted to relieve his breathing following his repeated bouts of bronchial pneumonia . This provoked an outburst from Davis that led to a cerebral haemorrhage , followed by a coma. After several days on life support, Davis' machine was turned off and he died on September 28, 1991. [174] Davis was 65 years old. His death was officially reasoned as the combined effects of a stroke, pneumonia and respiratory failure. [10] According to Troupe, Davis was taking azidothymidine (AZT), a type of antiretroviral drug used for the treatment of HIV and AIDS, during his treatments in hospital. [175] A funeral service was held on October 5, 1991 at St. Peter's Church in New York City that was attended by around 500 friends, family members, and musical acquaintances, with many fans standing outside in the rain. [176] Davis was buried in Woodlawn Cemetery in the Bronx , New York City, with one of his trumpets, close to the site of fellow jazz musician and his early idol, Duke Ellington . [177] [176]

Views on his earlier work
Late in his life, from the "electric period" onwards, Davis repeatedly explained his reasons for not wishing to perform his earlier works, such as Birth of the Cool or Kind of Blue . In his view, remaining stylistically static was the wrong option. [178] He commented: ""So What" or Kind of Blue , they were done in that era, the right hour, the right day, and it happened. It's over [...] What I used to play with Bill Evans, all those different modes, and substitute chords, we had the energy then and we liked it. But I have no feel for it anymore, it's more like warmed-over turkey." [179] When Shirley Horn insisted in 1990 that Miles reconsider playing the ballads and modal tunes of his Kind of Blue period, he demurred. "Nah, it hurts my lip," was the reason he gave. [180]
Other musicians regretted Davis’ change of style, for example, Bill Evans , who was instrumental in creating Kind of Blue , said: "I would like to hear more of the consummate melodic master, but I feel that big business and his record company have had a corrupting influence on his material. The rock and pop thing certainly draws a wider audience. It happens more and more these days that unqualified people with executive positions try to tell musicians what is good and what is bad music." [181]

Legacy and influence
Davis is regarded as one of the most innovative, influential and respected figures in the history of music. The Guardian described him as "a pioneer of 20th-century music, leading many of the key developments in the world of jazz." [182] He has been described as “one of the great innovators in jazz", [183] and had the titles the Prince of Darkness and the Picasso of Jazz bestowed upon him. [184] The Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll noted: "Miles Davis played a crucial and inevitably controversial role in every major development in jazz since the mid-'40s, and no other jazz musician has had so profound an effect on rock. Miles Davis was the most widely recognized jazz musician of his era, an outspoken social critic and an arbiter of style—in attitude and fashion—as well as music". [185]
William Ruhlmann of AllMusic wrote that "To examine his career is to examine the history of jazz from the mid-1940s to the early 1990s, since he was in the thick of almost every important innovation and stylistic development in the music during that period [...] It can even be argued that jazz stopped evolving when Davis wasn't there to push it forward." [1] As an innovative bandleader and composer, Miles Davis has influenced many notable musicians and bands from diverse genres. Miles' influence on the people who played with him has been described by music writer Christopher Smith as follows:
His approach, owing largely to the African-American performance tradition that focused on individual expression, emphatic interaction, and creative response to shifting contents, had a profound impact on generations of jazz musicians. [186]
Kind of Blue remains the best selling jazz album of all time. On November 5, 2009, U.S. Representative John Conyers of Michigan sponsored a measure in the United States House of Representatives to recognize and commemorate the album on its 50th anniversary. The measure also affirms jazz as a national treasure and "encourages the United States government to preserve and advance the art form of jazz music." [187] It passed, unanimously, with a vote of 409–0 on December 15, 2009. [188] The trumpet Davis used on the recording is displayed on the campus of the University of North Carolina at Greensboro . It was donated to the school by Arthur "Buddy" Gist, who met Davis in 1949 and became a close friend. The gift was the reason why the jazz program at UNCG is named the Miles Davis Jazz Studies Program. [189]
In 1986, the New England Conservatory awarded Davis an Honorary Doctorate for his extraordinary contributions to music. [190] Since 1960 the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences (NARAS) honored him with eight Grammy Awards, a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award, and three Grammy Hall of Fame Awards.
In 2001 a two-hour documentary film by Mike Dibb entitled The Miles Davis Story (Dibb Directions/ Channel 4 Television) won an International Emmy Award for arts documentary of the year. [191]
In 2010, Moldejazz premiered a play called Driving Miles , which focused on a landmark concert Davis performed in Molde , Norway, in 1984.
Miles Ahead , is a 2015 American music film directed by Don Cheadle , co-written by Cheadle with Steven Baigelman , Stephen J. Rivele, and Christopher Wilkinson , which interprets the life and compositions of Davis. It premiered at the New York Film Festival in October 2015. Starring Cheadle, the film also features Emayatzy Corinealdi as Frances Taylor, and a cast including Ewan McGregor , Michael Stuhlbarg , and Keith Stanfield . [192]

Awards

Discography

Filmography
^a Only one song is composed by Miles Davis in cooperation with Marcus Miller ("Theme For Augustine"). ^b Soundtrack is composed by Miles Davis in cooperation with Michel Legrand .

See also
WebPage index: 00017
List of Billboard number-one alternative singles of the 1980s
Alternative Songs is a record chart that ranks the most-played songs on American modern rock radio stations. Published by the music industry magazine Billboard , it was created in the midst of the growing popularity of alternative music on rock radio in the late 1980s. [1] As less-established alternative acts were receiving minimal exposure on album-oriented rock (AOR) radio stations, their labels turned to modern rock stations for airplay. [2] Billboard introduced the chart in response to demand within the music industry for consistent information on the commercial performance of alternative music. [3] During the decade, it was known as the Modern Rock Tracks chart and tabulated based on weighted reports from twenty-nine radio stations: eighteen established standard-bearer commercial stations and eleven non-commercial college stations. [3] [4]
The Modern Rock Tracks chart debuted in the September 10, 1988 issue of Billboard , with the inaugural number-one single being " Peek-a-Boo " by English alternative rock band Siouxsie and the Banshees . [1] Upon its debut, several publications noted the presence of more independent artists on Modern Rock Tracks compared to its companion chart, Album Rock Tracks . [2] [5] By the end of the decade, twenty-two singles had topped the chart. [6] Alternative rock band R.E.M. and new wave group The B-52's each scored two number-one singles on the Modern Rock Tracks chart during the 1980s, the most for any artist within the decade. [6] [7] [8] The R.E.M. single " Orange Crush " spent the longest period atop the chart during the decade, staying at number one for eight consecutive weeks from November 1988 to January 1989. [6] The final number one of the 1980s was " Blues from a Gun " by Scottish alternative rock band The Jesus and Mary Chain . [6]

Number-one singles
WebPage index: 00018
Alternative rock
Alternative rock (also called alternative music , alt-rock or simply alternative ) is a style of rock music that emerged from the independent music underground of the 1980s and became widely popular in the 1990s. In this instance, the word "alternative" refers to the genre's distinction from mainstream rock music. The term's original meaning was broader, referring to a generation of musicians unified by their collective debt to either the musical style or simply the independent, D.I.Y. ethos of punk rock , which in the late 1970s laid the groundwork for alternative music. [4] At times, "alternative" has been used as a catch-all description for music from underground rock artists that receives mainstream recognition, or for any music, whether rock or not, that is seen to be descended from punk rock (including some examples of punk itself, as well as new wave , and post-punk ).
Alternative rock is a broad umbrella term consisting of music that differs greatly in terms of its sound, its social context, and its regional roots. By the end of the 1980s magazines and zines , college radio airplay, and word of mouth had increased the prominence and highlighted the diversity of alternative rock, helping to define a number of distinct styles (and music scenes) such as noise pop , indie rock , grunge , and alternative hip hop . Most of these subgenres had achieved minor mainstream notice and a few bands representing them, such as Hüsker Dü and R.E.M. , had even signed to major labels . But most alternative bands' commercial success was limited in comparison to other genres of rock and pop music at the time, and most acts remained signed to independent labels and received relatively little attention from mainstream radio, television, or newspapers. With the breakthrough of Nirvana and the popularity of the grunge and Britpop movements in the 1990s, alternative rock entered the musical mainstream and many alternative bands became successful.
By the end of the decade, alternative rock's mainstream prominence declined due to a number of events that caused grunge and Britpop to fade and led to the hiatus of the Lollapalooza festival. Nevertheless, post-grunge remained commercially viable into the start of the 21st century, with the commercial success of Creed and Matchbox Twenty ; Radiohead 's critical acclaim, and the success of some post-Britpop groups like Coldplay . Emo attracted attention in the larger alternative rock world, and the term was applied to a variety of artists, including multi-platinum acts. During the late 1990s and early 2000s, several alternative rock bands emerged, including The White Stripes , The Strokes , Arcade Fire , Franz Ferdinand , and Interpol , that drew from post-punk and new wave. Post-punk revival artists such as Modest Mouse and The Killers had commercial success in the early and mid 2000s.

Origin of term
Before the term alternative rock came into common usage around 1990, the sort of music to which it refers was known by a variety of terms. [5] In 1979, Terry Tolkin used the term Alternative Music to describe the groups he was writing about. [6] In 1979 Dallas radio station KZEW had a late night new wave show entitled "Rock and Roll Alternative". [7] " College rock " was used in the United States to describe the music during the 1980s due to its links to the college radio circuit and the tastes of college students. [8] In the United Kingdom, dozens of small do it yourself record labels emerged as a result of the punk subculture . According to the founder of one of these labels, Cherry Red , NME and Sounds magazines published charts based on small record stores called "Alternative Charts". The first national chart based on distribution called the Indie Chart was published in January 1980; it immediately succeeded in its aim to help these labels. At the time, the term indie was used literally to describe independently distributed records. [9] By 1985, indie' had come to mean a particular genre, or group of subgenres, rather than simply distribution status. [8]
The use of the term alternative to describe rock music originated around the mid-1980s; [10] at the time, the common music industry terms for cutting-edge music were new music and post modern , respectively indicating freshness and a tendency to re contextualize sounds of the past. [4] [11] Individuals who worked as DJs and promoters during the 1980s claim the term originates from American FM radio of the 1970s, which served as a progressive alternative to top 40 radio formats by featuring longer songs and giving DJs more freedom in song selection. According to one former DJ and promoter, "Somehow this term 'alternative' got rediscovered and heisted by college radio people during the 80s who applied it to new post-punk, indie, or underground-whatever music". [12] At first the term referred to intentionally non–mainstream rock acts that were not influenced by "heavy metal ballads, rarefied new wave" and "high-energy dance anthems". [13] Usage of the term would broaden to include new wave , pop , punk rock , post-punk , and occasionally " college "/" indie " rock, all found on the American "commercial alternative" radio stations of the time such as Los Angeles ' KROQ-FM . The use of alternative gained further exposure due to the success of Lollapalooza , for which festival founder and Jane's Addiction frontman Perry Farrell coined the term Alternative Nation . In the late 1990s, the definition again became more specific. [4] In 1997, Neil Strauss of The New York Times defined alternative rock as "hard-edged rock distinguished by brittle, '70s-inspired guitar riffing and singers agonizing over their problems until they take on epic proportions". [13]
Defining music as alternative is often difficult because of two conflicting applications of the word. Alternative can describe music that challenges the status quo and that is "fiercely iconoclastic, anticommercial, and antimainstream", but the term is also used in the music industry to denote "the choices available to consumers via record stores, radio, cable television, and the Internet." [14] However alternative music has paradoxically become just as commercial and marketable as the mainstream rock, with record companies using the term "alternative" to market music to an audience that mainstream rock does not reach. [15] Using a broad definition of the genre, Dave Thompson in his book Alternative Rock cites the formation of the Sex Pistols as well as the release of the albums Horses by Patti Smith and Metal Machine Music by Lou Reed as three key events that gave birth to alternative rock. [16] Until recent years (early 2000s) when indie rock became the most common term in the US to describe modern pop and rock, the terms "indie rock" and "alternative rock" were often used interchangeably; [17] whilst there are aspects which both genres have in common, indie rock was regarded as a British-based term, unlike the more American alternative rock. [18]

Characteristics
The name "alternative rock" essentially serves as an umbrella term for underground music that has emerged in the wake of punk rock since the mid-1980s. [19] Throughout much of its history, alternative rock has been largely defined by its rejection of the commercialism of mainstream culture, although this could be contested ever since some of the major alternative artists have achieved mainstream success or co-opted with the major labels from the 1990s onwards (especially since the new millennium and beyond). Alternative bands during the 1980s generally played in small clubs, recorded for indie labels, and spread their popularity through word of mouth. [20] As such, there is no set musical style for alternative rock as a whole, although The New York Times in 1989 asserted that the genre is "guitar music first of all, with guitars that blast out power chords, pick out chiming riffs, buzz with fuzztone and squeal in feedback." [21] Sounds range from the gloomy soundscapes of gothic rock to the jangling guitars of indie pop to the dirty guitars of grunge to the 1960s/1970s revivalism of Britpop . A notable characteristic of alternative rock is the transgressive nature of the lyrics. [22] More often than in other rock-styles since the mainstreaming of rock music during the 1970s, alternative rock lyrics tend to address topics of social concern, such as drug use, depression, suicide, and environmentalism. [20] This approach to lyrics developed as a reflection of the social and economic strains in the United States and United Kingdom of the 1980s and early 1990s. [23]

History

1980s
By 1984, a majority of groups signed to independent record labels mined from a variety of rock and particularly 1960s rock influences. This represented a sharp break from the futuristic, hyper-rational post-punk years. [24]
Throughout the 1980s, alternative rock remained mainly an underground phenomenon. While on occasion a song would become a commercial hit or albums would receive critical praise in mainstream publications like Rolling Stone , alternative rock in the 1980s was primarily featured on independent record labels , fanzines , and college radio stations. Alternative bands built underground followings by touring constantly and by regularly releasing low-budget albums. In the case of the United States, new bands would form in the wake of previous bands, which created an extensive underground circuit in America, filled with different scenes in various parts of the country. [19] Although American alternative artists of the 1980s never generated spectacular album sales, they exerted a considerable influence on later alternative musicians and laid the groundwork for their success. [26] By 1989 the genre had become popular enough that a package tour featuring New Order , Public Image Limited and The Sugarcubes toured the United States arena circuit. [27]
In contrast, British alternative rock was distinguished from that of the United States early on by a more pop-oriented focus (marked by an equal emphasis on albums and singles, as well as greater openness to incorporating elements of dance and club culture) and a lyrical emphasis on specifically British concerns. As a result, few British alternative bands have achieved commercial success in the US. [28] Since the 1980s alternative rock has been played extensively on the radio in the UK, particularly by disc jockeys such as John Peel (who championed alternative music on BBC Radio 1 ), Richard Skinner , and Annie Nightingale . Artists that had cult followings in the United States received greater exposure through British national radio and the weekly music press, and many alternative bands had chart success there. [29]

American underground in the 1980s
Early American alternative bands such as Dream Syndicate , R.E.M. , The Feelies and Violent Femmes combined punk influences with folk music and mainstream music influences. R.E.M. was the most immediately successful; its debut album, Murmur (1983), entered the Top 40 and spawned a number of jangle pop followers. [30] One of the many jangle pop scenes of the early 1980s, Los Angeles' Paisley Underground revived the sounds of the 1960s, incorporating psychedelia, rich vocal harmonies and the guitar interplay of folk rock as well as punk and underground influences such as The Velvet Underground . [19]
American indie record labels SST Records , Twin/Tone Records , Touch and Go Records , and Dischord Records presided over the shift from the hardcore punk that then dominated the American underground scene to the more diverse styles of alternative rock that were emerging. [31] Minneapolis bands Hüsker Dü and The Replacements were indicative of this shift. Both started out as punk rock bands, but soon diversified their sounds and became more melodic. [19] Michael Azerrad asserted that Hüsker Dü was the key link between hardcore punk and the more melodic, diverse music of college rock that emerged. Azerrad wrote, "Hüsker Dü played a huge role in convincing the underground that melody and punk rock weren't antithetical." [32] The band also set an example by being the first group from the American indie scene to sign to a major record label, which helped establish college rock as "a viable commercial enterprise." [33] By focusing on heartfelt songwriting and wordplay instead of political concerns, The Replacements upended a number of underground scene conventions; Azerrad noted that "along with R.E.M. [The Replacements] were one of the few underground bands that mainstream people liked." [34]
By the late 1980s, the American alternative scene was dominated by styles ranging from quirky alternative pop ( They Might Be Giants and Camper Van Beethoven ), to noise rock ( Sonic Youth , Big Black , The Jesus Lizard [35] ) and industrial rock ( Ministry , Nine Inch Nails ). These sounds were in turn followed by the advent of Boston 's Pixies and Los Angeles ' Jane's Addiction . [19] Around the same time, the grunge subgenre emerged in Seattle , Washington , initially referred to as "The Seattle Sound" until its rise to popularity in the early 1990s. [36] Grunge featured a sludgy, murky guitar sound that synthesized heavy metal and punk rock. [37] Promoted largely by Seattle indie label Sub Pop , grunge bands were noted for their thrift store fashion which favored flannel shirts and combat boots suited to the local weather. [38] Early grunge bands Soundgarden and Mudhoney found critical acclaim in the U.S. and UK, respectively. [19]
By the end of the decade, a number of alternative bands began to sign to major labels. While early major label signings Hüsker Dü and The Replacements had little success, acts who signed with majors in their wake such as R.E.M. and Jane's Addiction achieved gold and platinum records, setting the stage for alternative's later breakthrough. [39] [40] Some bands such as Pixies had massive success overseas while they were ignored domestically. [19]
In the middle of the decade Hüsker Dü 's album Zen Arcade influenced other hardcore acts by tackling personal issues. Out of Washington, D.C.'s hardcore scene what was called "emocore" or " emo " emerged and was noted for its lyrics which delved into emotional very personal subject matter (vocalists sometimes cried) and added free association poetry and a confessional tone. Rites of Spring has been described as the first "emo" band. Former Minor Threat singer Ian MacKaye founded Dischord Records which became the center for the city's emo scene. [41]

British genres and trends of the 1980s
Gothic rock developed out of late-1970s British post-punk . With a reputation as the "darkest and gloomiest form of underground rock", gothic rock utilizes a synthesizer-and-guitar based sound drawn from post-punk to construct "foreboding, sorrowful, often epic soundscapes", and the genre's lyrics often address literary romanticism, morbidity, religious symbolism, and supernatural mysticism. [43] This genre among bands that took inspiration from late-1970s British post-punk groups, Joy Division and Siouxsie and the Banshees . [44] Bauhaus ' debut single " Bela Lugosi's Dead ", released in 1979, is considered to be the proper beginning of the gothic rock genre. [45] The Cure 's "oppressively dispirited" albums Seventeen Seconds (1980), Faith (1981), Pornography (1982) and their opus Disintegration (1989) cemented that group's stature in that style and laid the foundation for its large cult following. [46]
The key British alternative rock band to emerge during the 1980s was Manchester 's The Smiths . Music journalist Simon Reynolds singled out The Smiths and their American contemporaries R.E.M. as "the two most important alt-rock bands of the day", commenting that they "were eighties bands only in the sense of being against the eighties". Reynolds noted that The Smiths' "whole stance was predicated on their British audience being a lost generation, exiles in their own land". [47] The Smiths' embrace of the guitar in an era of synthesizer-dominated music is viewed as signaling the end of the new wave era and the advent of alternative rock in the United Kingdom. Despite the band's limited chart success and short career, The Smiths exerted an influence over the British indie scene through the end of the decade, as various bands drew from singer Morrissey 's English-centered lyrical topics and guitarist Johnny Marr 's jangly guitar-playing style. [28] The C86 cassette, a 1986 NME premium featuring Primal Scream , The Wedding Present and others, was a major influence on the development of indie pop and the British indie scene as a whole. [48] [49]
Other forms of alternative rock developed in the UK during the 1980s. The Jesus and Mary Chain 's sound combined the Velvet Underground 's "melancholy noise" with Beach Boys pop melodies and Phil Spector 's " Wall of Sound " production, [50] [51] while New Order emerged from the demise of post-punk band Joy Division and experimented with techno and house music . [28] The Mary Chain, along with Dinosaur Jr., C86 and the dream pop of Cocteau Twins , were the formative influences for the shoegazing movement of the late 1980s. Named for the band members' tendency to stare at their feet and guitar effects pedals [52] onstage rather than interact with the audience, shoegazing acts like My Bloody Valentine and Slowdive created an overwhelmingly loud "wash of sound" that obscured vocals and melodies with long, droning riffs, distortion, and feedback. [53] Shoegazing bands dominated the British music press at the end of the decade along with the Madchester scene. Performing for the most part in The Haçienda , a nightclub in Manchester owned by New Order and Factory Records , Madchester bands such as Happy Mondays and The Stone Roses mixed acid house dance rhythms with melodic guitar pop. [54]

Popularization in the 1990s
By the start of the 1990s, the music industry was enticed by alternative rock's commercial possibilities and major labels actively courted bands including Jane's Addiction , Red Hot Chili Peppers , Dinosaur Jr. , Firehose , and Nirvana . [39] In particular, R.E.M.'s success had become a blueprint for many alternative bands in the late 1980s and 1990s to follow; the group had outlasted many of its contemporaries and by the 1990s had become one of the most popular bands in the world. [19]
The breakthrough success of the band Nirvana led to the widespread popularization of alternative rock in the 1990s. The release of the band's single " Smells Like Teen Spirit " from its second album Nevermind (1991) "marked the instigation of the grunge music phenomenon". Due to constant airplay of the song's music video on MTV , Nevermind was selling 400,000 copies a week by Christmas 1991. [55] The success of Nevermind surprised the music industry. Nevermind not only popularized grunge, but also established "the cultural and commercial viability of alternative rock in general." [56] Michael Azerrad asserted that Nevermind symbolized "a sea-change in rock music" in which the hair metal that had dominated rock music at that time fell out of favor in the face of music that was authentic and culturally relevant. [57]
Nirvana's surprise success with Nevermind heralded a "new openness to alternative rock" among commercial radio stations, opening doors for heavier alternative bands in particular. [58] In the wake of Nevermind , alternative rock "found itself dragged-kicking and screaming ... into the mainstream" and record companies, confused by the genre's success yet eager to capitalize on it, scrambled to sign bands. [59] The New York Times declared in 1993, "Alternative rock doesn't seem so alternative anymore. Every major label has a handful of guitar-driven bands in shapeless shirts and threadbare jeans, bands with bad posture and good riffs who cultivate the oblique and the evasive, who conceal catchy tunes with noise and hide craftsmanship behind nonchalance." [60] However, many alternative rock artists rejected success, for it conflicted with the rebellious, D.I.Y. ethic the genre had espoused before mainstream exposure and their ideas of artistic authenticity. [61]

Grunge
Other grunge bands subsequently replicated Nirvana's success. Pearl Jam had released its debut album Ten a month before Nevermind in 1991, but album sales only picked up a year later. [62] By the second half of 1992 Ten became a breakthrough success, being certified gold and reaching number two on the Billboard 200 album chart. [63] Soundgarden 's album Badmotorfinger , Alice in Chains ' Dirt and Stone Temple Pilots ' Core along with the Temple of the Dog album collaboration featuring members of Pearl Jam and Soundgarden , were also among the 100 top-selling albums of 1992. [64] The popular breakthrough of these grunge bands prompted Rolling Stone to nickname Seattle "the new Liverpool ." [38] Major record labels signed most of the prominent grunge bands in Seattle, while a second influx of bands moved to the city in hopes of success. [65]
At the same time, critics asserted that advertising was co-opting elements of grunge and turning it into a fad. Entertainment Weekly commented in a 1993 article, "There hasn't been this kind of exploitation of a subculture since the media discovered hippies in the '60s." [66] The New York Times compared the "grunging of America" to the mass-marketing of punk rock, disco , and hip hop in previous years. As a result of the genre's popularity, a backlash against grunge developed in Seattle. [38] Nirvana's follow-up album In Utero (1993) was an intentionally abrasive album that Nirvana bassist Krist Novoselic described as a "wild aggressive sound, a true alternative record." [67] Nevertheless, upon its release in September 1993 In Utero topped the Billboard charts. [68] Pearl Jam also continued to perform well commercially with its second album, Vs. (1993), which topped the Billboard charts by selling a record 950,378 copies in its first week of release. [69]

Britpop
With the decline of the Madchester scene and the unglamorousness of shoegazing, the tide of grunge from America dominated the British alternative scene and music press in the early 1990s. [28] As a reaction, a flurry of British bands emerged that wished to "get rid of grunge" and "declare war on America", taking the public and native music press by storm. [70] Dubbed "Britpop" by the media, this movement represented by Pulp , Blur , Suede , and Oasis was the British equivalent of the grunge explosion, in that the artists propelled alternative rock to the top of the charts in their home country. [28] Britpop bands were influenced by and displayed reverence for British guitar music of the past, particularly movements and genres such as the British Invasion , glam rock , and punk rock . [71] In 1995 the Britpop phenomenon culminated in a rivalry between its two chief groups, Oasis and Blur, symbolized by their release of competing singles on the same day. Blur won " The Battle of Britpop ", but Oasis soon eclipsed the other band in popularity with its second album, (What's the Story) Morning Glory? (1995), [72] which went on to become the third best-selling album in the UK's history. [73]

Indie rock
Long synonymous with alternative rock as a whole in the US, indie rock became a distinct form following the popular breakthrough of Nirvana. [74] Indie rock was formulated as a rejection of both alternative rock's absorption into the mainstream by artists who could not or refused to cross over, and a wariness of its "macho" aesthetic. While indie rock artists share the punk rock distrust of commercialism, the genre does not entirely define itself against that, as "the general assumption is that it's virtually impossible to make indie rock's varying musical approaches compatible with mainstream tastes in the first place". [74]
Labels such as Matador Records , Merge Records , and Dischord , and indie rockers like Pavement , Superchunk , Fugazi , and Sleater-Kinney dominated the American indie scene for most of the 1990s. [75] One of the main indie rock movements of the 1990s was lo-fi . The movement, which focused on the recording and distribution of music on low-quality cassette tapes , initially emerged in the 1980s. By 1992, Pavement, Guided by Voices and Sebadoh became popular lo-fi cult acts in the United States, while subsequently artists like Beck and Liz Phair brought the aesthetic to mainstream audiences. [76] The period also saw alternative confessional female singer-songwriters. Besides the aforementioned Liz Phair, Lynda Thomas , PJ Harvey and the massively successful Alanis Morissette fit into this sub group. [77] [78] [79]

Post-grunge
During the latter half of the 1990s, grunge was supplanted by post-grunge . Many post-grunge bands lacked the underground roots of grunge and were largely influenced by what grunge had become, namely "a wildly popular form of inward-looking, serious-minded hard rock."; many post-grunge bands emulated the sound and style of grunge, "but not necessarily the individual idiosyncracies of its original artists." [80] Post-grunge was a more commercially viable genre that tempered the distorted guitars of grunge with polished, radio-ready production. [80] Originally, post-grunge was a label used almost pejoratively on bands that emerged when grunge was mainstream and emulated the grunge sound. The label suggested that bands labelled as post-grunge were simply musically derivative, or a cynical response to an "authentic" rock movement. [81] Bush, Candlebox and Collective Soul were labelled almost pejoratively as post-grunge which, according to Tim Grierson of About.com , is "suggesting that rather than being a musical movement in their own right, they were just a calculated, cynical response to a legitimate stylistic shift in rock music ." [81] Post-grunge morphed during the late 1990s as post-grunge bands such as Creed and Nickelback emerged. [81]

Post-rock
Post-rock was established by Talk Talk 's Laughing Stock and Slint 's Spiderland albums, both released in 1991. [82] Post-rock draws influence from a number of genres, including Krautrock , progressive rock , and jazz . The genre subverts or rejects rock conventions, and often incorporates electronic music. [82] While the name of the genre was coined by music journalist Simon Reynolds in 1994, the style of the genre was solidified by the release of Millions Now Living Will Never Die (1996) by the Chicago group Tortoise . [82] Post-rock became the dominant form of experimental rock music in the 1990s and bands from the genre signed to such labels as Thrill Jockey , Kranky , Drag City , and Too Pure . [82] A related genre, math rock , peaked in the mid-1990s. In comparison to post-rock, math rock is more " rockist " and relies on complex time signatures and intertwining phrases. [83] While by the end of the decade a backlash had emerged against post-rock due to its "dispassionate intellectuality" and its perceived increasing predictability, a new wave of post-rock bands such as Godspeed You! Black Emperor and Sigur Rós emerged who further expanded the genre. [82]

Other trends
In 1993, Smashing Pumpkins album Siamese Dream was a major commercial success. The strong influence of heavy metal and progressive rock on the album helped to legitimize alternative rock to mainstream radio programmers and close the gap between alternative rock and the type of rock played on American 1970s Album Oriented Rock radio. [84]
After almost a decade in the underground, ska punk , a mixture of earlier British ska and punk acts, became popular in the United States. Rancid was the first of the "Third Wave Ska Revival" acts to break. In 1996, the Mighty Mighty Bosstones , No Doubt , Sublime , Goldfinger , Reel Big Fish , Less Than Jake and Save Ferris charted or received radio exposure. [85] [86]

Decline of popularity
By the end of the decade, alternative rock's mainstream prominence declined due to a number of events, notably the death of Nirvana's Kurt Cobain in 1994 and Pearl Jam's lawsuit against concert venue promoter Ticketmaster , which in effect barred the group from playing many major venues around the United States. [61] In addition to the decline of grunge bands, Britpop faded as Oasis's third album, Be Here Now (1997), received lackluster reviews and Blur began to incorporate influences from American alternative rock. [87] A signifier of alternative rock's declining popularity was the hiatus of the Lollapalooza festival after an unsuccessful attempt to find a headliner in 1998. In light of the festival's troubles that year, Spin said, "Lollapalooza is as comatose as alternative rock right now". [88]
Despite alternative rock's declining popularity, some artists retained mainstream relevance. Post-grunge remained commercially viable into the start of the 21st century, when bands like Creed and Matchbox Twenty became among the most popular rock bands in the United States. [80] At the same time Britpop began to decline, Radiohead achieved critical acclaim with its third album OK Computer (1997), and its follow-ups Kid A (2000) and Amnesiac (2001), which were in marked contrast with the traditionalism of Britpop. Radiohead, along with post-Britpop groups like Travis and Coldplay , were major forces in British rock in subsequent years. [89]
In the mid-1990s Sunny Day Real Estate defined the "emo" genre for many. Weezer 's album Pinkerton (1996) was also influential. By 2000 and on into the new decade emo was one of the most popular rock music genres. [41] Popular acts included platinum selling success of Bleed American by Jimmy Eat World (2001) and Dashboard Confessional 's The Places You Have Come to Fear the Most (2003). [90] The new emo had a much more mainstream sound than in the 1990s and a far greater appeal amongst adolescents than its earlier incarnations. [90] At the same time, use of the term "emo" expanded beyond the musical genre, becoming associated with fashion, a hairstyle and any music that expressed emotion. [91] The term "emo" has been applied by critics and journalists to a variety of artists, including multi-platinum acts such as Fall Out Boy [92] and My Chemical Romance [93] and disparate groups such as Paramore [92] and Panic! at the Disco , [94] even when they reject the label.

2000s revival
During the late 1990s and early 2000s, several alternative rock bands emerged, including The Strokes , Franz Ferdinand , Interpol and The Rapture that drew primary inspiration from post-punk and new wave, establishing the post-punk revival movement. [95] Preceded by the success of bands such as The Strokes and The White Stripes earlier in the decade, an influx of new alternative rock bands, including several post-punk revival artists and others such as Modest Mouse , The Killers , and Yeah Yeah Yeahs , found commercial success in the early and mid 2000s. Owing to the success of these bands, Entertainment Weekly declared in 2004, "After almost a decade of domination by rap-rock and nu-metal bands, mainstream alt-rock is finally good again." [96] Worldwide arena tours for alternative rock acts were culled to a few well-established players such as U2 , Muse , and Foo Fighters , with American band Thirty Seconds to Mars experiencing a notable rise in popularity during the latter half of the 2000s. [97] American rock band Red Hot Chili Peppers entered a new-found popularity in 1999 after the release of their album Californication (1999), with continued success throughout the 2000s.
Most references to modern alternative rock music in the United States are to the indie rock genre, a term that previously had limited usage on alternative rock channels and media. [17] While there have been conflicting opinions on the relevance of alternative rock to mainstream audiences beyond 2010, [98] [99] Dave Grohl commented on an article from the December 29, 2013 issue of the New York Daily News stating that rock is dead: [100] "speak for yourself... Rock seems pretty alive to me." [101]

See also

Citations

Bibliography

External links
WebPage index: 00019
R.E.M.
R.E.M. was an American rock band from Athens, Georgia , that was formed in 1980 by drummer Bill Berry , guitarist Peter Buck , bassist/backing vocalist Mike Mills , and lead vocalist Michael Stipe . One of the first alternative rock bands, R.E.M. was noted for Buck's ringing, arpeggiated guitar style, Stipe's particular vocal quality and obscure lyrics, and Mills' melodic basslines and backing vocals. R.E.M. released its first single—" Radio Free Europe "—in 1981 on the independent record label Hib-Tone . The single was followed by the Chronic Town EP in 1982, the band's first release on I.R.S. Records . In 1983, the group released its critically acclaimed debut album, Murmur , and built its reputation over the next few years through subsequent releases, constant touring, and the support of college radio . Following years of underground success, R.E.M. achieved a mainstream hit in 1987 with the single " The One I Love ". The group signed to Warner Bros. Records in 1988, and began to espouse political and environmental concerns while playing large arenas worldwide.
By the early 1990s, when alternative rock began to experience broad mainstream success, R.E.M. was viewed by subsequent acts such as Nirvana and Pavement as a pioneer of the genre. The band then released its two most commercially successful albums, Out of Time (1991) and Automatic for the People (1992), which veered from the band's established sound and catapulted it to international fame. R.E.M.'s 1994 release, Monster , was a return to a more rock-oriented sound, but still continued its run of success. The band began its first tour in six years to support the album; the tour was marred by medical emergencies suffered by three of the band members.
In 1996, R.E.M. re-signed with Warner Bros. for a reported US$80 million, at the time the most expensive recording contract in history. Its 1996 release, New Adventures in Hi-Fi , though critically acclaimed, fared worse commercially than its predecessors. The following year, Bill Berry left the band, while Stipe, Buck, and Mills continued the group as a trio. Through some changes in musical style, the band continued its career into the next decade with mixed critical and commercial success, despite having sold more than 85 million records worldwide and becoming one of the world's best-selling music artists of all time . [6] In 2007, the band was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , in their first year of eligibility. R.E.M. disbanded amicably in September 2011, announcing the split on its website.

History

1980–1981: Formation
In January 1980, Michael Stipe met Peter Buck in Wuxtry Records, the Athens record store where Buck worked. The pair discovered that they shared similar tastes in music, particularly in punk rock and protopunk artists like Patti Smith , Television , and The Velvet Underground . Stipe said, "It turns out that I was buying all the records that [Buck] was saving for himself." [7] Stipe and Buck soon met fellow University of Georgia students Mike Mills and Bill Berry, [8] who had played music together since high school [9] and lived together in Georgia. [10] The quartet agreed to collaborate on several songs; Stipe later commented that "there was never any grand plan behind any of it". [7] Their still-unnamed band spent a few months rehearsing and played its first show on April 5, 1980, at a friend's birthday party held in a converted Episcopal church in Athens. After considering names like "Twisted Kites", "Cans of Piss", and "Negro Wives", the band settled on "R.E.M." (which stands for the stage of sleep called rapid eye movement ), which Stipe selected at random from a dictionary. [11]
The band members eventually dropped out of school to focus on their developing group. [12] They found a manager in Jefferson Holt , a record store clerk who was so impressed by an R.E.M. performance in his hometown of Chapel Hill, North Carolina , that he moved to Athens. [13] R.E.M.'s success was almost immediate in Athens and surrounding areas; the band drew progressively larger crowds for shows, which caused some resentment in the Athens music scene . [14] Over the next year and a half, R.E.M. toured throughout the Southern United States. Touring was arduous because a touring circuit for alternative rock bands did not then exist. The group toured in an old blue van driven by Holt, and lived on a food allowance of $2 each per day. [15]
During the summer of 1981, R.E.M. recorded its first single, "Radio Free Europe", at producer Mitch Easter 's Drive-In Studios in Winston-Salem, North Carolina . The single was released on the local independent record label Hib-Tone with an initial pressing of one thousand copies, which quickly sold out. [16] Despite its limited pressing, the single garnered critical acclaim, and was listed as one of the ten best singles of the year by The New York Times . [17]

1981–1987: I.R.S. Records and cult success
R.E.M. recorded the Chronic Town EP with Mitch Easter in October 1981, and planned to release it on a new indie label named Dasht Hopes. [18] However, I.R.S. Records acquired a demo of the band's first recording session with Easter that had been circulating for months. [19] The band turned down the advances of major label RCA Records in favor of I.R.S., with whom it signed a contract in May 1982. I.R.S. released Chronic Town that August as its first American release. [20] A positive review of the EP by NME praised the songs' auras of mystery, and concluded, "R.E.M. ring true, and it's great to hear something as unforced and cunning as this." [21]
I.R.S. first paired R.E.M. with producer Stephen Hague to record its debut album. Hague's emphasis on technical perfection left the band unsatisfied, and the band members asked the label to let them record with Easter. [22] I.R.S. agreed to a "tryout" session, allowing the band to return to North Carolina and record the song "Pilgrimage" with Easter and producing partner Don Dixon . After hearing the track, I.R.S. permitted the group to record the album with Dixon and Easter. [23] Because of its bad experience with Hague, the band recorded the album via a process of negation, refusing to incorporate rock music clichés such as guitar solos or then-popular synthesizers , in order to give its music a timeless feel. [24] The completed album, Murmur , was greeted with critical acclaim upon its release in 1983, with Rolling Stone listing the album as its record of the year. [25] The album reached number 36 on the Billboard album chart. [26] A re-recorded version of "Radio Free Europe" was the album's lead single and reached number 78 on the Billboard singles chart in 1983. [27] Despite the acclaim awarded the album, Murmur sold only about 200,000 copies, which I.R.S.'s Jay Boberg felt was below expectations. [28]
R.E.M. made its first national television appearance on Late Night with David Letterman in October 1983, [29] during which the group performed a new, unnamed song. [30] The piece, eventually titled " So. Central Rain (I'm Sorry) ", became the first single from the band's second album, Reckoning (1984), which was also recorded with Easter and Dixon. The album met with critical acclaim; NME ' s Mat Snow wrote that Reckoning "confirms R.E.M. as one of the most beautifully exciting groups on the planet". [31] While Reckoning peaked at number 27 on the US album charts—an unusually high chart placing for a college rock band at the time—scant airplay and poor distribution overseas resulted in it charting no higher than number 91 in Britain. [32]
The band's third album, Fables of the Reconstruction (1985), demonstrated a change in direction. Instead of Dixon and Easter, R.E.M. chose producer Joe Boyd , who had worked with Fairport Convention and Nick Drake , to record the album in England. The band members found the sessions unexpectedly difficult, and were miserable due to the cold winter weather and what they considered to be poor food; [33] the situation brought the band to the verge of break-up. [34] The gloominess surrounding the sessions ended up providing the context for the album itself. Lyrically, Stipe began to create storylines in the mode of Southern mythology , noting in a 1985 interview that he was inspired by "the whole idea of the old men sitting around the fire, passing on ... legends and fables to the grandchildren". [35]
They toured in Canada in July and August 1985, and throughout Europe in October of that year, including in The Netherlands, England (one concert was held at the famous Hammersmith Palais in London), Ireland, Scotland, France, Switzerland, Belgium and West Germany . [36] On October 2, 1985, the group played a concert in Bochum , West Germany, for the German TV show Rockpalast . Stipe had bleached his hair blond during this time. [37] [38] [39] [40] [41] Fables of the Reconstruction performed poorly in Europe and its critical reception was mixed, with some critics regarding it as dreary and poorly recorded. [42] As with the previous records, the singles from Fables of the Reconstruction were mostly ignored by mainstream radio. Meanwhile, I.R.S. was becoming frustrated with the band's reluctance to achieve mainstream success. [43]
For its fourth album, R.E.M. enlisted John Mellencamp producer Don Gehman . The result, Lifes Rich Pageant (1986) featured Stipe's vocals closer to the forefront of the music. In a 1986 interview with the Chicago Tribune , Peter Buck related, "Michael is getting better at what he's doing, and he's getting more confident at it. And I think that shows up in the projection of his voice." [44] The album improved markedly upon the sales of Fables of the Reconstruction and eventually peaked at number 21 on the Billboard album chart. The single " Fall on Me " also picked up support on commercial radio. [45] The album was the band's first to be certified gold for selling 500,000 copies. [46] While American college radio remained R.E.M.'s core support, the band was beginning to chart hits on mainstream rock formats; however, the music still encountered resistance from Top 40 radio . [47]
Following the success of Lifes Rich Pageant , I.R.S. issued Dead Letter Office , a compilation of tracks recorded by the band during their album sessions, many of which had either been issued as B-sides or left unreleased altogether. Shortly thereafter, I.R.S. compiled R.E.M.'s music video catalog (except "Wolves, Lower") as the band's first video release, Succumbs .

1987–1990: Breakthrough
Don Gehman was unable to produce R.E.M.'s fifth album, so he suggested the group work with Scott Litt . [48] Litt would be the producer for the band's next five albums. Document (1987) featured some of Stipe's most openly political lyrics, particularly on "Welcome to the Occupation" and "Exhuming McCarthy", which were reactions to the conservative political environment of the 1980s under American President Ronald Reagan . [49] Jon Pareles of The New York Times wrote in his review of the album, " ' Document ' is both confident and defiant; if R.E.M. is about to move from cult-band status to mass popularity, the album decrees that the band will get there on its own terms." [50] Document was R.E.M.'s breakthrough album, and the first single " The One I Love " charted in the Top 20 in the US, UK, and Canada. [26] By January 1988, Document had become the group's first album to sell a million copies. [51] In light of the band's breakthrough, the December 1987 cover of Rolling Stone declared R.E.M. "America's Best Rock & Roll Band". [52]
Frustrated that its records did not see satisfactory overseas distribution, R.E.M. left I.R.S. when its contract expired and signed with the major label Warner Bros. Records . [53] Though other labels offered more money, R.E.M. ultimately signed with Warner Bros.—reportedly for an amount between $6 million and $12 million—due to the company's assurance of total creative freedom. [54] In the aftermath of the group's departure, I.R.S. released the 1988 "best of" compilation Eponymous (assembled with input from the band members) to capitalize on assets the company still possessed. [55] The band's 1988 Warner Bros. debut, Green , was recorded in Nashville , Tennessee, and showcased the group experimenting with its sound. [56] The record's tracks ranged from the upbeat first single " Stand " (a hit in the United States), [57] to more political material, like the rock-oriented " Orange Crush " and "World Leader Pretend", which address the Vietnam War and the Cold War , respectively. [58] Green has gone on to sell four million copies worldwide. [59] The band supported the album with its biggest and most visually developed tour to date, featuring back-projections and art films playing on the stage. [60] After the Green tour, the band members unofficially decided to take the following year off, the first extended break in the band's career. [61] In 1990 Warner Bros. issued the music video compilation Pop Screen to collect clips from the Document and Green albums, followed a few months later by the video album Tourfilm featuring live performances filmed during the Green World Tour. [62]

1990–1993: Non-touring years and international success
R.E.M. reconvened in mid-1990 to record its seventh album, Out of Time . In a departure from Green , the band members often wrote the music with non-traditional rock instrumentation including mandolin , organ , and acoustic guitar instead of adding them as overdubs later in the creative process. [63] Released in March 1991, Out of Time was the band's first album to top both the US and UK charts. [26] The record eventually sold 4.2 million copies in the US alone, [64] and about 12 million copies worldwide by 1996. [59] The album's lead single " Losing My Religion " was a worldwide hit that received heavy rotation on radio, as did the music video on MTV . [65] "Losing My Religion" was R.E.M.'s highest-charting single in the US, reaching number four on the Billboard charts. [26] "There've been very few life-changing events in our career because our career has been so gradual," Mills said years later. "If you want to talk about life changing, I think 'Losing My Religion' is the closest it gets". [66] The album's second single, " Shiny Happy People " (one of three songs on the record to feature vocals from Kate Pierson of fellow Athens band The B-52's ), was also a major hit, reaching number 10 in the US and number six in the UK. [26] Out of Time garnered R.E.M. seven nominations at the 1992 Grammy Awards , the most nominations of any artist that year. The band won three awards: one for Best Alternative Music Album and two for "Losing My Religion", Best Short Form Music Video and Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal . [67] R.E.M. did not tour to promote Out of Time ; instead the group played a series of one-off shows, including an appearance taped for an episode of MTV Unplugged [68] and released music videos for each song on the video album This Film Is On . The MTV Unplugged session of "Losing My Religion" was recorded with members of the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra in Madison, Georgia, at Madison-Morgan Cultural Center . [69]
After spending some months off, R.E.M. returned to the studio in 1991 to record its next album. Late in 1992, the band released Automatic for the People . Though the group had intended to make a harder-rocking album after the softer textures of Out of Time , [70] the somber Automatic for the People "[seemed] to move at an even more agonized crawl", according to Melody Maker . [71] The album dealt with themes of loss and mourning inspired by "that sense of ... turning thirty", according to Buck. [72] Several songs featured string arrangements by former Led Zeppelin bassist John Paul Jones . Considered by a number of critics (as well as by Buck and Mills) to be the band's best album, [73] Automatic for the People reached numbers one and two on UK and US charts, respectively, and generated the American Top 40 hit singles " Drive ", " Man on the Moon ", and " Everybody Hurts ". [26] The album would sell over fifteen million copies worldwide. [59] As with Out of Time , there was no tour in support of the album. The decision to forgo a tour, in conjunction with Stipe's physical appearance, generated rumors that the singer was dying or HIV-positive , which were vehemently denied by the band. [71]

1994–1996: Return to touring and continued success
After the band released two slow-paced albums in a row, R.E.M.'s 1994 album Monster was, as Buck said, "a 'rock' record, with the rock in quotation marks." In contrast to the sound of its predecessors, the music of Monster consisted of distorted guitar tones, minimal overdubs, and touches of 1970s glam rock . [74] Like Out of Time , Monster topped the charts in both the US and UK. [26] The record sold about nine million copies worldwide. [59] The singles " What's the Frequency, Kenneth? " and " Bang and Blame " were the band's last American Top 40 hits, although all the singles from Monster reached the Top 30 on the British charts. [26] Warner Bros. assembled the music videos from the album as well as those from Automatic for the People for release as Parallel in 1995. [75]
In January 1995, R.E.M. set out on its first tour in six years. The tour was a huge commercial success, but the period was difficult for the group. [76] On March 1, Berry collapsed on stage during a performance in Lausanne, Switzerland , having suffered a brain aneurysm . He had surgery immediately and recovered fully within a month. Berry's aneurysm was only the beginning of a series of health problems that plagued the Monster tour. Mills had to undergo abdominal surgery to remove an intestinal adhesion in July; a month later, Stipe had to have an emergency surgery to repair a hernia . [77] Despite all the problems, the group had recorded the bulk of a new album while on the road. The band brought along eight-track recorders to capture its shows, and used the recordings as the base elements for the album. [78] The final three performances of the tour were filmed and released in home video form as Road Movie . [79]
R.E.M. re-signed with Warner Bros. Records in 1996 for a reported $80 million (a figure the band constantly asserted originated with the media), rumored to be the largest recording contract in history at that point. [80] The group's 1996 album New Adventures in Hi-Fi debuted at number two in the US and number one in the UK. [26] The five million copies of the album sold were a reversal of the group's commercial fortunes of the previous five years. [81] Time writer Christopher John Farley argued that the lesser sales of the album were due to the declining commercial power of alternative rock as a whole. [82] That same year, R.E.M. parted ways with manager Jefferson Holt, allegedly due to sexual harassment charges levied against him by a member of the band's home office in Athens. [83] The group's lawyer Bertis Downs assumed managerial duties. [84]

1997–2000: Berry's departure and 
In April 1997, the band convened at Buck's Kauai vacation home to record demos of material intended for the next album. The band sought to reinvent its sound and intended to incorporate drum loops and percussion experiments. [85] Just as the sessions were due to begin in October, Berry decided, after months of contemplation and discussions with Downs and Mills, to tell the rest of the band that he was quitting. [86] Berry told his band mates that he would not quit if they would break up as a result, so Stipe, Buck, and Mills agreed to carry on as a three-piece with his blessing. [87] Berry publicly announced his departure three weeks later in October 1997. Berry told the press, "I'm just not as enthusiastic as I have been in the past about doing this anymore . . . I have the best job in the world. But I'm kind of ready to sit back and reflect and maybe not be a pop star anymore." [85] Stipe admitted that the band would be different without a major contributor: "For me, Mike, and Peter, as R.E.M., are we still R.E.M.? I guess a three-legged dog is still a dog. It just has to learn to run differently." [87]
The band cancelled its scheduled recording sessions as a result of Berry's departure. "Without Bill it was different, confusing", Mills later said. "We didn't know exactly what to do. We couldn't rehearse without a drummer." [88] The remaining members of R.E.M. resumed work on the album in February 1998 at Toast Studios in San Francisco. [89] The band ended its decade-long collaboration with Scott Litt and hired Pat McCarthy to produce the record. Nigel Godrich was taken on as assistant producer, and drafted in Screaming Trees member Barrett Martin and Beck 's touring drummer Joey Waronker . The recording process was plagued with tension, and the group came close to disbanding. Bertis Downs called an emergency meeting where the band members sorted out their problems and agreed to continue as a group. [90] Led off by the single " Daysleeper ", Up (1998) debuted in the top ten in the US and UK. However, the album was a relative failure, selling 900,000 copies in the US by mid-1999 and eventually selling just over two million copies worldwide. [64] While R.E.M.'s American sales were declining, the group's commercial base was shifting to the UK, where more R.E.M. records were sold per capita than any other country and the band's singles regularly entered the Top 20. [91]
A year after Up ' s release, R.E.M. wrote the instrumental score to the Andy Kaufman biographical film Man on the Moon , a first for the group. The film took its title from the Automatic for the People song of the same name. [92] The song "The Great Beyond" was released as a single from the Man on the Moon soundtrack album. "The Great Beyond" only reached number 57 on the American pop charts, but was the band's highest-charting single ever in the UK, reaching number three in 2000. [26]

2000–2007: 
R.E.M. recorded the majority of its twelfth album Reveal (2001) in Canada and Ireland from May to October 2000. [93] Reveal shared the "lugubrious pace" of Up , [94] and featured drumming by Joey Waronker, as well as contributions by Scott McCaughey (a co-founder of the band The Minus 5 with Buck) and Posies founder Ken Stringfellow . Global sales of the album were over four million, but in the United States Reveal sold about the same number of copies as Up . [95] The album was led by the single " Imitation of Life ", which reached number six in the UK. [96] Writing for Rock's Backpages , The Rev. Al Friston described the album as "loaded with golden loveliness at every twist and turn", in comparison to the group's "essentially unconvincing work on New Adventures in Hi-Fi and Up ." [97] Similarly, Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone called Reveal "a spiritual renewal rooted in a musical one" and praised its "ceaselessly astonishing beauty." [98]
In 2003, Warner Bros. released the compilation album and DVD In Time: The Best of R.E.M. 1988–2003 and In View: The Best of R.E.M. 1988–2003 , which featured two new songs, " Bad Day " and " Animal ". At a 2003 concert in Raleigh, North Carolina , Berry made a surprise appearance, performing backing vocals on "Radio Free Europe". He then sat behind the drum kit for a performance of the early R.E.M. song "Permanent Vacation", marking his first performance with the band since his retirement. [99]
R.E.M. released Around the Sun in 2004. During production of the album in 2002, Stipe said, "[The album] sounds like it's taking off from the last couple of records into unchartered R.E.M. territory. Kind of primitive and howling". [100] After the album's release, Mills said, "I think, honestly, it turned out a little slower than we intended for it to, just in terms of the overall speed of songs." [101] Around the Sun received a mixed critical reception, and peaked at number 13 on the Billboard charts. [102] The first single from the album, " Leaving New York ", was a Top 5 hit in the UK. [103] For the record and subsequent tour, the band hired a new full-time touring drummer, Bill Rieflin , who had previously been a member of several industrial music acts such as Ministry and Pigface . [104] The video album Perfect Square was released that same year.
EMI released a compilation album covering R.E.M.'s work during its tenure on I.R.S. in 2006 called And I Feel Fine... The Best of the I.R.S. Years 1982–1987 along with the video album When the Light Is Mine: The Best of the I.R.S. Years 1982–1987 —the label had previously released the compilations The Best of R.E.M. (1991), R.E.M.: Singles Collected (1994), and R.E.M.: In the Attic – Alternative Recordings 1985–1989 (1997). That same month, all four original band members performed during the ceremony for their induction into the Georgia Music Hall of Fame . [105] While rehearsing for the ceremony, the band recorded a cover of John Lennon 's " #9 Dream " for Instant Karma: The Amnesty International Campaign to Save Darfur , a tribute album benefiting Amnesty International . [106] The song—released as a single for the album and the campaign—featured Bill Berry's first studio recording with the band since his departure almost a decade earlier. [107]
In October 2006, R.E.M. was nominated for induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in its first year of eligibility. [108] The band was one of five nominees accepted into the Hall that year, and the induction ceremony took place in March 2007 at New York's Waldorf-Astoria Hotel . The group—which was inducted by Pearl Jam lead singer Eddie Vedder —performed three songs with Bill Berry; " Gardening at Night ," " Man on the Moon " and " Begin the Begin " as well as a cover of " I Wanna Be Your Dog ." [109]

2007–2011: 
Work on the group's fourteenth album commenced in early 2007. The band recorded with producer Jacknife Lee in Vancouver and Dublin, where it played five nights in the Olympia Theatre between June 30 and July 5 as part of a "working rehearsal". [110] R.E.M. Live , the band's first live album (featuring songs from a 2005 Dublin show), was released in October 2007. [111] The group followed this with the 2009 live album Live at The Olympia , which features performances from its 2007 residency. R.E.M. released Accelerate in early 2008. The album debuted at number two on the Billboard charts, [112] and became the band's eighth album to top the British album charts. [113] Rolling Stone reviewer David Fricke considered Accelerate an improvement over the band's previous post-Berry albums, calling it "one of the best records R.E.M. have ever made." [114]
In 2010, R.E.M. released the video album R.E.M. Live from Austin, TX —a concert recorded for Austin City Limits in 2008. The group recorded its fifteenth album, Collapse into Now (2011), with Jacknife Lee in locales including Berlin, Nashville, and New Orleans. For the album, the band aimed for a more expansive sound than the intentionally short and speedy approach implemented on Accelerate . [115] The album debuted at number five on the Billboard 200, becoming the group's tenth album to reach the top ten of the chart. [116] This release fulfilled R.E.M.'s contractual obligations to Warner Bros., and the band began recording material without a contract a few months later with the possible intention of self-releasing the work. [117]
On September 21, 2011, R.E.M. announced via its website that it was "calling it a day as a band". Stipe said that he hoped fans realized it "wasn't an easy decision": "All things must end, and we wanted to do it right, to do it our way." [118] Long-time associate and former Warner Bros. Senior Vice President of Emerging Technology Ethan Kaplan has speculated that shake-ups at the record label influenced the group's decision to disband. [119] The group discussed breaking up for several years, but was encouraged to continue after the lackluster critical and commercial performance of Around the Sun ; according to Mills, "We needed to prove, not only to our fans and critics but to ourselves, that we could still make great records." [120] They were also disinterested in the business end of recording as R.E.M. [121] The band members finished their collaboration by assembling the compilation album Part Lies, Part Heart, Part Truth, Part Garbage 1982–2011 , which was released in November 2011. The album is the first to collect songs from R.E.M.'s I.R.S. and Warner Bros. tenures, as well as three songs from the group's final studio recordings from post- Collapse into Now sessions. [122] In November, Mills and Stipe did a brief span of promotional appearances in British media, ruling out the option of the group ever reuniting. [123]
In 2014, Unplugged: The Complete 1991 and 2001 Sessions was released for Record Store Day . [124] Digital download collections of I.R.S. and Warner Bros. rarities followed. Later in the year, the band compiled the video album box set REMTV , which collected their two Unplugged performances along with several other documentaries and live shows, while their record label released the box set 7IN—83–88 , made up of 7" vinyl singles. [125] In December 2015, the band members agreed to a distribution deal with Concord Bicycle Music to re-release their Warner Bros. albums. [126]

Musical style
In a 1988 interview, Peter Buck described typical R.E.M. songs as, "Minor key, mid-tempo, enigmatic, semi-folk-rock-balladish things. That's what everyone thinks and to a certain degree, that's true." [127] All songwriting is credited to the entire band, even though individual members are sometimes responsible for writing the majority of a particular song. [128] Each member is given an equal vote in the songwriting process; however, Buck has conceded that Stipe, as the band's lyricist, can rarely be persuaded to follow an idea he does not favor. [71] Among the original line-up, there were divisions of labor in the songwriting process: Stipe would write lyrics and devise melodies, Buck would edge the band in new musical directions, and Mills and Berry would fine-tune the compositions due to their greater musical experience. [129]
Michael Stipe sings in what R.E.M. biographer David Buckley described as "wailing, keening, arching vocal figures". [130] Stipe often harmonizes with Mills in songs; in the chorus for "Stand", Mills and Stipe alternate singing lyrics, creating a dialogue. [131] Early articles about the band focused on Stipe's singing style (described as "mumbling" by The Washington Post ), which often rendered his lyrics indecipherable. [132] Creem writer John Morthland wrote in his review of Murmur , "I still have no idea what these songs are about, because neither me nor anyone else I know has ever been able to discern R.E.M.'s lyrics." [133] Stipe commented in 1984, "It's just the way I sing. If I tried to control it, it would be pretty false." [134] Producer Joe Boyd convinced Stipe to begin singing more clearly during the recording of Fables of the Reconstruction . [135]
Stipe later called chorus lyrics of " Sitting Still " from R.E.M. debut album, Murmur , "nonsense", saying in a 1994 online chat, "You all know there aren't words, per se , to a lot of the early stuff. I can't even remember them." In truth, Stipe carefully crafted the lyrics to many early R.E.M. songs. [136] Stipe explained in 1984 that when he started writing lyrics they were like "simple pictures", but after a year he grew tired of the approach and "started experimenting with lyrics that didn't make exact linear sense, and it's just gone from there." [134] In the mid-1980s, as Stipe's pronunciation while singing became clearer, the band decided that its lyrics should convey ideas on a more literal level. [137] Mills explained, "After you've made three records and you've written several songs and they've gotten better and better lyrically the next step would be to have somebody question you and say, are you saying anything? And Michael had the confidence at that point to say yes . . ." [138] Songs like "Cuyahoga" and "Fall on Me" on Lifes Rich Pageant dealt with such concerns as pollution. [139] Stipe incorporated more politically oriented concerns into his lyrics on Document and Green . "Our political activism and the content of the songs was just a reaction to where we were, and what we were surrounded by, which was just abject horror," Stipe said later. "In 1987 and '88 there was nothing to do but be active." [140] Stipe has since explored other lyrical topics. Automatic for the People dealt with "mortality and dying. Pretty turgid stuff", according to Stipe, [141] while Monster critiqued love and mass culture. [140]
Peter Buck's style of playing guitar has been singled out by many as the most distinctive aspect of R.E.M.'s music. During the 1980s, Buck's "economical, arpeggiated, poetic" style reminded British music journalists of 1960s American folk rock band The Byrds . [142] Buck has stated "[Byrds guitarist] Roger McGuinn was a big influence on me as a guitar player", [143] but said it was Byrds-influenced bands, including Big Star and The Soft Boys , that inspired him more. [144] Comparisons were also made with the guitar playing of Johnny Marr of alternative rock contemporaries The Smiths . While Buck professed being a fan of the group, he admitted he initially criticized the band simply because he was tired of fans asking him if he was influenced by Marr, [128] whose band had in fact made their debut after R.E.M. [144] Buck generally eschews guitar solos; he explained in 2002, "I know that when guitarists rip into this hot solo, people go nuts, but I don't write songs that suit that, and I am not interested in that. I can do it if I have to, but I don't like it." [145] Mike Mills' melodic approach to bass playing is inspired by Paul McCartney of The Beatles and Chris Squire of Yes ; Mills has said, "I always played a melodic bass, like a piano bass in some ways . . . I never wanted to play the traditional locked into the kick drum, root note bass work." [146] Mills has more musical training than his band mates, which he has said "made it easier to turn abstract musical ideas into reality." [143]

Legacy
R.E.M. was pivotal in the creation and development of the alternative rock genre. AllMusic stated, "R.E.M. mark the point when post-punk turned into alternative rock." [12] In the early 1980s, the musical style of R.E.M. stood in contrast to the post-punk and new wave genres that had preceded it. Music journalist Simon Reynolds noted that the post-punk movement of the late 1970s and early 1980s "had taken whole swaths of music off the menu", particularly that of the 1960s, and that "After postpunk's demystification and New Pop's schematics, it felt liberating to listen to music rooted in mystical awe and blissed-out surrender." Reynolds declared R.E.M., a band that recalled the music of the 1960s with its "plangent guitar chimes and folk-styled vocals" and who "wistfully and abstractly conjured visions and new frontiers for America", one of "the two most important alt-rock bands of the day." [147] With the release of Murmur , R.E.M. had the most impact musically and commercially of the developing alternative genre's early groups, leaving in its wake a number of jangle pop followers. [148]
R.E.M.'s early breakthrough success served as an inspiration for other alternative bands. Spin referred to the "R.E.M. model"—career decisions that R.E.M. made which set guidelines for other underground artists to follow in their own careers. Spin's Charles Aaron wrote that by 1985, "They'd shown how far an underground, punk-inspired rock band could go within the industry without whoring out its artistic integrity in any obvious way. They'd figured out how to buy in, not sellout-in other words, they'd achieved the American Bohemian Dream." [149] Steve Wynn of Dream Syndicate said, "They invented a whole new ballgame for all of the other bands to follow whether it was Sonic Youth or the Replacements or Nirvana or Butthole Surfers . R.E.M. staked the claim. Musically, the bands did different things, but R.E.M. was first to show us you can be big and still be cool." [150] Biographer David Buckley stated that between 1991 and 1994, a period that saw the band sell an estimated 30 million albums, R.E.M. "asserted themselves as rivals to U2 for the title of biggest rock band in the world." [151] Over the course of its career, the band has sold over 85 million records worldwide. [105]
Later alternative bands such as Nirvana, Pavement , Radiohead , Coldplay , Pearl Jam , Live , and Local H have drawn inspiration from R.E.M.'s music. "When I was 15 years old in Richmond, Virginia, they were a very important part of my life," Pavement's Bob Nastanovich said, "as they were for all the members of our band." Pavement devoted the song "Unseen Power of the Picket Fence" from the No Alternative compilation (1993) to discussing Chronic Town and Reckoning . [152] Local H , according to the band's Twitter account, created their name by combining two R.E.M. songs: "Oddfellows Local 151" and "Swan Swan H". [153] Kurt Cobain of Nirvana was a vocal fan of R.E.M., and had plans to collaborate on a musical project with Stipe before his death in April 1994. [154] Cobain told Rolling Stone in an interview earlier that year, "I don’t know how that band does what they do. God, they’re the greatest. They’ve dealt with their success like saints, and they keep delivering great music." [155]

Awards

American Music Awards

Billboard Music Awards

Brit Awards

Danish Music Awards

MTV Europe Music Awards

MTV Video Music Awards

Meteor Music Awards

NME Awards

Q Awards

Rockbjornen

Campaigning and activism
Throughout R.E.M.'s career, its members sought to highlight social and political issues. According to the Los Angeles Times , R.E.M. was considered to be one of the United States' "most liberal and politically correct rock groups." [156] The band's members were "on the same page" politically, sharing a liberal and progressive outlook. [157] Mills admitted that there was occasionally dissension between band members on what causes they might support, but acknowledged "Out of respect for the people who disagree, those discussions tend to stay in-house, just because we'd rather not let people know where the divisions lie, so people can't exploit them for their own purposes." An example is that in 1990 Buck noted that Stipe was involved with People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals , but the rest of the band were not. [158]
R.E.M. helped raise funds for environmental, feminist and human rights causes, and were involved in campaigns to encourage voter registration . During the Green tour, Stipe took time during sets to inform the audience about a variety of pressing socio-political issues. [159] Through the late 1980s and 1990s, the band (particularly Stipe) increasingly used its media coverage on national television to mention a variety of causes it felt were important. One example is when the band attended the 1991 MTV Video Music Awards , during which Stipe wore a half-dozen white shirts emblazoned with slogans including "rainforest", "love knows no colors", and "handgun control now". [160]
R.E.M. helped raise awareness of Aung San Suu Kyi and human rights violations in Burma , when they worked with the Freedom Campaign and the US Campaign for Burma . [161] Stipe himself ran ads for the 1988 supporting Democratic presidential candidate and Massachusetts governor Michael Dukakis over then-Vice President George H. W. Bush . [162] In 2004, the band participated in the Vote for Change tour that sought to mobilize American voters to support Democratic presidential candidate John Kerry . [163] R.E.M.'s political stance, particularly coming from a wealthy rock band under contract to a label owned by a multinational corporation, received criticism from former Q editor Paul Du Noyer , who criticized the band's "celebrity liberalism", saying, "It's an entirely pain-free form of rebellion that they're adopting. There's no risk involved in it whatsoever, but quite a bit of shoring up of customer loyalty." [164]
From the late 1980s, R.E.M. was involved in the local politics of its hometown of Athens, Georgia. [165] Buck explained to Sounds in 1987, "Michael always says think local and act local—we have been doing a lot of stuff in our town to try and make it a better place." [166] The band often donated funds to local charities and to help renovate and preserve historic buildings in the town. [167] R.E.M.'s political clout was credited with the narrow election of Athens mayor Gwen O'Looney twice in the 1990s. [168]

Members

Discography

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00020
List of Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Bedfordshire
Bedfordshire is a county in the East of England . [1] It is bounded by Hertfordshire to the south-east, Cambridgeshire to the north-east, Northamptonshire to the north, and Buckinghamshire to the west. [2] It has an area of 1,235 square kilometres (477 sq mi), and population estimated in 2015 at 630,000, with an increase of 10% over the previous ten years. [3] The county town is Bedford , and the name is first recorded in the treaty in about 879 between King Alfred the Great and Guthrum , which divided English and Danish territory by a line which went through Bedford. [4]
Southern Bedfordshire is part of the Chilterns Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty . North and mid Bedfordshire are undulating claylands with broad river valleys of the River Great Ouse and its tributaries, and the Bedfordshire Greensand Ridge . Jurassic and Cretaceous clays are overlaid by Quaternary glacial deposits of chalky boulder clay. [5]
There are forty Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) in Bedfordshire , designated by Natural England . Thirty-five are listed for their biological interest, and five for their geological interest. [6] Three of the sites are also National nature reserves , twelve are in the Chilterns Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty , and eleven are managed wholly or partly by the Wildlife Trust for Bedfordshire, Cambridgeshire and Northamptonshire . In 2009 Bedfordshire was divided into three unitary local authorities : thirty-two sites are in Central Bedfordshire , eight in Bedford and none in Luton .

Key

Interest

Other classifications

Sites

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00021
Wikimedia Foundation
The Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. ( WMF ) is an American non-profit and charitable organization headquartered in San Francisco , California . It is mostly known for participating in the Wikimedia movement . It owns the internet domain names of most movement projects and hosts sites like Wikipedia . The foundation was founded in 2003 by Jimmy Wales as a way to fund Wikipedia and its sister projects through non-profit means. [5] [6]
As of 2015 [update] , the foundation employs over 280 people, with annual revenues in excess of US$ 75 million . [7] Christophe Henner is chair of the board . [8] Katherine Maher is the executive director since March 2016.

Goal
The Wikimedia Foundation has stated its goal is to develop and maintain open content , wiki -based projects and to provide the full contents of those projects to the public free of charge . [9] Another main objective of the Wikimedia Foundation is political advocacy . [10]
The Wikimedia Foundation was granted section 501(c)(3) status by the U.S. Internal Revenue Code as a public charity in 2005. [11] Its National Taxonomy of Exempt Entities (NTEE) code is B60 ( Adult , Continuing education ). [12] [13] The foundation's by-laws declare a statement of purpose of collecting and developing educational content and to disseminate it effectively and globally. [14]

History
In 2001, Jimmy Wales , an Internet entrepreneur , and Larry Sanger , an online community organizer and philosophy professor, founded Wikipedia as an Internet encyclopedia to supplement Nupedia . The project was originally funded by Bomis , Wales' for-profit business. As Wikipedia's popularity skyrocketed, revenues to fund the project stalled. [5] Since Wikipedia was depleting Bomis' resources, Wales and Sanger thought of a charity model to fund the project. [5] The Wikimedia Foundation was incorporated in Florida on June 20, 2003. [6] [15] It applied to the United States Patent and Trademark Office to trademark Wikipedia on September 17, 2004. The mark was granted registration status on January 10, 2006. Trademark protection was accorded by Japan on December 16, 2004, and, in the European Union , on January 20, 2005. There were plans to license the use of the Wikipedia trademark for some products, such as books or DVDs. [16]
In April 2005, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service approved the foundation as an educational foundation in the category " Adult , Continuing education ", meaning all contributions to the foundation are tax-deductible for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
On December 11, 2006, the Foundation's board noted that the corporation could not become the membership organization initially planned but never implemented due to an inability to meet the registration requirements of Florida statutory law. Accordingly, [ according to whom? ] the by-laws were amended to remove all reference to membership rights and activities. The decision to change the bylaws was passed by the board unanimously. [17]
On September 25, 2007, the foundation's board gave notice that the operations would be moving to the San Francisco Bay Area . Major considerations cited for choosing San Francisco were proximity to like-minded organizations and potential partners, a better talent pool, as well as cheaper and more convenient international travel than is available from St. Petersburg, Florida . [18] [19] [20]
Lila Tretikov was appointed executive director of the Wikimedia Foundation in May 2014. She resigned in March 2016. Former chief communications officer Katherine Maher was appointed the interim executive director, a position made permanent in June 2016.

Projects and initiatives

 Wikimedia projects
In addition to Wikipedia, the foundation operates other wikis that follow the free content model with their main goal being the dissemination of knowledge. These include:
Several additional projects exist to provide infrastructure or coordination of the free knowledge projects. For instance, a wiki helps coordinate work on MediaWiki software and Outreach gives guidelines for best practices on encouraging the use of Wikimedia sites.

Movement affiliates
Wikimedia movement affiliates are independent, but formally recognized, groups of people intended to work together to support and contribute to the Wikimedia movement. The Wikimedia Foundation's Board of Trustees has approved three active models for movement affiliates: chapters, thematic organizations, and user groups. Movement affiliates are intended to organize and engage in activities to support and contribute to the Wikimedia movement, such as regional conferences, outreach, edit-a-thons , hackathons , public relations , public policy advocacy, GLAM engagement, and Wikimania . [21] [22] [23]
Recognition of a chapter and thematic organization is approved by the foundation's board. Recommendations on recognition of chapters and thematic organizations are made to the foundation's board by an Affiliations Committee , composed of Wikimedia community volunteers. The Affiliations Committee approves the recognition of individual user groups. While movement affiliates are formally recognized by the Wikimedia Foundation, they are independent of the Wikimedia Foundation, with no legal control of nor responsibility for the Wikimedia projects. [22] [23] [24]
The foundation began recognizing chapters in 2004. [25] In 2010, development on additional models began. In 2012, the foundation approved, finalized, and adopted the thematic organization and user group recognition models. An additional model, movement partners, was also approved but as of 27 October 2015 [update] has not yet been finalized or adopted. [21] [23] [26]

Wikimania
Each year, an international conference called Wikimania brings the people together who are involved in the Wikimedia organizations and projects. The first Wikimania was held in Frankfurt , Germany, in 2005. Nowadays, Wikimania is organized by a committee supported usually by the national chapter, in collaboration with the Wikimedia Foundation. Wikimania has been held in cities such as Buenos Aires , [27] Cambridge , [28] Haifa , [29] Hong Kong , [30] and London . [31] In 2015, Wikimania took place in Mexico City . [32] In 2016, Wikimania was held in Esino Lario , Italy . [33]

Strategic plan
In response to the growing size and popularity of Wikipedia, the Wikimedia Foundation announced a Strategic Plan to improve and sustain the Wikimedia movement. The plan was announced in July 2009, followed by a process of interviews and surveys with people from across the Wikimedia movement, including board of trustees, members of staff and volunteer editors. [34] The ongoing plan was intended to be the basis of a five-year plan to further outreach, improve content quality and quality control, and optimising operational areas such as finance and infrastructure. [35]

Wikipedia Usability Initiative
In December 2008, the Wikimedia Foundation announced a restricted donation grant of US$890,000 from the Stanton Foundation , to improve Wikipedia's accessibility. [36] Later named the Wikipedia Usability Initiative, the grant was used by the Wikimedia Foundation to appoint project-specific staff to the technology department. [37]
A series of surveys were conducted throughout 2009. This began with a qualitative environment survey on MediaWiki extensions, followed by a Qualitative Statistical Survey focusing on volume of edits, number of new users, and related statistics. In March 2009, a usability and experience study was carried out on new and non-editors of the English Wikipedia. The aim was to discover what obstacles participants encountered while editing Wikipedia, ranging from small changes to more complicated syntax such as templates. The study recruited 2500 people for in-person laboratory testing via the Wikipedia website, which was filtered down to ten participants. The results were collated and used by the technology team to improve Wikipedia's usability. [38] The Usability and Experience Study was followed up by the Usability, Experience and Progress Study in September 2009. This study recruited different new and non-editors for in-person trials on a new Wikipedia skin. [39]
The initiative ultimately culminated in a new Wikipedia skin named Vector, constructed based on the results of the usability studies. This was introduced by default in stages, beginning in May 2010. [40]

Public Policy Initiative
In May 2010, the Wikimedia Foundation announced the Public Policy Initiative, following a US$1.2 million donation by the Stanton Foundation. The Initiative was set up to improve articles relating to public policy–related issues. [41] As part of the initiative, Wikipedia collaborated with ten universities to help students and professors create and maintain articles relating to public policy. [42] Volunteer editors of Wikipedia, known as "ambassadors", provided assistance to students and professors. This was either done on campus sites or online. [43]
In April 2017, the Foundation was one of the founding partners in the Initiative for Open Citations . [44]

Technology
The foundation employs technology including hardware and software to run its projects.

Hardware
Wikipedia employed a single server until 2004, when the server setup was expanded into a distributed multitier architecture . [45]
In January 2005, the project ran on 39 dedicated servers in Florida. [ citation needed ] This configuration included a single master database server running MySQL , multiple database servers, 21 web servers running the Apache HTTP Server , and seven Squid cache servers. [ citation needed ]
Wikimedia currently runs on dedicated clusters of Linux servers (mainly Ubuntu ). [46] [47] As of December 2009 [update] , there were 300 in Florida and 44 in Amsterdam . [48] The number of servers needed to run the infrastructure has been mostly stable since then: 520 servers are used in the main cluster (eqiad) as of November 2015. [49]
As of 2015, the system still runs on central master database and application servers, but there are several cache layers with various ever-changing technologies, as well as a multitude of subsystems for DNS resolution, load balancing, metrics, monitoring, other system administration etc. [50]

Softwаrе
The operation of Wikimedia depends on MediaWiki , a custom-made, free and open-source wiki software platform written in PHP and built upon the MySQL database. [51] The software incorporates programming features such as a macro language , variables , a transclusion system for templates , and URL redirection . MediaWiki is licensed under the GNU General Public License and it is used by all Wikimedia projects, as well as many other wiki projects. Originally, Wikipedia ran on UseModWiki written in Perl by Clifford Adams (Phase I), which initially required CamelCase for article hyperlinks; the present double bracket style was incorporated later. Starting in January 2002 (Phase II), Wikipedia began running on a PHP wiki engine with a MySQL database; this software was custom-made for Wikipedia by Magnus Manske . The Phase II software was repeatedly modified to accommodate the exponentially increasing demand. In July 2002 (Phase III), Wikipedia shifted to the third-generation software, MediaWiki, originally written by Lee Daniel Crocker . Several MediaWiki extensions are installed to extend the functionality of MediaWiki software. In April 2005, a Lucene extension [52] [53] was added to MediaWiki's built-in search and Wikipedia switched from MySQL to Lucene for searching. Currently Lucene Search 2.1, [54] which is written in Java and based on Lucene library 2.3, [55] is used. Wikimedia Foundation also uses CiviCRM [56] and WordPress . [57]
The Foundation published official Wikipedia mobile apps for Android and iOS devices and in March 2015, the apps were updated to include mobile user friendly features. [58]

Finances

In general
The Wikimedia Foundation relies on public contributions and grants to fund its mission. [59] It is exempt from federal income tax [59] [60] and from state income tax. [59] [61] It is not a private foundation, and contributions to it qualify as tax-deductible charitable contributions. [59]
The continued technical and economic growth of each of the Wikimedia projects is dependent mostly on donations but the Wikimedia Foundation also increases its revenue by alternative means of funding such as grants , sponsorship, services and brand merchandising. The Wikimedia OAI-PMH update feed service, targeted primarily at search engines and similar bulk analysis and republishing, has been a source of revenue for several years, [59] but is no longer open to new customers. [62] DBpedia was given access to this feed free of charge. [63] In July 2014, the Foundation announced it would be accepting Bitcoin donations. [64]
Since the end of fiscal year ended 2004, the Foundation's net assets have grown from US$57,000 [65] to US$53.5 million at the end of fiscal year ended June 30, 2014. [66] Under the leadership of Sue Gardner, who joined the Wikimedia Foundation in 2007, the Foundation's staff levels, number of donors and revenue have seen very significant growth. [67]
In 2007, Charity Navigator gave Wikimedia an overall rating of three out of four possible stars [68] Charity Navigator gave three out of four possible stars in overall rating for fiscal years 2008 and 2009 which improved to four-stars in 2010. [69] As of December 2016, the current overall rating was four stars. [70]

Grants
In March 2008, the Foundation announced a large donation, at the time its largest donation yet: a three-year, US$3 million grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation . [71]
In 2009, the Foundation received four grants – the first grant was a US$890,000 Stanton Foundation grant which was aimed to help study and simplify user interface for first-time authors of Wikipedia. [72] The second was a US$300,000 Ford Foundation Grant, given in July 2009, for Wikimedia Commons that aimed to improve the interfaces and workflows for multimedia uploading on Wikimedia websites. [73] In August 2009, the Foundation received a US$500,000 grant from The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation . [74] Lastly, in August 2009, the Omidyar Network issued a potential [ clarification needed ] US$2 million in "grant" funding to Wikimedia. [75]
In 2010, the Google corporation donated US$2 million to the Foundation. [76] The Stanton Foundation granted $1.2 million to fund the Public Policy Initiative, a pilot program for what would later become the Wikipedia Education Program (and the spinoff Wiki Education Foundation ). [77] [78] [79] Also in 2010, the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation pledged a US$800,000 grant and all was funded during 2011. [ citation needed ]
In March 2011, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation authorized another US$3 million grant to continue to develop and maintain the Foundation's mission. The grant was to be funded over three years with the first US$1 million funded in July 2011 and the remaining US$2 million was scheduled to be funded in August 2012 and 2013. In August 2011, the Stanton Foundation pledged to fund a US$3.6 million grant of which US$1.8 million was funded and the remaining was due to be funded in September 2012. As of 2011, this was the largest grant received by the Wikimedia Foundation to-date. [80] In November 2011, the Foundation received a US$500,000 donation from Google co-founder Sergey Brin and his wife. [81] [82]
In 2012, the Foundation was awarded a grant of US$1.25 million from the historians Lisbet Rausing [81] and Peter Baldwin through Charities Aid Foundation , scheduled to be funded in five equal installments. The first installment of US$250,000 was received in April 2012 and the remaining were to be funded in December 2012 through 2015. In 2014, the Foundation received the largest single gift in its history, a $5 million unrestricted donation from an anonymous donor supporting $1 million worth of expenses annually for the next five years. [83]
In 2015, a grant agreement was reached with the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation to build a search engine called the " Knowledge Engine ". [84] [85]

Financial summary

Governance

Board of Trustees
The Board of Trustees has ultimate authority of all the businesses and affairs of the Foundation. It is composed of ten members:
Three permanent entities support the board on its mission and responsibilities: an executive director, who leads and oversees the operational arm of the foundation; an advisory board composed of individuals selected by the board itself that advise the board on different matters; and standing committees to which the board delegates certain matters while retaining ultimate authority. The board has also at times created other orthodox entities [ clarification needed ] to support itself, such as executive secretaries and ad-hoc committees established for specific tasks.
The current board comprises Christophe Henner as chairman and María Sefidari as vice-chairman, together with Alice Wiegand, Nataliia Tymkiv, Kelly Battles , Dariusz Jemielniak as members at-large, and Jimmy Wales as founder's seat (installed as "Community Founder Trustee Position" to the WMF bylaws in August 2008). [95] [96] There are three vacant seats, most recently occupied by Arnnon Geshuri , Denny Vrandečić and Guy Kawasaki .
In a high-profile decision of 2015, James Heilman was removed from the board, [97] [98] with little explanation. [97] In January 2016, Arnnon Geshuri stepped down from the board following a controversy about an agreement he executed when at Google , violating United States antitrust law . The participating companies paid US$415 million in a class action suit on behalf of affected employees. [99] [100]

Advisory board
The Advisory Board, according to the Wikimedia Foundation, is an international network of experts who have agreed to give the foundation meaningful help on a regular basis in many different areas, including law, organizational development, technology, policy, and outreach. [101]

Staff

First appointments
In 2004, the foundation appointed Tim Starling as developer liaison to help improve the MediaWiki software, Daniel Mayer as chief financial officer ( finance , budgeting , and coordination of fund drives), and Erik Möller as content partnership coordinator. In May 2005, the foundation announced seven more official appointments. [102]
In January 2006, the foundation created several committees, including the Communication Committee, in an attempt to further organize activities essentially handled by volunteers at that time. [103] Starling resigned that month to spend more time on his PhD program.

Employees
The foundation's functions were, for the first few years, executed almost entirely by volunteers. In 2005, it had only two employees, Danny Wool, a coordinator, and Brion Vibber, a software manager.
As of October 4, 2006 [update] , the foundation had five paid employees: [104] two programmers, an administrative assistant, a coordinator handling fundraising and grants, and an interim executive director , [105] Brad Patrick, previously the foundation's general counsel . Patrick ceased his activity as interim director in January 2007, and then resigned from his position as legal counsel, effective April 1, 2007. He was replaced by Mike Godwin , who served as general counsel and legal coordinator from July 2007 [106] until 2010.
In January 2007, Carolyn Doran was named chief operating officer and Sandy Ordonez joined as head of communications . [107] Doran began working as a part-time bookkeeper in 2006 after being sent by a temporary agency . Doran, found to have had a long criminal record, [108] left the foundation in July 2007, and Sue Gardner was hired as consultant and special advisor (later CEO). Doran's departure from the organization was cited by Florence Devouard as one of the reasons the foundation took about seven months to release its fiscal 2007 financial audit. [109]
Danny Wool, officially the grant coordinator but also largely involved in fundraising and business development, resigned in March 2007. He accused Wales of misusing the foundation's funds for recreational purposes, and said that Wales had his Wikimedia credit card taken away in part because of his spending habits, a claim Wales denied. [110] In February 2007, the foundation added a new position, chapters coordinator, and hired Delphine Ménard, [111] who had been occupying the position as a volunteer since August 2005. Cary Bass was hired in March 2007 in the position of volunteer coordinator. Oleta McHenry was brought in as accountant in May 2007, through a temporary placement agency and made the official full-time accountant in August 2007. In January 2008, the foundation appointed Veronique Kessler as the new chief financial and operating officer, Kul Wadhwa as head of business development, and Jay Walsh as head of communications.
By early 2015, the foundation had well over 200 employees.

Disputes and lawsuits
Many disputes have resulted in litigation [112] [113] [114] [115] while others have not. [116] Attorney Matt Zimmerman stated, "Without strong liability protection, it would be difficult for Wikipedia to continue to provide a platform for user-created encyclopedia content." [117]
In December 2011, the Foundation hired Washington, DC lobbyist Dow Lohnes Government Strategies LLC to lobby the United States Congress with regard to "Civil Rights/Civil Liberties" and "Copyright/Patent/Trademark." [118] At the time of the hire the Foundation was concerned specifically about a bill known as the Stop Online Piracy Act . [119]
In October 2013, a German Court ruled that the Wikimedia Foundation can be held liable for content added to Wikipedia – however, this applies only when there has been a specific complaint; otherwise, the Wikimedia Foundation does not check any of the content published on Wikipedia and has no duty to do so. [120]
In June 2014, a copyright infringement lawsuit was filed by Bildkonst Upphovsrätt i Sverige against Wikimedia Sweden. [121]
On June 20, 2014, a defamation lawsuit (Law Division civil case No. L-1400-14) involving Wikipedia editors was filed with the Mercer County Superior Court in New Jersey seeking, inter alia, compensatory and punitive damages. [122] [123]
In a March 10, 2015, op-ed for The New York Times , Wales and Tretikov announced the Foundation was filing a lawsuit against the National Security Agency , calling into question its practice of mass surveillance , which they argued infringed the constitutional rights of the Foundation's readers, editors and staff. [124] [125] [126] On October 23, 2015, the United States District Court for the District of Maryland dismissed the suit Wikimedia Foundation v. NSA on grounds of standing . US District Judge T. S. Ellis III ruled that the plaintiffs could not plausibly prove they were subject to upstream surveillance , and that their argument is riddled with assumptions, speculations and mathematical gymnastics. [127] [128] The plaintiffs filed an appeal with the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit on February 17, 2016. [129]
In February 2016, Lila Tretikov announced her resignation as executive director, as a result of the WMF's controversial Knowledge Engine project and disagreements with the staff. [130] [131]
WebPage index: 00022
Jimmy Wales
Jimmy Donal " Jimbo " Wales ( / ˈ dʒ ɪ m i ˈ d oʊ n əl ˈ w eɪ l z / ; born August 7, 1966 in Huntsville , Alabama ) is an American Internet entrepreneur . [3] [4] He is the co-founder of Wikipedia , the online non-profit encyclopedia , [5] and the for-profit web hosting company Wikia . [6]
Wales was born in Huntsville , Alabama , where he attended Randolph School , a university-preparatory school. [7] [8] Later, he earned bachelor's and master's degrees in Finance from Auburn University and the University of Alabama , respectively. [9]
While in graduate school, Wales taught at two universities; however, he departed before completing a PhD to take a job in finance, and later worked as the Research Director of a Chicago, Illinois, Futures and Options firm. In 1996, he and two partners founded Bomis , an adult web portal featuring entertainment and adult content. The company would provide the initial funding for the peer-reviewed free encyclopedia, Nupedia (2000–03), and its successor, Wikipedia.
On January 15, 2001, with Larry Sanger and others, Wales launched Wikipedia—a free, open content encyclopedia that enjoyed rapid growth and popularity; as Wikipedia's public profile grew, he became the project's promoter and spokesman. He is historically cited as a co-founder of Wikipedia, though he has disputed the "co-" designation, declaring himself the sole founder. [10] [11]
Wales serves on the Wikimedia Foundation Board of Trustees, the non-profit charitable organization that he helped establish to operate Wikipedia, holding its board-appointed "community founder" seat. In 2004, he co-founded Wikia , a for-profit wiki hosting service . His role in creating Wikipedia, which has become the world's largest encyclopedia, prompted Time Magazine to name him in their 2006 list of "The 100 Most Influential People in the World". [12]

Early life
Wales was born in Huntsville, Alabama , shortly before midnight on August 7, 1966; however, his birth certificate lists his date of birth as the 8th. [13] [14] His father, Jimmy, [15] worked as a grocery store manager, while his mother, Doris Ann (née Dudley), and his grandmother, Erma, ran the House of Learning, [16] [8] a small private school in the tradition of the one-room schoolhouse , where Wales and his three siblings received their early education. [16] [17]
As a child, Wales was a keen reader with an acute intellectual curiosity. [6] When he was three, his mother bought a World Book Encyclopedia from a door-to-door salesman. As he grew up and learned to read, it became an object of reverence. It put at his fingertips an abundant supply of knowledge complete with maps, illustrations, and a few cellophane layers of transparencies one could lift to explore such things as the muscles, arteries, and digestive system of a dissected frog. But Wales soon discovered that the World Book had shortcomings: no matter how much was in it, there were many more things that were not. World Book sent out stickers for owners to paste on the pages in order to update the encyclopedia, and Wales was careful to put the stickers to work, stating, "I joke that I started as a kid revising the encyclopedia by stickering the one my mother bought." [18]
During an interview in 2005 with Brian Lamb , Wales described his childhood private school as a " Montessori influenced philosophy of education", where he "spent lots of hours poring over the Britannicas and World Book Encyclopedias ". [19] There were only four other children in Wales's grade , so the school grouped together the first through fourth-grade students and the fifth through eighth-grade students. As an adult, Wales was sharply critical of the government's treatment of the school, citing the "constant interference and bureaucracy and very sort of snobby inspectors from the state" as a formative influence on his political philosophy. [19]
After eighth grade, Wales attended Randolph School , [20] [21] [22] [23] a university-preparatory school in Huntsville, graduating at sixteen. [24] Wales said that the school was expensive for his family, but that "education was always a passion in my household ... you know, the very traditional approach to knowledge and learning and establishing that as a base for a good life." [19] He received his bachelor's degree in finance from Auburn University in 1986. [25] He began his Auburn education when he was 16 years old. [9] Wales then entered the PhD finance program at the University of Alabama before leaving with a master's degree to enter the PhD finance program at Indiana University . [17] [19] [24] At the University of Alabama, he played Internet fantasy games and developed his interest in the web. [9] He taught at both universities during his postgraduate studies but did not write the doctoral dissertation required for a PhD, something he ascribed to boredom. [17] [19]

Career

Chicago Options Associates and Bomis
In 1994, Wales took a job with Chicago Options Associates , a futures and options trading firm in Chicago , Illinois . [19] [26] [27] Wales has described himself as having been addicted to the Internet from an early stage and he wrote computer code during his leisure time. During his studies in Alabama, he had become an obsessive player of Multi-User Dungeons (MUDs)—a type of virtual role-playing game —and thereby experienced the potential of computer networks to foster large-scale collaborative projects. [24] [28]
Inspired by the remarkably successful initial public offering of Netscape in 1995, and having accumulated capital through "speculating on interest-rate and foreign-currency fluctuations", [16] Wales decided to leave the realm of financial trading and became an Internet entrepreneur. [24] In 1996, he and two partners founded Bomis , [16] [29] a web portal featuring user-generated webrings and, for a time, erotic photographs. [30] Wales described it as a "guy-oriented search engine" with a market similar to that of Maxim magazine; [17] [19] [31] the Bomis venture did not ultimately turn out to be successful. [16] [17] [32]

Nupedia and the origins of Wikipedia
Though Bomis had struggled to make money, it provided Wales with the funding to pursue his greater passion, an online encyclopedia. [17] While moderating an online discussion group devoted to the philosophy of Objectivism in the early 1990s, Wales had encountered Larry Sanger , a skeptic of the philosophy. [6] The two had engaged in detailed debate on the subject on Wales's list and then on Sanger's, eventually meeting offline to continue the debate and becoming friends. [6] Years later, after deciding to pursue his encyclopedia project and seeking a credentialed academic to lead it, [28] Wales hired Sanger—who at that time was a doctoral student in philosophy at Ohio State University —to be its editor-in-chief , and in March 2000, Nupedia ("the free encyclopedia"), a peer-reviewed , open-content encyclopedia, was launched. [17] [19] The intent behind Nupedia was to have expert-written entries on a variety of topics, and to sell advertising alongside the entries in order to make profit. [6] The project was characterized by an extensive peer-review process designed to make its articles of a quality comparable to that of professional encyclopedias. [33]
In an October 2009 speech, Wales recollected attempting to write a Nupedia article on Nobel Prize-winning economist Robert C. Merton , but being too intimidated to submit his first draft to the prestigious finance professors who were to peer review it, even though he had published a paper on Option Pricing Theory and was comfortable with the subject matter. Wales characterized this as the moment he realized that the Nupedia model was not going to work. [35]
In January 2001, Sanger was introduced to the concept of a wiki by extreme programming enthusiast Ben Kovitz after explaining to Kovitz the slow pace of growth Nupedia endured as a result of its onerous submission process. [36] Kovitz suggested that adopting the wiki model would allow editors to contribute simultaneously and incrementally throughout the project, thus breaking Nupedia's bottleneck. [36] Sanger was excited about the idea, and after he proposed it to Wales, they created the first Nupedia wiki on January 10, 2001. [36] The wiki was initially intended as a collaborative project for the public to write articles that would then be reviewed for publication by Nupedia's expert volunteers. The majority of Nupedia's experts, however, wanted nothing to do with this project, fearing that mixing amateur content with professionally researched and edited material would compromise the integrity of Nupedia's information and damage the credibility of the encyclopedia. [37] Thus, the wiki project, dubbed "Wikipedia" by Sanger, [10] went live at a separate domain five days after its creation. [27] [32]

Wikipedia
Originally, Bomis planned to make Wikipedia a profitable business. [40] Sanger initially saw Wikipedia primarily as a tool to aid Nupedia development. Wales feared that, at worst, it might produce "complete rubbish". [27] To the surprise of Sanger and Wales, within a few days of launching, the number of articles on Wikipedia had outgrown that of Nupedia, and a small collective of editors had formed. [26] [28] It was Jimmy Wales, along with other people, who came up with the broader idea of an open-source, collaborative encyclopedia that would accept contributions from ordinary people. [41] Initially, neither Sanger nor Wales knew what to expect from the Wikipedia initiative. [27] [28] Many of the early contributors to the site were familiar with the model of the free culture movement , and, like Wales, many of them sympathized with the open-source movement . [37] Wales has said that he was initially so worried about the concept of open editing, where anyone can edit the encyclopedia, that he would awaken during the night and monitor what was being added. [42] [43] Nonetheless, the cadre of early editors helped create a robust, self-regulating community that has proven conducive to the growth of the project. [17] In a talk at SXSW in 2016, he recalled that he wrote the first words on Wikipedia: " Hello world ", a phrase computer programmers often use to test new software. [44]
Sanger developed Wikipedia in its early phase and guided the project. [10] [45] The broader idea he originally ascribes to other people, remarking in a 2005 memoir for Slashdot that "the idea of an open source, collaborative encyclopedia, open to contribution by ordinary people, was entirely Jimmy's, not mine, and the funding was entirely by Bomis. Of course, other people had had the idea", adding, "the actual development of this encyclopedia was the task he gave me to work on." [46] Sanger worked on and promoted both the Nupedia and Wikipedia projects until Bomis discontinued funding for his position in February 2002; [47] Sanger resigned as editor-in-chief of Nupedia and as "chief organizer" of Wikipedia on March 1 of that year. [48] [49] Early on, Bomis supplied the financial backing for Wikipedia, [45] [50] and entertained the notion of placing advertisements on Wikipedia before costs were reduced with Sanger's departure and plans for a nonprofit foundation were advanced instead. [40]

Controversy regarding Wales's status as co-founder
Wales has asserted that he is the sole founder of Wikipedia, [11] and has publicly disputed Sanger's designation as a co-founder. Sanger and Wales were identified as co-founders at least as early as September 2001 by The New York Times and as founders in Wikipedia's first press release in January 2002. [52] [53] In August of that year, Wales identified himself as "co-founder" of Wikipedia. [54] Sanger assembled on his personal webpage an assortment of links that appear to confirm the status of Sanger and Wales as co-founders. [10] [55] For example, Sanger and Wales are historically cited or described in early news citations and press releases as co-founders. [10] Wales was quoted by The Boston Globe as calling Sanger's claim "preposterous" in February 2006, [56] and called "the whole debate silly" in an April 2009 interview. [57]
In late 2005, Wales edited his own biographical entry on the English Wikipedia . Writer Rogers Cadenhead drew attention to logs showing that in his edits to the page, Wales had removed references to Sanger as the co-founder of Wikipedia. [58] [59] Sanger commented that "having seen edits like this, it does seem that Jimmy is attempting to rewrite history. But this is a futile process because in our brave new world of transparent activity and maximum communication, the truth will out." [31] [60] Wales was also observed to have modified references to Bomis in a way that was characterized as downplaying the sexual nature of some of his former company's products. [27] [31] Though Wales argued that his modifications were solely intended to improve the accuracy of the content, [31] he apologized for editing his own biography, a practice generally discouraged on Wikipedia. [31] [60]

Role
In a 2004 interview with Slashdot , Wales outlined his vision for Wikipedia: "Imagine a world in which every single person on the planet is given free access to the sum of all human knowledge. That's what we're doing." [61] Although his formal designation is board member and chairman emeritus of the Wikimedia Foundation, Wales's social capital within the Wikipedia community has accorded him a status that has been characterized as benevolent dictator , constitutional monarch and spiritual leader . [62] [63] [64] In two interviews with the Guardian in 2014, Wales elaborated on his role on Wikipedia. In the first interview, he said that while he "has always rejected" the term "benevolent dictator", he does refer to himself as the "constitutional monarch". In the second, he elaborated on his "constitutional monarch" designation, saying that, like the Queen of England, he has no real power. [2] [65] He was also the closest the project had to a spokesperson in its early years. [6] The growth and prominence of Wikipedia made Wales an Internet celebrity . [66] Although he had never traveled outside North America prior to the site's founding, his participation in the Wikipedia project has seen him flying internationally on a near-constant basis as its public face. [6] [67]
When Larry Sanger left Wikipedia, Wales's approach was different from Sanger's. [68] Wales was fairly hands-off. [68] Despite involvement in other projects, Wales has denied intending to reduce his role within Wikipedia, telling The New York Times in 2008 that "Dialing down is not an option for me ... Not to be too dramatic about it, but, 'to create and distribute a free encyclopedia of the highest possible quality to every single person on the planet in their own language,' that's who I am. That's what I am doing. That's my life goal." [63] In May 2010, the BBC reported that Wales had relinquished many of his technical privileges on Wikimedia Commons (a Wikipedia sister project that hosts much of its multimedia content) after criticism by the project's volunteer community over what they saw as Wales's hasty and undemocratic approach to deleting sexually explicit images he believed "appeal solely to prurient interests". [69]

Wikimedia Foundation
In mid-2003, Wales set up the Wikimedia Foundation (WMF), a non-profit organization founded in St. Petersburg, Florida and later headquartered in San Francisco , California . [70] [71] All intellectual property rights and domain names pertaining to Wikipedia were moved to the new foundation, [72] whose purpose is to establish general policy for the encyclopedia and its sister projects. [28] Wales has been a member of the Wikimedia Foundation's Board of Trustees since it was formed and was its official chairman from 2003 through 2006. [73] Since 2006 he has been accorded the honorary title of chairman emeritus and holds the board-appointed " community founder's seat " that was installed in 2008. [74] [75] [76] His work for the foundation, including his appearances to promote it at computer and educational conferences, has always been unpaid. [30] Wales has often joked that donating Wikipedia to the foundation was both the "dumbest and the smartest" thing he had done. On one hand, he estimated that Wikipedia was worth US$3 billion; on the other, he weighed his belief that the donation made its success possible. [34] [72] [77] [78]
Wales gives an annual "State of the Wiki" address, at the Wikimania conference. [79]

Controversies
Wales's association with the foundation has led to controversy. In March 2008, Wales was accused by former Wikimedia Foundation employee Danny Wool of misusing the foundation's funds for recreational purposes. [80] Wool also stated that Wales had his Wikimedia credit card taken away in part because of his spending habits, a claim Wales denied. [80] Then-chairperson of the foundation Florence Devouard and former foundation interim Executive Director Brad Patrick denied any wrongdoing by Wales or the foundation, saying that Wales accounted for every expense and that, for items for which he lacked receipts, he paid out of his own pocket; in private, Devouard upbraided Wales for "constantly trying to rewrite the past". [81] Later in March 2008, it was claimed by Jeffrey Vernon Merkey that Wales had edited Merkey's Wikipedia entry to make it more favorable in return for donations to the Wikimedia Foundation, an allegation Wales dismissed as "nonsense". [82] [83] In early 2016 Wikipedia editors perceived the WMF's Knowledge Engine project as a conflict of interest for Wales, whose business Wikia might benefit from having the WMF spend a lot of money on research in respect to search. [84] Wikia attempted to develop a search engine but it was closed in 2009. [84]

Wikia and later pursuits
In 2004, Wales and then-fellow member of the WMF Board of Trustees Angela Beesley founded the for-profit company Wikia . [26] Wikia is a wiki farm —a collection of individual wikis on different subjects, all hosted on the same website. It hosts some of the largest wikis outside Wikipedia, including Memory Alpha (devoted to Star Trek ) and Wookieepedia ( Star Wars ). [85] Another service offered by Wikia was Wikia Search , an open source search engine intended to challenge Google and introduce transparency and public dialogue about how it is created into the search engine's operations, [86] but the project was abandoned in March 2009. [87] Wales stepped down as Wikia CEO to be replaced by angel investor Gil Penchina , a former vice president and general manager at eBay , on June 5, 2006. [88] Penchina declared Wikia to have reached profitability in September 2009. [89] In addition to his role at Wikia, Wales is a public speaker represented by the Harry Walker Agency. [90] [91] He has also participated in a celebrity endorsement campaign for the Swiss watch maker Maurice Lacroix . [92]
On November 4, 2011, Wales delivered an hour-long address at The Sage Gateshead in the United Kingdom to launch the 2011 Free Thinking Festival on BBC Radio Three . [93] His speech, which was entitled "The Future of the Internet", was largely devoted to Wikipedia. Twenty days later, on November 24, Wales appeared on the British topical debate television program Question Time . [94]
In May 2012, it was reported that Wales was advising the UK government on how to make taxpayer-funded academic research available on the internet at no cost. [95] His role reportedly involved working as "an unpaid advisor on crowdsourcing and opening up policymaking", and advising the Department of Business, Innovation and Skills and the UK research councils on distributing research. [95]
In January 2014, it was announced that Wales had joined The People's Operator as co-chair of the mobile phone network. [96]
On March 21, 2014, Wales spoke on a panel at a Clinton Global Initiative University conference held at Arizona State University , along with John McCain , Saudi Arabian women's rights activist Manal al-Sharif and Harvard University student Shree Bose. [97] The topic of discussion was "the age of participation" and the ability of an increasingly large number of citizens to "express their own opinions, pursue their own educations, and launch their own enterprises." Wales exhorted young people to use social media to try to bring about societal change, and compared government suppression of the Internet to a human rights violation. [98]
On May 26, 2014, Google appointed Wales to serve on a seven-member committee on privacy in response to Google v. Gonzalez , which led to Google's being inundated with requests to remove websites from their search results. Wales said he wanted the committee to be viewed as "a blue-ribbon panel" by lawmakers and for the committee to advise the lawmakers as well as Google. [99]
In 2017, Wales announced that he is launching an online publication called Wikitribune , with a goal to fight fake news through a combination of professional journalists and volunteer contributors. Wales described it as "news by the people and for the people", and that it will be the "first time that professional journalists and citizen journalists will work side-by-side as equals writing stories as they happen, editing them live as they develop, and at all times backed by a community checking and rechecking all facts”. [100]

Political and economic views

Personal philosophy
Wales is a self-avowed Objectivist , [86] referring to the philosophy invented by writer Ayn Rand in the mid-20th century that emphasizes reason , individualism , and capitalism . Wales first encountered the philosophy through reading Rand's novel The Fountainhead during his undergraduate period [19] and, in 1992, founded an electronic mailing list devoted to "Moderated Discussion of Objectivist Philosophy". [6] [101] Though he has stated that the philosophy "colours everything I do and think", [6] he has said, "I think I do a better job—than a lot of people who self-identify as Objectivists—of not pushing my point of view on other people." [102]
When asked by Brian Lamb about Rand's influence on him in his appearance on C-SPAN 's Q&A in September 2005, Wales cited integrity and "the virtue of independence" as personally important. When asked if he could trace "the Ayn Rand connection" to a personal political philosophy at the time of the interview, Wales labeled himself a libertarian , qualifying his remark by referring to the U.S. Libertarian Party as "lunatics", and citing "freedom, liberty, basically individual rights, that idea of dealing with other people in a manner that is not initiating force against them" as his guiding principles. [19]
An interview with Wales served as the cover feature of the June 2007 issue of the libertarian magazine Reason . [17] In that profile, he described his political views as " center-right ". Prior to 2008, Wales attended George Soros ' birthday. [103]
In a 2011 interview with The Independent , he expressed sympathy with the Occupy Wall Street and Occupy London protesters, saying, "You don't have to be a socialist to say it's not right to take money from everybody and give it to a few rich people. That's not free enterprise." [104]
Dan Hodges in The Telegraph has described Wales as a " Labour sympathizer". [105] In 2015, he offered to help Ed Miliband with the Labour Party's social media strategy, but Miliband turned him down. [105]
In 2015, Wales signed up as the committee chair for Lawrence Lessig 's 2016 presidential campaign . [106]
In 2016, Wales and eleven other business leaders signed on to an open letter to American voters urging them not to vote for Donald Trump in that year's United States presidential election . [107]

Philosophy in practice
The January/February 2006 issue of Maximum PC reported that Wales refused to comply with a request from the People's Republic of China to censor "politically sensitive" Wikipedia articles—other corporate Internet companies, such as Google , Yahoo! and Microsoft , had already yielded to Chinese government pressure. Wales stated that he would rather see companies such as Google adhere to Wikipedia's policy of freedom of information. [108] In 2010, Wales criticized whistle blower website WikiLeaks and its editor-in-chief Julian Assange , saying that their publication of Afghan war documents "could be enough to get someone killed"; furthermore, he expressed irritation at their use of the name " wiki ": [109] "What they're doing is not really a wiki. The essence of wiki is a collaborative editing ...". [110]

Development and management of Wikipedia
Wales cites Austrian School economist Friedrich Hayek 's essay, " The Use of Knowledge in Society ", which he read as an undergraduate, [27] as "central" to his thinking about "how to manage the Wikipedia project". [17] Hayek argued that information is decentralized —that each individual only knows a small fraction of what is known collectively—and that as a result, decisions are best made by those with local knowledge, rather than by a central authority. [17] Wales reconsidered Hayek's essay in the 1990s, while reading about the open source movement , which advocated for the free distribution of free software . He was particularly moved by " The Cathedral and the Bazaar ", an essay which was later adapted into a book of the same name , by one of the founders of the movement, Eric S. Raymond , as it "opened [his] eyes to the possibilities of mass collaboration ." [27]
From his background in finance, and working as a futures and options trader, Wales developed an interest in game theory and the effect of incentives on human collaborative activity. He identifies this fascination as a significant basis for his developmental work on the Wikipedia project. [111] He has rejected the notion that his role in promoting Wikipedia is altruistic , which he defines as "sacrificing your own values for others", stating that the idea of "participating in a benevolent effort to share information is somehow destroying your own values makes no sense to me". [67]

Testimony before Senate Homeland Security Committee
On December 11, 2007, Wales testified before to the United States Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. [112] [113] He also submitted written testimony to the Senate Committee entitled "E-Government 2.0: Improving Innovation, Collaboration and Access". [114] [115]
Senator Joseph Lieberman introduced Wales by stating:
Wales's testimony is available for viewing on CSPAN. [117]

European Court of Justice Google ruling
On May 14, 2014, Wales strongly reacted to the European Court of Justice (ECJ)'s ruling on the right of individuals to request the removal of information from Google's search results . He stated to the BBC that the ruling was "one of the most wide-sweeping internet censorship rulings that I've ever seen". [118] In early June 2014, the TechCrunch media outlet interviewed Wales on the subject, as he had been invited by Google to join an advisory committee that the corporation had formed as an addition to the formal process that the ECJ requested from Google to manage such requests. [119]
The May 2014 ECJ ruling required swift action from Google to implement a process that allowed people to directly contact the corporation about the removal of information that they believe is outdated or irrelevant. Google's Larry Page revealed that 30 percent of requests received by Google since the ruling was made were categorized as "other". Wales explained in email responses that he was contacted by Google on May 28, 2014, and "The remit of the committee is to hold public hearings and issue recommendations—not just to Google but to legislators and the public." [119] When asked about his view on the ECJ's "right to be forgotten" ruling, Wales replied:
Wales then provided further explanation, drawing a comparison with Wikipedia: "You do not have a right to use the law to prevent Wikipedia editors from writing truthful information, nor do you have a right to use the law to prevent Google from publishing truthful information." Wales concluded with an indication of his ideal outcome: "A part of the outcome should be the very strong implementation of a right to free speech in Europe—essentially the language of the First Amendment in the U.S." [119]

Other issues
In 2012, the Home Secretary of the U.K. was petitioned by Wales in regard to his opposition to the extradition of Richard O'Dwyer to the U.S. [120] After an agreement was reached to avoid the extradition, Wales commented, "This is very exciting news, and I'm pleased to hear it ... What needs to happen next is a serious reconsideration of the UK extradition treaty that would allow this sort of nonsense in the first place." [121]
In August 2013, Wales criticized U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron 's plan for an Internet porn-filter, saying that the idea was "ridiculous." [122] In November 2013, Wales also commented on the Snowden affair , describing Edward Snowden as "a hero" whom history would judge "very favourably"; additionally, Wales said the U.S. public "would have never approved [the] sweeping surveillance program [publicized by Snowden]", had they been informed or asked about it. [123]

Personal life
Jimmy Wales has been married three times. At the age of twenty, he married Pamela Green, [3] a co-worker at a grocery store in Alabama. [67] They divorced in 1993. [25] He met his second wife, Christine Rohan, through a friend in Chicago while she was working as a steel trader for Mitsubishi . [19] [24] The couple were married in Monroe County, Florida in March 1997, [124] and had a daughter before separating. [19] [67] Wales moved to San Diego in 1998, and after becoming disillusioned with the housing market there, relocated in 2002 to St. Petersburg, Florida . [24] [50] [125]
Wales had a brief relationship with Canadian conservative columnist Rachel Marsden in 2008 that began after Marsden contacted Wales about her Wikipedia biography. [126] After accusations that Wales's relationship constituted a conflict of interest , Wales stated that there had been a relationship but that it was over and said that it had not influenced any matters on Wikipedia, [127] [128] a claim which was disputed by Marsden. [129]
Wales married Kate Garvey in London on October 6, 2012. [130] She is Tony Blair's former diary secretary , whom Wales met in Davos , Switzerland. [131] [132] Wales and Garvey have two daughters. [2]
Wales is an atheist . In an interview with Big Think , he said his personal philosophy is firmly rooted in reason and he is a complete non-believer. [133] As of 2012 [update] , he lives in London, England. [1]

Honors, awards and positions

See also

Publications
WebPage index: 00023
List of Wikipedias
This is a list of the different language editions of Wikipedia ; as of 26 May 2017 there are 296 Wikipedias of which 285 are active.

Wikipedia edition codes
Each Wikipedia has a code, which is used as a subdomain below wikipedia.org. Interlanguage links are sorted by that code. The codes represent the language codes defined by ISO 639-1 and ISO 639-3 , and the decision of which language code to use is usually determined by the IETF language tag policy. Wikipedias also vary by how thinly they slice dialects and variants; for example, the English Wikipedia includes most modern varieties of English (American English, Indian English, South African English, etc.), but does not include other related languages such as Scots , or Anglo-Saxon , all of which have separate Wikipedias. The Spanish Wikipedia includes both Peninsular Castilian and Latin American Spanish ; Malay Wikipedia includes a large number of Malay languages; and so on.
Differences between the ISO mappings and Wikipedia codes include:
Additionally, Wikipedias vary in wikt:orthography at times. Chinese Wikipedia automatically translates from modern Mandarin Chinese into four standard forms: Mainland China and Singapore in simplified Chinese characters, and Taiwan and Hong Kong / Macau in traditional Chinese characters. Belarussian , however, has a separate Wikipedia for the 'normative' orthography (be) and Taraškievica (be-tarask).

List
An approximation to the number of active users is given in powers of ten (see common logarithm ): so "5" means at least 10,000, "4" means at least 1000, "3" means at least 100, and so on.

Detailed list

Notes

Grand total

See also
WebPage index: 00024
Portmanteau
A portmanteau ( i / p ɔːr t ˈ m æ n t oʊ / , / ˌ p ɔːr t m æ n ˈ t oʊ / ; plural portmanteaus or portmanteaux / - ˈ t oʊ z / ) or portmanteau word is a linguistic blend of words , [1] in which parts of multiple words or their phones (sounds) are combined into a new word, [1] [2] [3] as in smog , coined by blending smoke and fog , [2] [4] or motel , from motor and hotel . [5] In linguistics , a portmanteau is defined as a single morph that represents two or more morphemes . [6] [7] [8] [9]
The definition overlaps with the grammatical term contraction , but contractions are formed from words that would otherwise appear together in sequence, such as do and not to make don't , whereas a portmanteau word is formed by combining two or more existing words that all relate to a singular concept which the portmanteau describes. A portmanteau also differs from a compound , which does not involve the truncation of parts of the stems of the blended words. For instance, starfish is a compound, not a portmanteau, of star and fish ; whereas a hypothetical portmanteau of star and fish might be stish .

Origin
The word portmanteau was first used in this context by Lewis Carroll in the book Through the Looking-Glass (1871), [10] in which Humpty Dumpty explains to Alice the coinage of the unusual words in Jabberwocky , [11] where slithy means "slimy and lithe" and mimsy is "miserable and flimsy". Humpty Dumpty explains the practice of combining words in various ways by telling Alice:
In his introduction to The Hunting of the Snark , Carroll uses portmanteau when discussing lexical selection :
In then-contemporary English, a portmanteau was a suitcase that opened into two equal sections. The etymology of the word is the French porte-manteau , from porter , "to carry", and manteau , "cloak" (from Old French mantel , from Latin mantellum ). [12] In modern French, a porte-manteau is a clothes valet , a coat-tree or similar article of furniture for hanging up jackets, hats, umbrellas and the like. [13] [14] [15] It has also been used especially in Europe as a formal description for coat racks from the French words porter (to carry) and manteau (cloak).
An occasional synonym for "portmanteau word" is frankenword , an autological word exemplifying the phenomenon it describes, blending " Frankenstein " and "word". [16]

Examples in English

Standard English

Formal
Many neologisms are examples of blends, but many blends have become part of the lexicon. [11] In Punch in 1896, the word brunch (breakfast + lunch) was introduced as a "portmanteau word." [17] In 1964, the newly independent African republic of Tanganyika and Zanzibar chose the portmanteau word Tanzania as its name. Similarly Eurasia is a portmanteau of Europe and Asia .
Some city names are portmanteaus of the border regions they straddle: Texarkana spreads across the Texas-Arkansas border, while Calexico and Mexicali are respectively the American and Mexican sides of a single conurbation . A scientific example is a liger , which is a cross between a male lion and a female tiger (a tigon or tiglon is a similar cross in which the male is a tiger).
Many company or brand names are portmanteaus, including Microsoft , a portmanteau of microcomputer and software ; the cheese " Cambozola " combines a similar rind to " Camembert " with the same mold used to make " Gorgonzola "; passenger rail company " Amtrak ", a portmanteau of " America " and " track "; " Velcro ", a portmanteau of the French "Velours" (velvet) and "Crochet" (hook); " Verizon ," a portmanteau of "veritas" (Latin for truth) and "horizon," and ComEd (a Chicago -area electric utility company) a portmanteau of "Commonwealth" and Edison ( Thomas Edison ).
"Jeoportmanteau!" is a recurring category on the American television quiz show Jeopardy! . The category's name is itself a portmanteau of the words "Jeopardy" and "portmanteau." Responses in the category are portmanteaus constructed by fitting two words together.

Informal
Portmanteau words may be produced by joining together proper nouns with common nouns, such as " gerrymandering ," which refers to the scheme of Massachusetts Governor Elbridge Gerry for politically contrived re-districting; the perimeter of one of the districts thereby created resembled a very curvy salamander in outline. The term gerrymander has itself contributed to portmanteau terms bjelkemander and playmander .
Oxbridge is a common portmanteau for the UK's two oldest universities, those of Oxford and Cambridge .
Many portmanteau words receive some use but do not appear in all dictionaries. For example, a spork is an eating utensil that is a combination of a spoon and a fork , and a skort is an item of clothing that is part skirt , part shorts . On the other hand, turducken , a dish made by inserting a chicken into a duck, and the duck into a turkey, was added to the Oxford English Dictionary in 2010.
Similarly, the word refudiate was first used by Sarah Palin when she misspoke, conflating the words refute and repudiate . Though initially a gaffe, the word was recognized as the New Oxford American Dictionary' s "Word of the Year" in 2010. [18]
Brexit is a recent (2016) example, referring to Britain 's planned exit from the European Union .

Business
The business lexicon is replete with newly coined portmanteau words like "permalance" (permanent freelance), "advertainment" (advertising as entertainment), "advertorial" (a blurred distinction between advertising and editorial), "infotainment" (information about entertainment or itself intended to entertain by virtue of its manner of presentation), and "infomercial" (informational commercial ).
A company name may also be portmanteau (e.g., Timex is a portmanteau of Time (referring to Time magazine ) and Kleenex ) [19] as well as a product name (e.g., Renault markets its Twingo , a combination of twist , swing and tango ). [20]

Non-standard English

Name-meshing
Two proper names can also be used in creating a portmanteau word in reference to the partnership between people, especially in cases where both persons are well-known, or sometimes to produce epithets such as "Billary" (referring to former United States president Bill Clinton and his wife, former United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton ). In this example of recent American political history, the purpose for blending is not so much to combine the meanings of the source words but "to suggest a resemblance of one named person to the other"; the effect is often derogatory, as linguist Benjamin Zimmer states. [21] By contrast, the public, including the media, use portmanteaux to refer to their favorite pairings as a way to "...giv[e] people an essence of who they are within the same name." [22] This is particularly seen in cases of fictional and real-life " supercouples ". An early known example, Bennifer , referred to film stars Ben Affleck and Jennifer Lopez . Other examples include Brangelina ( Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie ) and TomKat ( Tom Cruise and Katie Holmes ). [22] " Desilu Productions " was a Los Angeles, California-based company jointly owned by couple and actors Desi Arnaz and Lucille Ball . Miramax is the combination of the first names of the parents of the Weinstein brothers.
Holidays are another example, as in Thanksgivukkah , a portmanteau neologism given to the convergence of the American holiday of Thanksgiving and the first day of the Jewish holiday of Hanukkah on Thursday, 28 November 2013. [23] [24]

Other languages

Arabic
In vernacular Arabic, contractions are a pretty common phenomenon, in which mostly prepositions are added to other words to create a word with a new meaning. For example, the Hejazi word for "not yet" is لسع/لسه (lessa/lessaʕ), which is a combination of the words لـ (li, for) and الساعة (assaʕa,the hour). Other examples in Hejazi Arabic include:
A few rare or facetious examples would include:

Bulgarian
In the Bulgarian language the most common use of portmanteau is as a part of advertising campaigns. One such example is the word gintuition ( джинтуиция pronounced dzhintuitsia), which is made up from the words gin and intuition . This one in particular is used, not surprisingly, as a part of a gin commercial . Another example is the word charomat, which consists of the words чар (the Bulgarian word for charm) and аромат (meaning aroma), made popular by an ad about a coffee brand.

Chinese
Several Chinese province names are portmanteau words. Anhui is a combination of Anqing and Huizhou , Fujian is a combination of Fuzhou and Jianzhou (ancient name of Jian'ou ), Gansu is a combination of Ganzhou and Suzhou , and Jiangsu is a combination of Jiangning (ancient name of Nanjing ) and Suzhou .
In 1927, the city of Wuhan , capital of Hubei Province, was created by merging the three cities of Wuchang , Hankou , and Hanyang into one city.

Filipino
Certain portmanteaus in Filipino have come into use to describe popular combinations of items in a Filipino breakfast. An example of such a combination order is kankamtuy: an order of kanin (rice), kamatis (tomatoes) and tuyo (dried fish). Another is tapsi: an order of tapa and sinangág. Other examples include variations using a silog suffix, usually some kind of meat served with sinangág and itlog (egg). The three most commonly seen silogs are tapsilog (having tapa as the meat portion), tocilog (having tocino as the meat portion), and longsilog (having longganisa as the meat portion). Other silogs include hotsilog (with a hot dog), bangsilog (with bangus (milkfish)), dangsilog (with danggit (rabbitfish)), spamsilog (with spam), adosilog (with adobo), chosilog (with chorizo), chiksilog (with chicken), cornsilog (with corned beef), and litsilog (with lechon/litson). An establishment that specializes in such meals is called a tapsihan or "tapsilugan".
The name of a common Filipino mongrel dogs askal is derived from Tagalog words "asong kalye" or "street dog" because these dogs are commonly seen in streets. Askals are also called "aspins", a combination of "asong Pinoy " or "Philippine Dog".
Another Filipino portmanteau is a popular but slightly dated female name Luzviminda derived from the Philippines ' three major island groups Luzon , Visayas and Mindanao .
Many Filipinos are very fond of speaking in Tagalog with some English words and thus are actually speaking in Taglish. Tagalog is a dialect in the island of Luzon and the basis for the national language Pilipino.

French
Despite its French etymology (modern spelling: portemanteau), portmanteau is not used in French in this context. It is indeed a false friend . It refers to a coat stand or coat hook (literally a "coat support"), but in the past it could also refer to a cloth drape knight would use to pack their gear. It was in this context that it first came to its English use, and the metaphorical use for a linguistic phenomenon (putting one word inside another, as into a case) is an English coinage. The French linguistic term mot-valise , literally a "suitcase-word", is a relatively recent back-translation from English, attested only since 1970.
Although French is regulated by the Académie française (which has had a conservative attitude to neologisms) it produced a number of portmanteau words such as franglais (frenglish) or courriel ( courrier électronique = email) and has used the technique in literature ( Boris Vian ) or to create brands: Transilien ( Transports franciliens = Île-de-France transportation system). [26]
French has a second regulatory body, named OQLF , an agency of the Government of Quebec , which is completely independent from the Académie. It has a tendency to produce neologisms in order to replace anglicisms. It created the portmanteaus courriel and clavardage ( clavier + bavardage ), for example. Another example in Quebec (but made outside of OQLF) is Centricois , which means person from the region Centre-du-Québec (winner of a contest organised by the SSJB of Centre-du-Québec in 1999).

Galician
Galician has many portmanteaus, some existing also in Portuguese but many others not (or only in the North of Portugal, close to Galicia ), which can be explained by its popular origin: carambelo (frozen candy), from caramelo (candy) and carámbano (icicle); martabela (a kind of dead bolt), from martelo (hammer) and tarabela (a kind of drill bit); rabuñar (to scratch with a fingernail, for instance a cat or a person), from rabuxa (a small tail, and also a common ill in tails) and rañar (to scratch); millenta ("many thousands", also common in Portuguese milhenta ), from milleiro (one thousand) and cento (one hundred); runxir (to crackle, applied to some things only), from ruxir (to howl) and renxer (to grind the teeth), or vagamundo (tramp), from vagabundo (wanderer) and mundo (world), currently "vagamundo" and "vagabundo" mean the same, and the former is considered a vulgarism [ clarification needed ] .

German
Kofferwort , a German synonym for portmanteau, is a recent literal translation of French mot-valise , attested since 1983. However, the phenomenon is well known in German poetry. A modern example of German portmanteau is 'Teuro', combining 'teuer' (expensive) and 'Euro'. Other examples are Mainhattan , a Central business district in Frankfurt on the river Main like Manhattan, New York and Kreuzkölln, the Berlin area bordering between Kreuzberg and Neukölln .

Modern Hebrew
Modern Hebrew abounds with European mechanisms such as blending: Along with קומפקט דיסק ( kompaktdisk , compact disc), Hebrew has the blend תקליטור ( taklitor ), which consists of the Jewish-descent תקליט ( taklít , record) and אור ( or , light). Modern Hebrew is full of portmanteau blends, such as:
Sometimes the root of the second word is truncated, giving rise to a portmanteau that resembles an acrostic :

Hindi
A portmanteau common in both Hindi and English is Hinglish , which refers to the vernacular of the people in (the Hindi-speaking regions of) India, where they mix Hindi and English in the spoken language. Another modern day example is the BrahMos missile, whose name is a portmanteau of two rivers, Brahmaputra and Moskva .
Compounds displaying Sanskritic sandhi are extremely commonplace in Hindi, but as compounds showing sandhi still consist of multiple morphemes , these are not portmanteaux.

Hungarian
In Hungarian language, the first decades of the 19th century saw the language-reforming movement (Hungarian: nyelvújítás ), when some authors and poets, like Ferenc Kazinczy, Pál Bugát, Mihály Fazekas, Miklós Révai and others created approximately 10,000 new words and phrases in order to develop Hungarian language to a modern and progressive tongue. Among this new phrases there are some portmanteaux:
gyufa (safety matches), consists of gyújtó (burner) and fa (wood).

Icelandic
There is a tradition of linguistic purism in Icelandic , and neologisms are frequently created from pre-existing words. Tölva ("computer") is a portmanteau of tala ("digit; number") and völva ("oracle or seeress"). [27]

Indonesian
In Indonesian , portmanteaux are often used as both formal and informal acronyms and referrals. Many organizations and government bodies use them for brevity. Journalists often create portmanteaux for particular historical moments. Examples include:
Formal and journalism uses:
Informal uses, for example:

Japanese
A very common type of portmanteau in Japanese forms one word from the beginnings of two others (that is, from two back-clippings ). [29] The portion of each input word retained is usually two morae , which is tantamount to one kanji in most words written in kanji.
The inputs to the process can be native words, Sino-Japanese words , gairaigo (later borrowings), or combinations thereof. A Sino-Japanese example is the name 東大 ( Tōdai ) for the University of Tokyo , in full 東 京 大 学 ( Tō kyō dai gaku ) . With borrowings, typical results are words such as パソコン ( pasokon ) , meaning personal computer (PC), which despite being formed of English elements does not exist in English; it is a uniquely Japanese contraction of the English personal computer ( パ ー ソ ナル ・コン ピュータ ? , pāso naru kon pyūta ) . Another example, Pokémon ( ポケモン ? ) , is a contracted form of the English words pocket ( ポケ ット ? , poke tto ) and monsters ( モン スター ? , mon sutā ) . [30] A famous example of a blend with mixed sources is karaoke ( カラオケ ? , karaoke ) , blending the Japanese word for empty ( 空 ? , kara ) and the English word orchestra ( オーケストラ ? , ōke sutora ) .
Some Anime titles also are portmanteaus, such as Hetalia (ヘタリア). It came from Hetare (ヘタレ) which means idiot and Itaria (イタリア) which means Italy , and for the anime Servamp which came from English word Servant (サヴァント)　and Vampire (ヴァンパイア).

Spanish
Although not very common in Spanish (except for some compulsory contractions such as 'a el'='al'), portmanteaux are finding their way into the language mainly through marketing and media efforts, such as in Mexican Spanish 'cafebrería' from 'cafetería' and 'librería', or Teletón from 'televisión' and 'maratón'. However, it is very frequent in commercial brands of any type (for instance, "chocolleta", from "chocolate" + "galleta", cookie), and above all family owned business (of small size, for instance: Rocar, from "Roberto" + "Carlos", and Mafer, from "Maria" + "Fernanda"). Such usages are obviously prompted by the registering of a distinguishable trademark, but with time is common that a specific trademark became the name of the all similar products, like in Cola Cao , a name which is very common to use to refer any similar product.

Tibetan
Neologisms are also frequently created from pre-existing words in the Tibetan languages . For example, kubkyab (the common word for "chair") combines the words kub ("butt"), ky ag ("a stand"), and gy ab nye ("cushion," often for the back). Gyabnye is itself a blend of gyab ten ("back support") and nye ba, the verb for "lean against, recline, rest on." Thus the word for chair is "a standing support for one's butt and back to rest on." Tibetan also employs portmanteaus frequently in names of important figures and spiritual practices, such as His Holiness Penor Rinpoche, with Penor being pe ma nor bu ("lotus jewel"), and the Buddhist practice of Dzogchen, or dzog pa chen po, the "Great Perfection." Tibetan is rich with portmanteaus.

Word/morph (linguistics)
In linguistics the term blend is used to refer to general combination of words, and the term portmanteau is reserved for the narrow sense of combining two or more morphemes in one morph. E.g. in the Latin word animalis the ending -is is a portmanteau morph because it is used for two morphemes: the singularity and the genitive case. In English two separate morphs are used ( of an animal ).
The term may also be extended to include contractions . Examples of such combinations include:
This usage has been referred to as "portmanteau morph". [6]
While in Portuguese, French, Spanish and Italian the use of the short forms is obligatory (with the exception of ès in French, which is archaic in most senses), German and Cornish speakers theoretically may freely choose the form they use. In German, portmanteaus clearly dominate in spoken language, whilst in written language both forms are in use.

See also
WebPage index: 00025
Criticism of Wikipedia
Criticism of Wikipedia —of its content, procedures, and operations, and of the Wikipedia community —covers many subjects, topics, and themes about the nature of Wikipedia as an open source encyclopedia of subject entries that almost anyone can edit. Wikipedia has been criticized for the uneven handling, acceptance, and retention of articles about controversial subjects. The principal concerns of its critics are the factual reliability of the content; the readability of the prose; and a clear article layout; the existence of systemic bias ; of gender bias ; and of racial bias among the editorial community that is Wikipedia. Further concerns are that the organization allows the participation of anonymous editors (leading to editorial vandalism); the existence of social stratification (allowing cliques); and over-complicated rules (allowing editorial quarrels), the conditions of which permit the misuse of Wikipedia.
Wikipedia is described as unreliable at times. In "Wikipedia: The Dumbing Down of World Knowledge" (2010), Edwin Black characterized the editorial content of articles as a mixture of "truth, half-truth, and some falsehoods". [1] Similarly, in "Wisdom?: More like Dumbness of the Crowds" (2011), Oliver Kamm said that the encyclopedic articles usually are dominated by the editors with the loudest and most persistent editorial voices (talk pages and edit summaries), usually by an interest group with an ideological "axe to grind" on the subject, topic, or theme of the article in question. [2] Politics and ideology entries are also criticized on Wikipedia. In two works published in 2012, "The 'Undue Weight' of Truth on Wikipedia" by Timothy Messer–Kruse, and "You Just Type in What You are Looking for: Undergraduates' Use of Library Resources vs. Wikipedia" by Mónica Colón–Aguirre and Rachel A. Fleming–May, the authors analyzed and criticized the undue-weight policy (relative importance of a given source), and concluded that Wikipedia is not about providing correct and definitive information about a subject, [3] but instead presenting, as editorially dominant, the perspective taken by most authors of the sources for the article. This allegedly uneven application of the undue-weight policy creates omissions (of fact and of interpretation) that might give the reader false impressions about the subject matter, based upon the factually incomplete content of the Wikipedia article. [3] [4] [5]
Wikipedia is also sometimes characterized as having a hostile editing environment. In Common Knowledge?: An Ethnography of Wikipedia (2014), Dariusz Jemielniak , a steward for Wikimedia Foundation projects, stated that the complexity of the rules and laws governing editorial content and editors' behavior is a licence for the "office politics" of disruptive editors and drives away new, potentially constructive editors. [6] [7] In a follow-up article, "The Unbearable Bureaucracy of Wikipedia" (2014), Jemielniak said that abridging and rewriting the editorial rules and laws of Wikipedia for clarity of purpose and simplicity of application would resolve the bureaucratic bottleneck of too many rules. [6] [7] In "The Rise and Decline of an Open Collaboration System: How Wikipedia's Reaction to Popularity is Causing its Decline" (2013), Aaron Halfaker stated that the over-complicated rules and laws of Wikipedia unintentionally provoked the decline in editorial participation that began in 2009—frightening away new editors who otherwise would contribute to Wikipedia. [8]

Criticism of content
Wikipedia is described as unreliable at times. Edwin Black has characterized the editorial content of articles as a mixture of "truth, half-truth, and some falsehoods". [1] and Oliver Kamm has said that articles are usually dominated by the editors with the loudest and most persistent editorial voices (talk pages and edit summaries), usually by an interest group with an ideological "axe to grind" on the subject, topic, or theme of the article in question. [2]
Wikipedia articles on politics and ideology have also been criticized. Two works published in 2012 are critical of the undue-weight policy (relative importance of a given source), and concluded that, because the purpose of Wikipedia is not to provide correct and definitive information about a subject, [3] but to present, as the consensus opinion, the majority opinion advanced by the authors of the entry's sources. The uneven application of the undue-weight policy creates omissions (of fact and of interpretation) that might give the reader false impressions about the subject matter, based upon the incompleteness of the Wikipedia article. [3] [9] [5]
Wikipedia is sometimes characterized as having a hostile editing environment. In Common Knowledge?: An Ethnography of Wikipedia (2014), Dariusz Jemielniak , a steward for Wikimedia Foundation projects, stated that the complexity of the rules and laws governing editorial content and the behavior of the editors is a burden for new editors and a licence for the "office politics" of disruptive editors. [6] [10] In a follow-up article, Jemielniak said that abridging and rewriting the editorial rules and laws of Wikipedia for clarity of purpose and simplicity of application would resolve the bureaucratic bottleneck of too many rules. [10] In The Rise and Decline of an Open Collaboration System: How Wikipedia's Reaction to Popularity is Causing its Decline (2013), Aaron Halfaker stated that the over-complicated rules and laws of Wikipedia unintentionally provoked the decline in editorial participation that began in 2009—frightening away new editors who otherwise would contribute to Wikipedia. [8]
There have also been works that describe the possible misuse of Wikipedia. In "Wikipedia or Wickedpedia?" (2008), the Hoover Institution said that Wikipedia is an unreliable resource for correct knowledge, information, and facts about a subject, because, as an open source website, the editorial content of the articles is readily subjected to manipulation and propaganda . [11] The 2014 edition of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 's official student handbook, Academic Integrity at MIT , informs students that Wikipedia is not a reliable academic source, stating, "the bibliography published at the end of the Wikipedia entry may point you to potential sources. However, do not assume that these sources are reliable—use the same criteria to judge them as you would any other source. Do not consider the Wikipedia bibliography as a replacement for your own research ." [12]

Accuracy of information

Not authoritative
Wikipedia acknowledges that the encyclopedia should not be used as a primary source for research, either academic or informational. The British librarian Philip Bradley said that "the main problem is the lack of authority . With printed publications, the publishers have to ensure that their data are reliable, as their livelihood depends on it. But with something like this, all that goes out the window." [13] Likewise, Robert McHenry , editor-in-chief of Encyclopædia Britannica from 1992 to 1997, said that readers of Wikipedia articles cannot know who wrote the article they are reading—it might have been written by an expert in the subject matter or by an amateur. [14] In November 2015, Wikipedia co-founder Larry Sanger told Zach Schwartz in Vice : "I think Wikipedia never solved the problem of how to organize itself in a way that didn't lead to mob rule" and that since he left the project, "People that I would say are trolls sort of took over. The inmates started running the asylum." [15]

Comparative study of science articles
In "Internet Encyclopaedias Go Head-to-head", a 2005 article published in the Nature scientific journal, the results of a blind experiment (single-blind study), which compared the factual and informational accuracy of entries from Wikipedia and the Encyclopædia Britannica , were reported. The 42-entry sample included science articles and biographies of scientists, which were compared for accuracy by anonymous academic reviewers; they found that the average Wikipedia entry contained four errors and omissions, while the average Encyclopædia Britannica entry contained three errors and omissions. The study concluded that Wikipedia and Britannica were comparable in terms of the accuracy of its science entries". [17] Nevertheless, the reviewers had two principal criticisms of the Wikipedia science entries: (i) thematically confused content, without an intelligible structure (order, presentation, interpretation); and (ii) that undue weight is given to controversial, fringe theories about the subject matter. [18]
The dissatisfaction of the Encyclopædia Britannica editors led to Nature publishing additional survey documentation that substantiated the results of the comparative study. [19] Based upon the additional documents, Encyclopædia Britannica denied the validity of the study, stating it was flawed, because the Britannica extracts were compilations that sometimes included articles written for the youth version of the encyclopedia. [20] In turn, Nature acknowledged that some Britannica articles were compilations, but denied that such editorial details invalidated the conclusions of the comparative study of the science articles. [21]
The editors of Britannica also said that while the Nature study showed that the rate of error between the two encyclopedias was similar, the errors in a Wikipedia article usually were errors of fact, while the errors in a Britannica article were errors of omission. According to the editors of Britannica , Britannica was more accurate than Wikipedia in that respect. [20] Subsequently, Nature magazine rejected the Britannica response with a rebuttal of the editors' specific objections about the research method of the study. [22] [23]

Lack of methodical fact-checking
Inaccurate information that is not obviously false may persist in Wikipedia for a long time before it is challenged. The most prominent cases reported by mainstream media involved biographies of living people.
The Wikipedia Seigenthaler biography incident demonstrated that the subject of a biographical article must sometimes fix blatant lies about his own life. In May 2005, an anonymous user edited the biographical article on American journalist and writer John Seigenthaler so that it contained several false and defamatory statements. [24] [25] The inaccurate claims went unnoticed from May until September 2005 when they were discovered by Victor S. Johnson Jr. , a friend of Seigenthaler. Wikipedia content is often mirrored at sites such as Answers.com , which means that incorrect information can be replicated alongside correct information through a number of web sources. Such information can develop a misleading authority because of its presence at such sites. [26]
In another example, on March 2, 2007, MSNBC.com reported that then- New York Senator and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton had been incorrectly listed for 20 months in her Wikipedia biography as valedictorian of her class of 1969 at Wellesley College , when in fact she was not (though she did speak at commencement ). [27] The article included a link to the Wikipedia edit, [28] where the incorrect information was added on July 9, 2005. The inaccurate information was removed within 24 hours after the MSNBC.com report appeared. [29]
Attempts to perpetrate hoaxes may not be confined to editing existing Wikipedia articles, but can also include creating new articles. In October 2005, Alan Mcilwraith , a former call center worker from Scotland , created a Wikipedia article in which he wrote that he was a highly decorated war hero. The article was quickly identified as a hoax by other users and deleted. [30] [ better source needed ]
There have also been instances of users deliberately inserting false information into Wikipedia in order to test the system and demonstrate its alleged unreliability. Gene Weingarten , a journalist, ran such a test in 2007, in which he inserted false information into his own Wikipedia article; it was removed 27 hours later by a Wikipedia editor. [31] Wikipedia considers the deliberate insertion of false and misleading information to be vandalism . [32]

Neutral point of view and conflicts of interest
Wikipedia regards the concept of a neutral point of view as one of its non-negotiable principles; however, it acknowledges that such a concept has its limitations—its NPOV policy states that articles should be "as far as possible" written "without editorial bias". Mark Glaser, a journalist, also wrote that this may be an impossible ideal due to the inevitable biases of editors. [33]
In August 2007, a tool called WikiScanner—developed by Virgil Griffith, a visiting researcher from the Santa Fe Institute in New Mexico —was released to match edits to the encyclopedia by non-registered users with an extensive database of IP addresses . [34] News stories appeared about IP addresses from various organizations such as the Central Intelligence Agency , the National Republican Congressional Committee , the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee , Diebold, Inc. and the Australian government being used to make edits to Wikipedia articles, sometimes of an opinionated or questionable nature. Another story stated that an IP address from the BBC itself had been used to vandalize the article on George W. Bush . [35] The BBC quoted a Wikipedia spokesperson as praising the tool: "We really value transparency and the scanner really takes this to another level. Wikipedia Scanner may prevent an organisation or individuals from editing articles that they're really not supposed to." [36] Not everyone hailed WikiScanner as a success for Wikipedia. Oliver Kamm , in a column for The Times , argued instead that: [2]
WikiScanner only reveals conflicts of interest when the editor does not have a Wikipedia account and their IP address is used instead. Conflict of interest editing done by editors with accounts is not detected, since those edits are anonymous to everyone except some Wikipedia administrators . [37]

Scientific disputes
The 2005 Nature study also gave two brief examples of challenges that Wikipedian science writers purportedly faced on Wikipedia. The first concerned the addition of a section on violence to the schizophrenia article, which exhibited the view of one of the article's regular editors, neuropsychologist Vaughan Bell , that it was little more than a "rant" about the need to lock people up, and that editing it stimulated him to look up the literature on the topic. [17]
Another dispute involved the climate researcher William Connolley , a Wikipedia editor who was opposed by others. The topic in this second dispute was the greenhouse effect , and The New Yorker reported that this dispute, which was far more protracted, had led to arbitration , which took three months to produce a decision. The outcome of arbitration, as reported by Nature , was a six-month parole for Connolley, during which he was restricted to undoing edits on articles once per day. [38]

Exposure to political operatives and advocates
While Wikipedia policy requires articles to have a neutral point of view, it is not immune from attempts by outsiders (or insiders) with an agenda to place a spin on articles. In January 2006 it was revealed that several staffers of members of the U.S. House of Representatives had embarked on a campaign to cleanse their respective bosses' biographies on Wikipedia, as well as inserting negative remarks on political opponents. References to a campaign promise by Martin Meehan to surrender his seat in 2000 were deleted, and negative comments were inserted into the articles on United States Senator Bill Frist and Eric Cantor , a congressman from Virginia . Numerous other changes were made from an IP address assigned to the House of Representatives. [39] In an interview, Wikipedia de facto leader Jimmy Wales remarked that the changes were "not cool". [40]
Larry Delay and Pablo Bachelet wrote that from their perspective, some articles dealing with Latin American history and groups (such as the Sandinistas and Cuba ) lack political neutrality and are written from a sympathetic Marxist perspective which treats socialist dictatorships favorably at the expense of alternate positions. [41] [42] [43]
In 2008, the pro-Israel group Committee for Accuracy in Middle East Reporting in America (CAMERA) organized an e-mail campaign to encourage readers to correct perceived Israel-related biases and inconsistencies in Wikipedia. [44] CAMERA argued the excerpts were unrepresentative and that it had explicitly campaigned merely "toward encouraging people to learn about and edit the online encyclopedia for accuracy". [45] Defenders of CAMERA and the competing group, Electronic Intifada , went into mediation. [44] Israeli diplomat David Saranga said that Wikipedia is generally fair in regard to Israel. When it was pointed out that the entry on Israel mentioned the word "occupation" nine times, whereas the entry on the Palestinian People mentioned "terror" only once, he responded, "It means only one thing: Israelis should be more active on Wikipedia. Instead of blaming it, they should go on the site much more, and try and change it." [46]
Political commentator Haviv Rettig Gur, reviewing widespread perceptions in Israel of systemic bias in Wikipedia articles, has argued that there are deeper structural problems creating this bias: anonymous editing favors biased results, especially if the editors organize concerted campaigns of defamation as has been done in articles dealing with Arab-Israeli issues, and current Wikipedia policies, while well-meant, have proven ineffective in handling this. [47]
On August 31, 2008, The New York Times ran an article detailing the edits made to the biography of Alaska governor Sarah Palin in the wake of her nomination as the running mate of Arizona Senator John McCain . During the 24 hours before the McCain campaign announcement, 30 edits , many of them flattering details, were made to the article by Wikipedia single-purpose user identity Young_Trigg. [48] This person has later acknowledged working on the McCain campaign, and having several Wikipedia user accounts. [49]
In November 2007, libelous accusations were made against two politicians from southwestern France, Jean-Pierre Grand and Hélène Mandroux-Colas , on their Wikipedia biographies. Jean-Pierre Grand asked the president of the French National Assembly and the Prime Minister of France to reinforce the legislation on the penal responsibility of Internet sites and of authors who peddle false information in order to cause harm. [50] Senator Jean Louis Masson then requested the Minister of Justice to tell him whether it would be possible to increase the criminal responsibilities of hosting providers, site operators, and authors of libelous content; the minister declined to do so, recalling the existing rules in the LCEN law. [51]
On August 25, 2010, the Toronto Star reported that the Canadian "government is now conducting two investigations into federal employees who have taken to Wikipedia to express their opinion on federal policies and bitter political debates." [52]
In 2010, Al Jazeera 's Teymoor Nabili suggested that the article Cyrus Cylinder had been edited for political purposes by "an apparent tussle of opinions in the shadowy world of hard drives and 'independent' editors that comprise the Wikipedia industry." He suggested that after the Iranian presidential election, 2009 and the ensuing "anti-Iranian activities" a "strenuous attempt to portray the cylinder as nothing more than the propaganda tool of an aggressive invader" was visible. The edits following his analysis of the edits during 2009 and 2010, represented "a complete dismissal of the suggestion that the cylinder, or Cyrus' actions, represent concern for human rights or any kind of enlightened intent," in stark contrast to Cyrus ' own reputation as documented in the Old Testament and the people of Babylon. [53]

Commandeering or sanitizing articles
Articles of particular interest to an editor or group of editors are sometimes modified based on these editors' respective points of views. [54] Some companies and organizations—such as Sony , Diebold , Nintendo , Dell , the United States' Central Intelligence Agency , and the Church of Scientology —as well as individuals, such as United States Congressional staffers , were all shown to have modified the Wikipedia pages about themselves in order to present a point of view that describes them positively; these organizations may have editors who revert negative changes as soon as these changes are submitted. [55] [56]

Editing for financial rewards
In January 2007 Rick Jelliffe stated in a story carried by CBS [57] and IDG News Service [58] [59] that Microsoft had offered him compensation in exchange for his future editorial services on Wikipedia's articles related to OOXML (Office Open Extensible Markup Language). A Microsoft spokesperson, quoted by CBS, commented that "Microsoft and the writer, Rick Jelliffe, had not determined a price and no money had changed hands—but they had agreed that the company would not be allowed to review his writing before submission". Also quoted by CBS, Jimmy Wales expressed his disapproval of Microsoft's involvement: "We were very disappointed to hear that Microsoft was taking that approach".

Quality of the presentation

Quality of articles on U.S. history
In the essay, “Can History be Open Source?: Wikipedia and the Future of the Past” (2006), the academic historian Roy Rosenzweig criticized the encyclopedic content and writing style used in Wikipedia, for not distinguishing subjects that are important from subjects that are merely sensational. That Wikipedia is “surprisingly accurate in reporting names, dates, and events in U.S. history”, and that most of the factual errors he found “were small and inconsequential”, some of which “simply repeat widely held, but inaccurate, beliefs”, which are also repeated in the Microsoft Encarta encyclopedia and in the Encyclopædia Britannica ; yet Rosenzweig’s major criticism is that:
Rosenzweig also criticized the “waffling—encouraged by the [neutral point of view] policy—[which] means that it is hard to discern any overall interpretive stance in Wikipedia history [articles]”, and quoted the historical conclusion of the biography of William Clarke Quantrill , a Confederate guerrilla in the United States Civil War, as an example of weasel-word waffling:
In American National Biography Online , the historian James M. McPherson contrasted the content and writing style of Wikipedia's biography of United States President Abraham Lincoln to that of the U.S. Civil War article, and found that each entry was essentially accurate in covering the major episodes of President Lincoln’s life. The "richer contextualization" of McPherson's work, as well as "his artful use of quotations to capture Lincoln’s voice" and "his ability to convey a profound message in a handful of words," were contrasted with Wikipedia's history-article prose. The prose of the Wikipedia articles was "both verbose and dull" and thus difficult to read, because "the skill and confident judgment of a seasoned historian” are absent from the antiquarian writing style of Wikipedia, as opposed to the writing style used by professional historians in the American Heritage magazine. It was also mentioned that while Wikipedia usually provides many references, these are not the most accurate references. [60]

Quality of medical articles
In the article "Wikipedia Cancer Information Accurate," a study of medical articles, Yaacov Lawrence of the Kimmel Cancer Center of Thomas Jefferson University found that the cancer entries were mostly accurate. However, Wikipedia's articles were written in college-level prose, as opposed to in the easier-to-understand ninth-grade-level prose found in the Physician Data Query (PDQ) of the National Cancer Institute . According to Lawrence, "Wikipedia’s lack of readability may reflect its varied origins and haphazard editing.” [61]
In its 2007 article "Fact or Fiction? Wikipedia’s Variety of Contributors is Not Only a Strength," the magazine The Economist stated that the quality of the writing in Wikipedia articles usually indicates the quality of the editorial content: "Inelegant or ranting prose usually reflects muddled thoughts and incomplete information.” [62]

The Wall Street Journal
In the September 12, 2006, edition of The Wall Street Journal , Jimmy Wales debated with Dale Hoiberg , editor-in-chief of Encyclopædia Britannica . [63] Hoiberg focused on a need for expertise and control in an encyclopedia and cited Lewis Mumford that overwhelming information could "bring about a state of intellectual enervation and depletion hardly to be distinguished from massive ignorance." Wales emphasized Wikipedia's differences, and asserted that openness and transparency lead to quality. Hoiberg said that he "had neither the time nor space to respond to [criticisms]" and "could corral any number of links to articles alleging errors in Wikipedia", to which Wales responded: "No problem! Wikipedia to the rescue with a fine article", and included a link to the Wikipedia article about criticism of Wikipedia. [63]

Systemic bias in coverage
Wikipedia has been accused of systemic bias, which is to say its general nature leads, without necessarily any conscious intention, to the propagation of various prejudices. Although many articles in newspapers have concentrated on minor factual errors in Wikipedia articles, there are also concerns about large-scale, presumably unintentional effects from the increasing influence and use of Wikipedia as a research tool at all levels. In an article in the Times Higher Education magazine (London) philosopher Martin Cohen describes Wikipedia as having "become a monopoly" with "all the prejudices and ignorance of its creators," which he calls a "youthful cab-driver's" perspective. [64] Cohen concludes that "[t]o control the reference sources that people use is to control the way people comprehend the world. Wikipedia may have a benign, even trivial face, but underneath may lie a more sinister and subtle threat to freedom of thought ." [64] That freedom is undermined by what he sees as what matters on Wikipedia, "not your sources but the 'support of the community'." [64]
Researchers from Washington University developed a statistical model to measure systematic bias in the behavior of Wikipedia's users regarding controversial topics. The authors focused on behavioral changes of the encyclopedia's administrators after assuming the post, writing that systematic bias occurred after the fact. [65]
Critics also point to the tendency to cover topics in a detail disproportionate to their importance. For example, Stephen Colbert once mockingly praised Wikipedia for having a longer entry on ' lightsabers ' than it does on the ' printing press '. [66] In an interview with The Guardian , Dale Hoiberg, the editor-in-chief of Encyclopædia Britannica , noted: [13]
This critical approach has been satirised as "Wikigroaning", a term coined by Jon Hendren [67] of the website Something Awful . [68] In the game, two articles (preferably with similar names) are compared: one about an acknowledged, serious, or classical subject and the other about a popular or current one. [69] Defenders of a broad inclusion criteria have held that the encyclopedia's coverage of pop culture does not impose space constraints on the coverage of more serious subjects (see " Wiki is not paper "). As Ivor Tossell noted:
In 2014, supporters of holistic healing and energy psychology began a change.org petition asking for "true scientific discourse" on Wikipedia, complaining that "much of the information [on Wikipedia] related to holistic approaches to healing is biased, misleading, out-of-date, or just plain wrong". In response, Jimmy Wales said that Wikipedia only covers works that are published in respectable scientific journals. [71] [72]

Notability of article topics
Wikipedia's notability guidelines , which are used by editors to determine if a subject merits its own article, and the application thereof, are the subject of much criticism. [73] Nicholson Baker considers the notability standards arbitrary and essentially unsolvable: [74]
Criticizing the " deletionists ", Baker then writes: [73]
Another criticism about the deletionists is: "The increasing difficulty of making a successful edit; the exclusion of casual users; slower growth—all are hallmarks of the deletionists approach." [75]
Complaining that his own biography was on the verge of deletion for lack of notability, Timothy Noah argued that:
In the same article, Noah mentions that the Pulitzer Prize-winning writer Stacy Schiff was not considered notable enough for a Wikipedia entry before she wrote an extensive New Yorker article on Wikipedia itself.
A 2014 study found no correlation between characteristics of a given Wikipedia page about an academic and the academic's notability as determined by citation counts. The metrics of each Wikipedia page examined included length, number of links to the page from other articles, and number of edits made to the page. This study also found that Wikipedia did not cover notable ISI highly cited researchers properly. [77]

Partisanship
There have been suggestions that a politically liberal viewpoint is predominant . According to Jimmy Wales: "The Wikipedia community is very diverse, from liberal to conservative to libertarian and beyond. If averages mattered, and due to the nature of the wiki software (no voting) they almost certainly don't, I would say that the Wikipedia community is slightly more liberal than the U.S. population on average, because we are global and the international community of English speakers is slightly more liberal than the U.S. population. There are no data or surveys to back that." [78] Andrew Schlafly created Conservapedia because of his perception that Wikipedia contained a liberal bias. [79] Conservapedia's editors have compiled a list of alleged examples of liberal bias in Wikipedia. [80] In 2007, an article in The Christian Post criticised Wikipedia's coverage of intelligent design , saying that it was biased and hypocritical. [81] Lawrence Solomon of the National Review considered the Wikipedia articles on subjects like global warming , intelligent design , and Roe v. Wade all to be slanted in favor of liberal views. [82]
In a September 2010 issue of the conservative weekly Human Events , Rowan Scarborough presented a critique of Wikipedia's coverage of American politicians prominent in the approaching midterm elections as evidence of systemic liberal bias. [83] Scarborough compares the biographical articles of liberal and conservative opponents in Senate races in the Alaska Republican primary and the Delaware and Nevada general election, emphasizing the quantity of negative coverage of Tea Party -endorsed candidates. He also cites some criticism by Lawrence Solomon and quotes in full the lead section of Wikipedia's article on its rival Conservapedia as evidence of an underlying bias.
Shane Greenstein and Feng Zhu analyzed 2012 era Wikipedia articles on U.S. politics , going back a decade, and wrote a study [84] arguing the more contributors there were to an article, the less biased the article would be, and that — based on a study of frequent collocations — fewer articles "leaned Democrat" than was the case in Wikipedia's early years. [85] [86]

American and corporate bias
In 2008, Tim Anderson, a senior lecturer in political economy at the University of Sydney , said that Wikipedia administrators display an American-focused bias in their interactions with editors and their determinations of which sources are appropriate for use on the site. Anderson was outraged after several of the sources he used in his edits to the Hugo Chávez article, including Venezuela Analysis and Z Magazine , were disallowed as "unusable". Anderson also described Wikipedia's neutral point of view policy to ZDNet Australia as "a facade" and that Wikipedia "hides behind a reliance on corporate media editorials". [87]

Racial bias
Wikipedia has been criticized for having a systemic racial bias in its coverage, due to an under-representation of people of colour within its editor base. [88] The President of Wikimedia D.C. , James Hare, noted that "a lot of black history is left out" of Wikipedia, due to articles predominately being written by white editors. [89] Articles that do exist on African topics are, according to some critics, largely edited by editors from Europe and North America and thus reflect their knowledge and consumption of media, which "tend to perpetuate a negative image" of Africa. [90] Maira Liriano of the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture , has argued that the lack of information regarding black history on Wikipedia "makes it seem like it's not important." [91] San Francisco Poet Laureate Alejandro Murguía has stressed how it is important for Latinos to be part of Wikipedia "because it is a major source of where people get their information." [92]

Gender bias and sexism
Wikipedia has a longstanding controversy concerning gender bias and sexism. [94] [95] [96] [97] [98] [99] Gender bias on Wikipedia refers to the finding that between 84 and 91 percent of Wikipedia editors are male, [100] [101] which allegedly leads to systemic bias . [102] Wikipedia has been criticized [94] by some journalists and academics for lacking not only women contributors but also extensive and in-depth encyclopedic attention to many topics regarding gender. Sue Gardner , the former executive director of the foundation, said that increasing diversity was about making the encyclopedia "as good as it could be". Factors the article cited as possibly discouraging women from editing included the "obsessive fact-loving realm", associations with the "hard-driving hacker crowd", and the necessity to be "open to very difficult, high-conflict people, even misogynists." [95] In 2011, the Wikimedia Foundation set a goal of increasing the proportion of female contributors to 25 percent by 2015. [95] In August 2013, Gardner conceded defeat: "I didn't solve it. We didn't solve it. The Wikimedia Foundation didn't solve it. The solution won't come from the Wikimedia Foundation." [103] In August 2014, Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales acknowledged in a BBC interview the failure of Wikipedia to fix the gender gap and announced the Wikimedia Foundation 's plans for "doubling down" on the issue. Wales said the Foundation would be open to more outreach and more software changes. [104]

Sexual content
Wikipedia has been criticized for allowing graphic sexual content such as images and videos of masturbation and ejaculation as well as photos from hardcore pornographic films found on its articles. Child protection campaigners say graphic sexual content appears on many Wikipedia entries, displayed without any warning or age verification. [105]
The Wikipedia article Virgin Killer —a 1976 album from German heavy metal band Scorpions —features a picture of the album's original cover, which depicts a naked prepubescent girl. In December 2008, the Internet Watch Foundation , a nonprofit, nongovernment-affiliated organization, added the article to its blacklist, criticizing the inclusion of the picture as "distasteful". As a result, access to the article was blocked for four days by most Internet service providers in the United Kingdom. [106]
In April 2010, Larry Sanger , a co-founder of Wikipedia who had left the organization eight years previously, wrote a letter to the Federal Bureau of Investigation , outlining his concerns that two categories of images on Wikimedia Commons contained child pornography, and were in violation of United States federal obscenity law. Sanger also expressed concerns about access to the images on Wikipedia in schools. [107] Sanger later said that it was probably not correct to call it "child pornography", which most people associate with images of real children, and that he should have said "depictions of child sexual abuse". [108] Wikimedia Foundation spokesman Jay Walsh said that Wikipedia doesn't have "material we would deem to be illegal. If we did, we would remove it." [107] Following the complaint by Larry Sanger, Jimmy Wales deleted many sexual images without consulting the community; some were reinstated following discussion. [109] Critics, including Wikipediocracy , noticed that many of the sexual images deleted from Wikipedia since 2010 have reappeared. [110]

Exposure to vandals
As an online encyclopedia which almost anyone can edit, Wikipedia has long had problems with vandalism of articles, which range from "blanking" articles to inserting profanities, hoaxes or nonsense. Wikipedia has a range of tools available to users and administrators in order to fight against vandalism, including blocking and banning of vandals and automated bots that detect and repair vandalism. Supporters of the project argue that the vast majority of vandalism on Wikipedia is reverted within a short time, and a study by Fernanda Viégas of the MIT Media Lab and Martin Wattenberg and Kushal Dave of IBM Research found that most vandal edits were reverted within around five minutes; however they state that "it is essentially impossible to find a crisp definition of vandalism". [111] While most instances of page blanking or the addition of offensive material are soon reverted, less obvious vandalism, or vandalism to a little viewed article, has remained for longer periods.
A 2007 peer-reviewed study [112] that measured the actual number of page views with "damaged" content, concluded:

Privacy concerns
Most privacy concerns refer to cases of government or employer data gathering; or to computer or electronic monitoring; or to trading data between organizations. "The Internet has created conflicts between personal privacy, commercial interests and the interests of society at large" warn James Donnelly and Jenifer Haeckl. [113] Balancing the rights of all concerned as technology alters the social landscape will not be easy. It "is not yet possible to anticipate the path of the common law or governmental regulation" regarding this problem. [113]
The concern in the case of Wikipedia is the right of a private citizen to remain private; to remain a "private citizen" rather than a " public figure " in the eyes of the law. [114] It is somewhat of a battle between the right to be anonymous in cyberspace and the right to be anonymous in real life (" meatspace "). [ citation needed ] Wikipedia Watch argues that "Wikipedia is a potential menace to anyone who values privacy" and that "a greater degree of accountability in the Wikipedia structure" would be "the very first step toward resolving the privacy problem." [115] A particular problem occurs in the case of an individual who is relatively unimportant and for whom there exists a Wikipedia page against their wishes.
In 2005 Agence France-Presse quoted Daniel Brandt, the Wikipedia Watch owner, as saying that "the basic problem is that no one, neither the trustees of Wikimedia Foundation, nor the volunteers who are connected with Wikipedia, consider themselves responsible for the content." [116]
In January 2006, a German court ordered the German Wikipedia shut down within Germany because it stated the full name of Boris Floricic , aka "Tron", a deceased hacker who was formerly with the Chaos Computer Club . More specifically, the court ordered that the URL within the German .de domain ( http://www.wikipedia.de/ ) may no longer redirect to the encyclopedia's servers in Florida at http://de.wikipedia.org although German readers were still able to use the US-based URL directly, and there was virtually no loss of access on their part. The court order arose out of a lawsuit filed by Floricic's parents, demanding that their son's surname be removed from Wikipedia. [ citation needed ] On February 9, 2006, the injunction against Wikimedia Deutschland was overturned, with the court rejecting the notion that Tron's right to privacy or that of his parents were being violated. [117]

Criticism of the community

Role of Jimmy Wales
The community of Wikipedia editors has been criticized for placing an irrational emphasis on Jimmy Wales as a person. Wales's role in personally determining the content of some articles has also been criticized as contrary to the independent spirit that Wikipedia supposedly has gained. [118] [119] In early 2007, Wales dismissed the criticism of the Wikipedia model: "I am unaware of any problems with the quality of discourse on the site. I don't know of any higher-quality discourse anywhere." [120] [121] [122] [123] [124]

Conflict of interest cases
A Business Insider article wrote about a controversy in September 2012 where two Wikimedia Foundation employees were found to have been "running a PR business on the side and editing Wikipedia on behalf of their clients." [125]

Unfair treatment of female contributors
Some female editors have stated that they have been harassed by male editors. [126]
The English Wikipedia Arbitration Committee has been criticized as unfairly targeting female and feminist editors. [126]
In an article for Slate , David Auerbach criticized the decisions made by the Arbitration Committee, in a December 2014 case centered around the site's Gender Gap Task Force . Auerbach was critical of the committee's decision to permanently ban a female editor involved in the case, while not banning her male "chief antagonists", stating "With the Arbitration Committee opting only to ban the one woman in the dispute despite her behavior being no worse than that of the men, it's hard not to see this as a setback to Wikipedia's efforts to rectify its massive gender gap." [127]
In January 2015, The Guardian reported that the Arbitration Committee had banned five feminist editors from gender-related articles on a case related to the Gamergate controversy , while including quotes from a Wikipedia editor alleging unfair treatment. [128] [129] Other commentators, including from Gawker and ThinkProgress , provided additional analysis while sourcing from The Guardian ' s story. [129] [130] [131] [132] [133] Reports in The Washington Post , Slate and Social Text described these articles as "flawed" or factually inaccurate, pointing out that the Arbitration case had not concluded as at the time of publishing; no editor had been banned. [129] [134] [135] After the result was published, Gawker wrote that "ArbCom ruled to punish six editors who could be broadly classified as 'anti-Gamergate' and five who are 'pro-Gamergate'." All of the supposed "Five Horsemen" were among the editors punished, with one of them being the sole editor banned due to this case. [136] An article called "ArbitrationGate" regarding this situation was created (and quickly deleted) on Wikipedia, while The Guardian later issued a correction to their article. [129] The Committee and the Wikimedia Foundation issued press statements that the Gamergate case was in response to the atmosphere of the Gamergate article resembling a "battlefield" due to "various sides of the discussion [having] violated community policies and guidelines on conduct", and that the Committee was fulfilling its role to "uphold a civil, constructive atmosphere" on Wikipedia. The Committee also wrote that it "does not rule on the content of articles, or make judgements on the personal views of parties to the case". [134] [137] Michael Mandiberg , writing in Social Text , remained unconvinced. [135]

Lack of verifiable identities

Scandals involving administrators and arbitrators
David Boothroyd, a Wikipedia editor and a Labour Party ( United Kingdom ) member, created controversy in 2009, when Wikipedia Review contributor "Tarantino" discovered that he committed sockpuppeting , editing under the accounts "Dbiv", "Fys", and "Sam Blacketer", none of which acknowledged his real identity. After earning Administrator status with one account, then losing it for inappropriate use of the administrative tools, Boothroyd regained Administrator status with the Sam Blacketer sockpuppet account in April 2007. [ citation needed ] Later in 2007, Boothroyd's Sam Blacketer account became part of the English Wikipedia's Arbitration Committee. [ citation needed ] Under the Sam Blacketer account, Boothroyd edited many articles related to United Kingdom politics, including that of rival Conservative Party leader David Cameron . [138] [139] Boothroyd then resigned as an administrator and as an arbitrator. [140] [141]

Essjay controversy
In July 2006 The New Yorker ran a feature about Wikipedia by Stacy Schiff about a highly credentialed Wikipedia editor. [142] The initial version of the article included an interview with a Wikipedia administrator known by the pseudonym Essjay, who was described as a tenured professor of theology. [143] Essjay's Wikipedia user page, now removed, said the following:
Essjay also stated that he held four academic degrees: Bachelor of Arts in Religious Studies (B.A.), Master of Arts in Religion (M.A.R.), Doctorate of Philosophy in Theology (Ph.D.), and Doctorate in Canon Law (JCD). Essjay specialized in editing articles about religion on Wikipedia, including subjects such as "the penitential rite, transubstantiation, the papal tiara"; [142] on one occasion he was called in to give some "expert testimony" on the status of Mary in the Roman Catholic Church . [144] In January 2007, Essjay was hired as a manager with Wikia , a wiki-hosting service founded by Wales and Angela Beesley. In February, Wales appointed Essjay as a member of the Wikipedia Arbitration Committee , a group with powers to issue binding rulings in disputes relating to Wikipedia. [145]
In late February 2007 The New Yorker added an editorial note to its article on Wikipedia stating that it had learned that Essjay was Ryan Jordan, a 24-year-old college dropout from Kentucky with no advanced degrees and no teaching experience. [146] Initially Jimmy Wales commented on the issue of Essjay's identity: "I regard it as a pseudonym and I don't really have a problem with it." Larry Sanger , co-founder [147] [148] [149] of Wikipedia, responded to Wales on his Citizendium blog by calling Wales' initial reaction "utterly breathtaking, and ultimately tragic." Sanger said the controversy "reflects directly on the judgment and values of the management of Wikipedia." [150]
Wales later issued a new statement saying he had not previously understood that "EssJay used his false credentials in content disputes." He added: "I have asked EssJay to resign his positions of trust within the [Wikipedia] community." [151] Sanger responded the next day: "It seems Jimmy finds nothing wrong, nothing trust-violating, with the act itself of openly and falsely touting many advanced degrees on Wikipedia. But there most obviously is something wrong with it, and it's just as disturbing for Wikipedia's head to fail to see anything wrong with it." [152]
On March 4, Essjay wrote on his user page that he was leaving Wikipedia, and he also resigned his position with Wikia. [153] A subsequent article in The Courier-Journal ( Louisville ) suggested that the new résumé he had posted at his Wikia page was exaggerated. [154] The March 19, 2007 issue of The New Yorker published a formal apology by Wales to the magazine and Stacy Schiff for Essjay's false statements. [155]
Discussing the incident, the New York Times noted that the Wikipedia community had responded to the affair with "the fury of the crowd", and observed:
The Essjay incident received extensive media coverage, including a national United States television broadcast on ABC's World News with Charles Gibson [157] and the March 7, 2007, Associated Press story. [158] The controversy has led to a proposal that users who say that they possess academic qualifications should have to provide evidence before citing them in Wikipedia content disputes. [159] The proposal was not accepted. [160]

Anonymity
Wikipedia has been criticised for allowing editors to contribute anonymously (without a registered account and using an auto-generated IP -labeled account) or pseudonymously (using a registered account), with critics saying that this leads to a lack of accountability. [124] [161] This also sometimes leads to uncivil conduct in debates between Wikipedians. [124] [161] For privacy reasons, Wikipedia even forbids editors to reveal information about an anonymous editor on Wikipedia. [ citation needed ]

Editorial process

Level of debate, edit wars and harassment
The standard of debate on Wikipedia has been called into question by persons who have noted that contributors can make a long list of salient points and pull in a wide range of empirical observations to back up their arguments, only to have them ignored completely on the site. [162] An academic study of Wikipedia articles found that the level of debate among Wikipedia editors on controversial topics often degenerated into counterproductive squabbling:
In 2008, a team from the Palo Alto Research Center found that for editors that make between two and nine edits a month, the percentage of their edits being reverted had gone from 5% in 2004 to about 15%, and people who only make one edit a month were being reverted at a 25% rate. [164] According to The Economist magazine (2008), "The behaviour of Wikipedia's self-appointed deletionist guardians, who excise anything that does not meet their standards, justifying their actions with a blizzard of acronyms, is now known as "wiki-lawyering". [165] In regards to the decline in the number of Wikipedia editors since the 2007 policy changes, another study stated this was partly down to the way "in which newcomers are rudely greeted by automated quality control systems and are overwhelmed by the complexity of the rule system." [166]
Another complaint about Wikipedia focuses on the efforts of contributors with idiosyncratic beliefs , who push their point of view in an effort to dominate articles, especially controversial ones. [167] [168] This sometimes results in revert wars and pages being locked down. In response, an Arbitration Committee has been formed on the English Wikipedia that deals with the worst alleged offenders—though a conflict resolution strategy is actively encouraged before going to this extent. Also, to stop the continuous reverting of pages, Jimmy Wales introduced a "three-revert rule", whereby those users who reverse the effect of others' contributions to one article more than three times in a 24-hour period may be blocked. [ citation needed ]
In a 2008 article in The Brooklyn Rail , Wikipedia contributor David Shankbone contended that he had been harassed and stalked because of his work on Wikipedia, had received no support from the authorities or the Wikimedia Foundation, and only mixed support from the Wikipedia community. Shankbone wrote, "If you become a target on Wikipedia, do not expect a supportive community." [169]
David Auerbach , writing in Slate magazine, said:

Consensus and the "hive mind"
Oliver Kamm , in an article for The Times , said that Wikipedia's reliance on consensus in forming its content was dubious: [2]
Wikimedia advisor Benjamin Mako Hill also talked about Wikipedia's disproportional representation of viewpoints, saying:
Wikimedia steward Dariusz Jemielniak says:
In his article, " Digital Maoism: The Hazards of the New Online Collectivism " (first published online by Edge: The Third Culture , May 30, 2006), computer scientist and digital theorist Jaron Lanier describes Wikipedia as a "hive mind" that is "for the most part stupid and boring", and asks, rhetorically, "why pay attention to it?" His thesis says:
Lanier also says the economic trend to reward entities that aggregate information, rather than those that actually generate content. [ incomprehensible ] In the absence of "new business models", the popular demand for content will be sated by mediocrity, thus reducing or even eliminating any monetary incentives for the production of new knowledge. [173]
Lanier's opinions produced some strong disagreement. Internet consultant Clay Shirky noted that Wikipedia has many internal controls in place and is not a mere mass of unintelligent collective effort:

Excessive rule-making
Various figures involved with the Wikimedia Foundation have argued that Wikipedia's increasingly complex policies and guidelines are driving away new contributors to the site . Former chair Kat Walsh has criticized the project in recent years, saying, "It was easier when I joined in 2004... Everything was a little less complicated.... It's harder and harder for new people to adjust." [175] Top Wikipedia administrator Oliver Moran also views "policy creep" as the major barrier, writing that "the loose collective running the site today, estimated to be 90 percent male, operates a crushing bureaucracy with an often abrasive atmosphere that deters newcomers who might increase participation in Wikipedia and broaden its coverage". [176]
In his 2014 book, Common Knowledge?: An Ethnography of Wikipedia , Jemielniak, the Wikimedia steward, states similarly that the sheer complexity of the rules and laws governing content and editor behavior has become excessive and creates a learning burden for new editors. [6] [7] In a 2013 study, Aaron Halfaker of the University of Minnesota concluded the same thing. [8] Jemielniak suggests actively abridging and rewriting the rules and laws to fall within a fixed and reasonable limit of size and complexity to remedy their excessive complexity and size. [6] [7]

Social stratification
Despite the perception that the Wikipedia process is democratic, "a small number of people are running the show", [177] including administrators, bureaucrats, stewards, checkusers, mediators, arbitrators, and oversighters. [10] In an article on Wikipedia conflicts in 2007, The Guardian discussed "a backlash among some editors, who say that blocking users compromises the supposedly open nature of the project and the imbalance of power between users and administrators may even be a reason some users choose to vandalize in the first place" based on the experiences of one editor who became a vandal after his edits were reverted and he was blocked for edit warring. [178]

See also
WebPage index: 00026
Bomis
Bomis ( / ˈ b ɒ m ᵻ s / to rhyme with "promise") [14] was a dot-com company best known for supporting the creations of free-content online-encyclopedia projects Nupedia and Wikipedia . [8] It was founded in 1996 by Jimmy Wales , Tim Shell and Michael Davis . [15] [16] [17] Davis became acquainted with Wales after hiring him at Chicago Options Associates in 1994, [17] and Wales became friends with Shell through mailing lists discussing philosophy . [17] [18] The primary business of Bomis was the sale of advertising on the Bomis.com search portal. [19]
The company initially tried a number of ideas for content, including being a directory of information about Chicago . [20] The site subsequently focused on content geared to a male audience, including information on sporting activities, automobiles and women. [21] [22] [23] Bomis became successful after focusing on X-rated media. [24] "Bomis Babes" was devoted to erotic images; [5] the "Bomis Babe Report" featured adult pictures. [7] [12] Bomis Premium, available for an additional fee, provided explicit material . [4] [24] [25] "The Babe Engine" helped users find erotic content through a web search engine . [3] [8] [26] The advertising director for Bomis noted that 99 percent of queries on the site were for nude women. [27]
Bomis created Nupedia as a free online encyclopedia (with content submitted by experts) but it had a tedious, slow review process. [28] [29] Wikipedia was initially launched by Bomis to provide content for Nupedia, [11] [18] [30] and was a for-profit venture (a Bomis subsidiary) through the end of 2002. [31] As the costs of Wikipedia rose with its popularity, Bomis' revenues declined as result of the dot-com crash . [32] Since Wikipedia was a drain on Bomis' resources, Wales and philosophy graduate student Larry Sanger decided to fund the project as a charity ; [32] Sanger was laid off from Bomis in 2002. [33] Nupedia content was merged into Wikipedia, [34] and it ceased in 2003. [10]
The non-profit Wikimedia Foundation began in 2003 with a Board of Trustees composed of Bomis' three founders (Wales, Davis and Shell) [17] and was first headquartered in St. Petersburg, Florida , [35] Bomis' location. [36] Wales used about US$ 100,000 of revenue from Bomis to fund Wikipedia before the decision to shift the encyclopedia to non-profit status. [37] Wales stepped down from his role as CEO of Bomis in 2004. [38] Shell served as CEO of the company in 2005, while on the Wikimedia Foundation board of trustees. [1] Wales edited Wikipedia in 2005 to remove the characterizations of Bomis as providing softcore pornography , [18] [39] which attracted media attention; [25] [40] [41] Wales expressed regret for his actions. [18] [39] The Atlantic gave Bomis the nickname " Playboy of the Internet", [42] and the term caught on in other media outlets. [32] [43] [44] Scholars have described Bomis as a provider of softcore pornography. [30] [45]

History

Background
Jimmy Wales left a study track at Indiana University as a PhD candidate to work in finance before completing his doctoral dissertation . [29] [43] [46] In 1994 Wales was hired by Michael Davis , CEO of finance company Chicago Options Associates , as a trader [17] [47] [48] focusing on futures contracts and options . [47] [48] Wales was adept at determining future movements of foreign currencies and interest rates ; [29] [43] he was successful in Chicago , became independently wealthy, [29] [43] [47] and was director of research at Chicago Options Associates from 1994 to 2000. [49] [50] [51] He became acquainted with Tim Shell from email lists discussing philosophy. [17] [18]
Wales wanted to participate in the online-based entrepreneurial ventures which were increasingly popular and successful during the mid-1990s. [17] [44] His experience (from gaming in his youth) impressed on him the importance of networking. [44] Wales was interested in computer science , experimenting with source code on the Internet [28] and improving his skill at computer programming . [52] In his spare time after work at Chicago Options Associates, Wales constructed his own web browser . [18] While at the firm, he noted the successful 1995 initial public offering of Netscape Communications . [1] [28]

Foundation
Wales co-founded Bomis in 1996, with business associates Tim Shell, [4] [24] [31] and his then-manager Michael Davis, [15] [16] [17] as a for-profit corporation with joint ownership. [16] [53] [54] Wales was its chief manager. [55] In 1998 he moved from Chicago to San Diego to work for Bomis, [26] [56] [57] and then to St. Petersburg, Florida (where the company subsequently relocated). [36]
The staff at Bomis was originally about five employees. [16] [27] Its 2000 staff included programmer Toan Vo and system administrator Jason Richey; [16] Wales employed his high-school friend and best man in his second wedding, Terry Foote, [47] [48] as advertising director. [27] In June 2000, Bomis was one of five network partners of Ask Jeeves . [58] The majority of the revenue that came in to Bomis was generated through advertising. [59] The most successful time for Bomis was during its venture as a member of the NBC web portal NBCi; this collapsed at the end of the dot-com bubble . [59]
Although Bomis is not an acronym, the name stemmed from "Bitter Old Men in Suits" [60] (as Wales and Shell called themselves in Chicago). [17] [31] [61] The site began as a web portal , [24] [35] trying a number of ideas (including serving as an access point for information about Chicago). [20] [60] It later focused on male-oriented content, including information on sporting activities, automobiles and women. [21] [22] [23]

Hosted content
Working from the Open Directory Project , [66] Bomis created and maintained hundreds of webrings on topics related to lad culture . [42] In 1999 the company introduced the Bomis Browser, which helped users block online pop-up ads . [9] Its webring on Star Wars was considered a useful resource for information on Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace . [67] Additional webrings included sections helping users find information on Casablanca , [68] Hunter S. Thompson , [69] Farah Fawcett , [70] Geri Haliwell of the Spice Girls [71] and Snake Eyes . [72] "Bomis: The Buffy the Vampire Slayer Ring", devoted to Buffy the Vampire Slayer , organized over 50 sites related to the program. [73] Sheila Jeffreys noted in her Beauty and Misogyny that in 2004 Bomis maintained "The Lipstick Fetish Ring", which helped users with a particular attraction to women in makeup. [74]
Bomis became successful after it focused on X-rated and erotic media. [24] [75] Advertising generated revenue which enabled the company to fund other websites, [4] [19] [76] and the site published suggestive pictures of professional models . [77] In addition to Bomis the company maintained nekkid.com [40] and nekkid.info, [3] which featured pictures of nude women. [3] [78] About ten percent of Bomis' revenue was derived from pornographic films and blogs. [3] [56]
The website included a segment devoted to erotic images, "Bomis Babes", [5] [6] and a feature enabled users to submit recommended links to other sites appealing to a male audience. [46] Peer-to-peer services provided by the site helped users find other websites about female celebrities, including Anna Kournikova and Pamela Anderson . [44] In the Bomis Babes section was the Bomis Babe Report, begun in 2000, with pictures of porn stars [7] [12] [13] [61] in a blog format. [13] [47] [48] The Bomis Babe Report produced original erotic material, [1] [13] including reports on pornographic film actors and celebrities who had posed nude. [13] It was referred to as The Babe Report for short. [40]
Wales referred to the site's softcore pornography as "glamour photography", [36] [43] [45] [79] [80] and Bomis became familiar to Internet users for its erotic images. [81] [82] [83] During this period Wales was photographed steering a yacht with a peaked cap , posing as a sea captain with a female professional model on either side of him. In the photograph, the women were wearing panties and T-shirts advertising Bomis. [13] [59] [84]
A subscription section, Bomis Premium, [3] provided access to adult content and erotic material; [4] [24] [25] A three-day trial was US$2.95. [59] While Bomis Babes provided nude images of females to subscribers, [25] Bomis Premium featured lesbian sexual practices and female anatomy. [13] Bomis created the Babe Engine, [3] which helped users find erotic material online through a web search engine . [8] [26] According to Bomis advertising director Terry Foote, 99 percent of searches on the site related to nude women. [27]

Nupedia and Wikipedia
Bomis is best known for supporting the creation of free-content online-encyclopedia projects Nupedia and Wikipedia. [8] [19] Tim Shell and Michael David continued their partnership with Wales during the 2000 Nupedia venture. [15] Larry Sanger met Jimmy Wales through an e-mail communication group about philosophy and objectivism, [11] [20] [57] and joined Bomis in May 1999. [85] Sanger was a graduate student working towards a PhD degree in philosophy, with research focused on epistemology ; [20] [23] [86] he received his degree from Ohio State University , [87] moving to San Diego to help Bomis with its encyclopedia venture. [85] [88] At the time Sanger joined Bomis the company had a total workforce of two employees with help from programmers. [85]
Sanger and Wales began Nupedia with resources from Bomis; [8] at the beginning of 2000, the company agreed to provide early financing for Nupedia from its profits. [23] [45] [89] Nupedia went live in March, [7] [12] [12] when Wales was CEO of Bomis; [90] Sanger was Nupedia's editor-in-chief. [28] [91] Nupedia's reading comprehension was intended for high-school graduates, [92] and Bomis set its goal: "To set a new standard for breadth, depth, timeliness and lack of bias, and in the fullness of time to become the most comprehensive encyclopedia in the history of humankind." [85] [92]
Although Bomis began a search for experts to vet Nupedia articles, this proved tedious. [30] In August 2000 Nupedia had more than 60 academics contributing to the peer-review process on the site, most with doctor of philosophy or doctor of medicine degrees. [93] Scholars wishing to contribute to Nupedia were required to submit their credentials via fax for verification. [94] At that time, Bomis was attempting to obtain advertising revenue for Nupedia [93] and the company was optimistic that it could fund the project with ad space on Nupedia.com. [85]
Wikipedia began as a feature of Nupedia.com on January 15, 2001, [52] [95] later known as Wikipedia Day . [47] [90] It was originally intended only to generate draft articles for Nupedia, [11] [18] [30] with finished articles moved to the latter. [96] Wikipedia became a separate site days after the Nupedia advisory board opposed combining the two. [90] [95] In September 2001, Wales was simultaneously CEO of Bomis and co-founder of Wikipedia; [97] Sanger was chief organizer of Wikipedia and editor-in-chief of Nupedia. [33] [98]
Nupedia was encumbered by its peer-review system, [28] [29] a seven-step process [90] [96] of review and copyediting, [11] and Wikipedia grew at a faster rate. [35] [99] In November 2000, Nupedia had 115 potential articles awaiting its peer-review process. [85] [96] By September 2001, after a total investment of US$250,000 from Bomis, Nupedia produced 12 articles; [1] [94] [96] from 2000 through 2003, Nupedia contributors produced a total of 24 finalized articles. [18] [35] [90] Wikipedia had about 20,000 articles and 18 language versions by the end of 2001. [100]
Bomis originally planned to make Wikipedia profitable, [101] providing staffing and hardware for its initial structure; [35] Wikipedia would not have survived without this early support. [7] [12] Bomis provided web servers and bandwidth for the projects, owning key items such as domain names . [32] Wales used checks from Bomis to maintain the Wikipedia servers in Tampa, Florida . [3] [47] [48]
As the cost of Wikipedia rose with its popularity, Bomis' revenues declined as a result of the dot-com crash . [32] [52] In late 2000 Bomis had a staff of about 11 employees, but by early 2002 layoffs reduced the staff to its original size of about five. [16] Sanger was laid off in February 2002; [33] [61] from January 15, 2001 through March 1, 2002, he was the sole paid editor of Wikipedia. [33] Sanger stepped down from his dual roles as chief organizer of Wikipedia and editor-in-chief of Nupedia on March 1, 2002, feeling unable to commit to these areas on a volunteer basis [33] and a dearth of "the habit or tradition of respect for expertise" from high-ranking Wikipedia members. [10] He continued contributing to community discussions, optimistic about Wikipedia's future success. [61] [102]
After Sanger's departure, Wikipedia was managed by Wales and a burgeoning online community; [87] although he thought advertising a possibility, the Wikipedia community was opposed to business development [16] [42] [101] and Internet marketing was difficult at the end of 2002. [16] Wikipedia remained a for-profit venture (under the auspices of Bomis) through the end of 2002. [31] By then it had moved from a .com domain name to .org , [57] [100] and Wales said that the site would not accept advertising. [100] Material from Nupedia was folded into Wikipedia, [34] and by 2003 the former was discontinued. [10] [11]

Wikimedia Foundation Board of Trustees
By 2003 Wikipedia had grown to 100,000 articles in its English-language version, and it became difficult for Bomis to continue financially supporting the project. [103] With Wikipedia a drain on the company's resources, Wales and Sanger decided to fund the project on a non-profit basis. [32] Bomis laid off most of its employees to continue operating, since Wikipedia was not generating revenue. [31] The company owned Wikipedia from its creation through 2003, [7] [12] and Wales used about $100,000 of Bomis' revenue to fund Wikipedia before the decision to shift the encyclopedia to non-profit status. [37]
In June 2003 Wikipedia was transferred to a nascent non-profit organization, the Wikimedia Foundation , [7] [12] which was formed as a charitable institution to supervise Wikipedia and its associated wiki-based sites. [104] [105] When the foundation was established, its staff began to solicit public funding [104] and Bomis turned Wikipedia over to the non-profit. [61] All Bomis-owned hardware used to run Wikipedia-associated websites was donated to the Wikimedia Foundation, [35] and Wales transferred Wikipedia-related copyrights from Bomis to the foundation. [35] It was first headquartered in St. Petersburg, Florida , [35] where Bomis was located. [36] The foundation shifted Wikipedia's dependence away from Bomis, allowing it to purchase hardware for expansion. [106]
The Wikimedia Foundation Board of Trustees was initially composed of Bomis' three founders: Jimmy Wales and his two business partners, Michael Davis and Tim Shell. [17] [107] Shell and Davis were appointed to the board by Wales, [2] but after Wikipedia community members complained that the board was composed of appointed individuals, [17] the first elections were held in 2004. [35] Two community members, Florence Devouard and Angela Beesley, were elected to the Board of Trustees. [17]
In August 2004 Wales was chief executive officer of Bomis, [108] and on September 20 Wikipedia reached the million-article mark on an expenditure of $500,000 (most directly from Wales). [57] [94] In November 2004 he told the St. Petersburg Times he no longer controlled Bomis' day-to-day operations, but retained ownership as a shareholder. [38] In 2005, Tim Shell was CEO of Bomis and one of the board members overseeing Wikipedia. [1] Shell remained CEO of Bomis in 2006, becoming vice-president of the Wikimedia Foundation and continuing to serve on its board. [2] Bomis co-founder Michael Davis became treasurer of the Wikimedia Foundation that year. [2] Wales told The Sydney Morning Herald in 2007 that although he retained partial ownership of Bomis, "It's pretty much dead." [13] According to the Internet Archive , the Bomis website was last accessible with content in 2010; [109] when accessed in 2013 by the archive, it had a welcome message for PetaBox . [110]

Aftermath
In 2005, Wales made 18 changes to his Wikipedia biography. [25] [56] [111] He removed references to Bomis Babes as softcore pornography and erotica , [25] and Larry Sanger as co-founder of Wikipedia. [18] [39] Wales' actions were publicized by author Rogers Cadenhead , [5] [111] attracting attention from US and UK media. [a] In 2011, Time listed Wales' 2005 edits in its "Top 10 Wikipedia Moments". [111]
Wikipedia policy warned users not to edit their own biography pages, [5] [41] with its rules on autobiographical editing quoting Wales: "It is a social faux pas to write about yourself." [7] Larry Sanger said, "It does seem that Jimmy is attempting to rewrite history", [5] [25] and began a discussion on the talk page of Wales' biography about historical revisionism . [5]
Wales called his actions fixing mistakes, [18] but after Cadenhead publicized the edits to his biography he expressed regret for his actions. [8] [112] In The Times Wales said that individuals should not edit their own Wikipedia biographies, [25] telling The New Yorker that the standard applied to himself as well. [56] Wales warned that the activity should be discouraged because of the potential for bias: [25] "I wish I hadn't done it. It's in poor taste." [18] [39]
Bomis was called the "'Playboy' of the Internet" by The Atlantic , [42] and the sobriquet was adopted by other media outlets. [b] Wales considered the "'Playboy' of the Internet" nickname inappropriate, [114] although he was asked in interviews if his time at Bomis made him a "porn king". [26] [115] [116] The 2010 documentary film about Wikipedia, Truth in Numbers? , discussed this characterization of Wales by journalists. [115] [117] Wales, interviewed in the film, called the characterization inaccurate and explained that his company responded to content demand from customers. [c] In later interviews, he responded to "porn king" questions by telling journalists to look at a page on Yahoo! about pornography related to dwarfism . [26] According to a 2007 article in Reason , "If he was a porn king, he suggests, so is the head of the biggest Web portal in the world." [26]
On December 14, 2012, academic and writer Judith Reisman stated in a piece for WorldNetDaily that in her view Wales had received revenue from a website which dealt in pornography. [118] Relatively soon after the article was published, Wales wrote to WorldNetDaily to object to this characterization: "This is absolutely and categoricallly [sic] false. I have never made any 'fortune', as a pornography trafficker or otherwise, and I have never been a 'pornography trafficker' at all. ... I demand an immediate edit to that story to remove the lie about me." [59] WorldNetDaily editor Joseph Farah personally replied to Wales to explain that Wikipedia's coverage of the history of Bomis acknowledged at the time that: "Bomis ran a website called Bomis Premium at premium.bomis.com until 2005, offering customers access to premium, X-rated pornographic content." [59] Wales sent an email to Farah stating Wikipedia: "doesn't say anything remotely like me making a 'fortune' from 'pornography." [59] Wales inquired to Farah what he was going to do next about what Wales characterized as " libel ". [59] Farah responded to Wales' reply with a subsequent email asking: "Let me get this straight: You admit making money from pornography, but you feel defamed because you didn’t make enough for it to be considered a 'fortune'?" [59] Wales then repeated his original request to Farah and again asserted the original article was " defamatory ", writing in an email: "This is a defamatory falsehood. I have never made any 'fortune' as a 'porngraphy [sic] trafficker.' Fix it." [59]
WorldNetDaily published a correction on December 17, 2012, in the form of a new full article by journalist Chelsea Schilling which presented an analysis of the history of Bomis. [59] Schilling reported that WorldNetDaily had performed a search of archives of Bomis and found that the Bomis Premium feature had indeed advertised on its site that membership included access to naked pictures of models. [59] Schilling's article included historical screenshots of the appearance of the site when Bomis Premium was an active feature. [59] She cited a Wired article, and noted the prior history from 2005 of Wales's repeated attempts to remove references on Wikipedia to the term "pornography" in reference to Bomis. [59] In its final determination, Schilling reported that WorldNetDaily had modified the original article from stating Wales "made his original fortune as a pornography trafficker" to: "originally made his living off a website that earned revenue from pornography traffickers". [59]

Analysis
The Chronicle of Philanthropy characterized Bomis as "an Internet marketing firm... which also traded in erotic photographs for a while." [30] Jeff Howe wrote in his book, Crowdsourcing , about "one of Wales's less altruistic ventures, a Web portal called Bomis.com that featured, among other items, soft-core pornography." [45] In his book, The Future of the Internet—And How to Stop It , legal scholar Jonathan Zittrain wrote that "Bomis helped people find 'erotic photography', and earned money through advertising as well as subscription fees for premium content." [4] The Guardian described the site as on "the fringes of the adult entertainment industry", [79] and The Edge called Bomis.com an "explicit-content search engine". [104] Business 2.0 Magazine described it as "a search portal... which created and hosted Web rings around popular search terms – including, not surprisingly, a lot of adult themes." [50]

Footnotes

Notes

Bibliography

Further reading

External links
WebPage index: 00027
Richard Stallman
Richard Matthew Stallman (born March 16, 1953), often known by his initials, rms , [1] is an American software freedom activist and programmer . He campaigns for software to be distributed in a manner such that its users receive the freedoms to use, study, distribute and modify that software. Software that ensures these freedoms is termed free software . Stallman launched the GNU Project , founded the Free Software Foundation , developed the GNU Compiler Collection and GNU Emacs , and wrote the GNU General Public License .
Stallman launched the GNU Project in September 1983 to create a Unix-like computer operating system composed entirely of free software. [2] With this, he also launched the free software movement . He has been the GNU project's lead architect and organizer, and developed a number of pieces of widely used GNU software including, among others, the GNU Compiler Collection, [3] the GNU Debugger [4] and the GNU Emacs text editor. [5] In October 1985 [6] he founded the Free Software Foundation.
Stallman pioneered the concept of copyleft , which uses the principles of copyright law to preserve the right to use, modify and distribute free software, and is the main author of free software licenses which describe those terms, most notably the GNU General Public License (GPL), the most widely used free software license. [7]
In 1989 he co-founded the League for Programming Freedom . Since the mid-1990s, Stallman has spent most of his time advocating for free software, as well as campaigning against software patents , digital rights management , and other legal and technical systems which he sees as taking away users' freedoms. This has included software license agreements , non-disclosure agreements , activation keys , dongles , copy restriction , proprietary formats and binary executables without source code .
As of 2016 [update] , he has received fifteen honorary doctorates and professorships (see Honors and awards ).

Early life
Stallman was born to Alice Lippman, a school teacher, and Daniel Stallman, a printing press broker, in 1953 in New York City. Stallman had a difficult relationship with his parents, as his father had a drinking habit and verbally abused his stepmother. He later came to describe his parents as "tyrants". [8] He was interested in computers at a young age; when Stallman was a pre-teen at a summer camp, he read manuals for the IBM 7094 . [9] From 1967 to 1969, Stallman attended a Columbia University Saturday program for high school students. [9] Stallman was also a volunteer laboratory assistant in the biology department at Rockefeller University . Although he was interested in mathematics and physics , his teaching professor at Rockefeller thought he showed promise as a biologist. [10]
His first experience with actual computers was at the IBM New York Scientific Center when he was in high school. He was hired for the summer in 1970, following his senior year of high school, to write a numerical analysis program in Fortran . [9] He completed the task after a couple of weeks ("I swore that I would never use FORTRAN again because I despised it as a language compared with other languages") and spent the rest of the summer writing a text editor in APL [11] and a preprocessor for the PL/I programming language on the IBM System/360 . [12]

Harvard University and MIT
As a first-year student at Harvard University in fall 1970, Stallman was known for his strong performance in Math 55 . [13] He was happy: "For the first time in my life, I felt I had found a home at Harvard." [9]
In 1971, near the end of his first year at Harvard, he became a programmer at the MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory , and became a regular in the hacker community, where he was usually known by his initials, RMS (which was the name of his computer accounts). [1] [14] Stallman graduated from Harvard magna cum laude earning a bachelor's degree in Physics in 1974. [15]
Stallman considered staying on at Harvard, but instead he decided to enroll as a graduate student at MIT. He pursued a doctorate in physics for one year, but left that program to focus on his programming at the MIT AI Laboratory. [9] [12]
While working (starting in 1975) as a research assistant at MIT under Gerry Sussman , [12] Stallman published a paper (with Sussman) in 1977 on an AI truth maintenance system , called dependency-directed backtracking . [16] This paper was an early work on the problem of intelligent backtracking in constraint satisfaction problems . As of 2009 [update] , the technique Stallman and Sussman introduced is still the most general and powerful form of intelligent backtracking. [17] The technique of constraint recording , wherein partial results of a search are recorded for later reuse, was also introduced in this paper. [17]
As a hacker in MIT's AI laboratory, Stallman worked on software projects such as TECO , Emacs for ITS , and the Lisp machine operating system (the CONS of 1974–1976 and the CADR of 1977–1979—this latter unit was commercialized by Symbolics and LMI starting around 1980). [14] He would become an ardent critic of restricted computer access in the lab, which at that time was funded primarily by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency . When MIT's Laboratory for Computer Science (LCS) installed a password control system in 1977, Stallman found a way to decrypt the passwords and sent users messages containing their decoded password, with a suggestion to change it to the empty string (that is, no password) instead, to re-enable anonymous access to the systems. Around 20% of the users followed his advice at the time, although passwords ultimately prevailed. Stallman boasted of the success of his campaign for many years afterward. [18]

Events leading to GNU
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, the hacker culture that Stallman thrived on began to fragment. To prevent software from being used on their competitors' computers, most manufacturers stopped distributing source code and began using copyright and restrictive software licenses to limit or prohibit copying and redistribution. Such proprietary software had existed before, and it became apparent that it would become the norm. This shift in the legal characteristics of software can be regarded as a consequence triggered by the U.S. Copyright Act of 1976 , as stated by Stallman's MIT colleague Brewster Kahle . [19]
When Brian Reid in 1979 placed time bombs in the Scribe markup language and word processing system to restrict unlicensed access to the software, Stallman proclaimed it "a crime against humanity." [12] During an interview in 2008, he clarified that it is blocking the user's freedom that he believes is a crime, not the issue of charging for software. [20] Stallman's texinfo is a GPL replacement, loosely based on Scribe; [21] the original version was finished in 1986. [22]
In 1980, Stallman and some other hackers at the AI Lab were refused access to the source code for the software of a newly installed laser printer , the Xerox 9700 . Stallman had modified the software for the Lab's previous laser printer (the XGP, Xerographic Printer), so it electronically messaged a user when the person's job was printed, and would message all logged-in users waiting for print jobs if the printer was jammed. Not being able to add these features to the new printer was a major inconvenience, as the printer was on a different floor from most of the users. This experience convinced Stallman of people's need to be able to freely modify the software they use. [23]
Richard Greenblatt , a fellow AI Lab hacker, founded Lisp Machines, Inc. (LMI) to market Lisp machines , which he and Tom Knight designed at the lab. Greenblatt rejected outside investment, believing that the proceeds from the construction and sale of a few machines could be profitably reinvested in the growth of the company. In contrast, the other hackers felt that the venture capital -funded approach was better. As no agreement could be reached, hackers from the latter camp founded Symbolics , with the aid of Russ Noftsker , an AI Lab administrator. Symbolics recruited most of the remaining hackers including notable hacker Bill Gosper , who then left the AI Lab. Symbolics also forced Greenblatt to resign by citing MIT policies. While both companies delivered proprietary software, Stallman believed that LMI, unlike Symbolics, had tried to avoid hurting the lab's community. For two years, from 1982 to the end of 1983, Stallman worked by himself to clone the output of the Symbolics programmers, with the aim of preventing them from gaining a monopoly on the lab's computers. [18]
Stallman argues that software users should have the freedom to share with their neighbors and be able to study and make changes to the software that they use. He maintains that attempts by proprietary software vendors to prohibit these acts are antisocial and unethical. [24] The phrase "software wants to be free" is often incorrectly attributed to him, and Stallman argues that this is a misstatement of his philosophy. [25] He argues that freedom is vital for the sake of users and society as a moral value, and not merely for pragmatic reasons such as possibly developing technically superior software. [26] Eric S. Raymond , one of the creators of the open source movement , [27] argues that moral arguments, rather than pragmatic ones, alienate potential allies and hurt the end goal of removing code secrecy. [28]
In February 1984, Stallman quit his job at MIT to work full-time on the GNU project, which he had announced in September 1983. Since then, he has remained affiliated with MIT as an unpaid [29] visiting scientist in the Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. [30] Until "around 1998," he maintained an office at the Institute that doubled as his legal residence. [31]

GNU project
Stallman announced the plan for the GNU operating system in September 1983 on several ARPANET mailing lists and USENET . [32]
Stallman started the project on his own and describes: "As an operating system developer, I had the right skills for this job. So even though I could not take success for granted, I realized that I was elected to do the job. I chose to make the system compatible with Unix so that it would be portable, and so that Unix users could easily switch to it." [33]
In 1985, Stallman published the GNU Manifesto , which outlined his motivation for creating a free operating system called GNU, which would be compatible with Unix . [14] The name GNU is a recursive acronym for "GNU's Not Unix." [14] Soon after, he started a nonprofit corporation called the Free Software Foundation to employ free software programmers and provide a legal infrastructure for the free software movement. Stallman is the nonsalaried president of the FSF, which is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization founded in Massachusetts . [34] Stallman popularized the concept of copyleft , a legal mechanism to protect the modification and redistribution rights for free software. It was first implemented in the GNU Emacs General Public License, and in 1989 the first program-independent GNU General Public License (GPL) was released. By then, much of the GNU system had been completed.
Stallman was responsible for contributing many necessary tools, including a text editor ( Emacs ), compiler ( GCC ), debugger ( GNU Debugger ), and a build automator ( GNU make ). The notable omission was a kernel . In 1990, members of the GNU project began using Carnegie Mellon's Mach microkernel in a project called GNU Hurd , which has yet to achieve the maturity level required for full POSIX compliance.
In 1991, Linus Torvalds , a Finnish student, used the GNU's development tools to produce the free monolithic Linux kernel . The existing programs from the GNU project were readily ported to run on the resultant platform. Most sources use the name Linux to refer to the general-purpose operating system thus formed, while Stallman and the FSF call it GNU/Linux . This has been a longstanding naming controversy in the free software community. Stallman argues that not using GNU in the name of the operating system unfairly disparages the value of the GNU project and harms the sustainability of the free software movement by breaking the link between the software and the free software philosophy of the GNU project.
Stallman's influences on hacker culture include the name POSIX [35] and the Emacs editor. On Unix systems, GNU Emacs's popularity rivaled that of another editor vi , spawning an editor war . Stallman's take on this was to canonize himself as St. IGNUcius of the Church of Emacs [36] [37] and acknowledge that "vi vi vi is the editor of the beast ," while "using a free version of vi is not a sin ; it is a penance ". [38]
In 1992, developers at Lucid Inc. doing their own work on Emacs clashed with Stallman and ultimately forked the software into what would become XEmacs . [39] Technology journalist Andrew Leonard has characterized what he sees as Stallman's uncompromising stubbornness as common among elite computer programmers:

Activism
Stallman has written many essays on software freedom, and has been an outspoken political campaigner for the free software movement since the early 1990s. [14] The speeches he has regularly given are titled The GNU Project and the Free Software Movement , [41] The Dangers of Software Patents , [42] and Copyright and Community in the Age of Computer Networks . [43] In 2006 and 2007, during the eighteen month public consultation for the drafting of version 3 of the GNU General Public License, he added a fourth topic explaining the proposed changes. [44]
Linus Torvalds has criticized Stallman for what he considers "black-and-white thinking." [45]
Stallman's staunch advocacy for free software inspired the creation of the Virtual Richard M. Stallman ( vrms ), software that analyzes the packages currently installed on a Debian GNU/Linux system, and reports those that are from the non-free tree. [46] Stallman disagrees with parts of Debian's definition of free software. [47]
In 1999, Stallman called for development of a free online encyclopedia through the means of inviting the public to contribute articles. [48] The resulting GNUPedia was eventually retired in favour of the emerging Wikipedia , which had similar aims and was enjoying greater success. [49]
Stallman is a world traveler and has visited at least 65 countries, mostly to speak about free software and the GNU project. [50] According to Stallman, the free software movement has much in common with that of Mahatma Gandhi . [51]
In Venezuela , Stallman has delivered public speeches and promoted the adoption of free software in the state's oil company ( PDVSA ), in municipal government, and in the nation's military. In meetings with Hugo Chávez and in public speeches, Stallman criticised some policies on television broadcasting, free speech rights, and privacy. [52] [53] Stallman was on the Advisory Council of Latin American television station teleSUR from its launch [54] but resigned in February 2011, criticizing pro-Gaddafi propaganda during the Arab Spring . [55]
In August 2006, at his meetings with the government of the Indian State of Kerala , he persuaded officials to discard proprietary software, such as Microsoft's, at state-run schools. This has resulted in a landmark decision to switch all school computers in 12,500 high schools from Windows to a free software operating system. [56]
After personal meetings, Stallman obtained positive statements about the free software movement from the then-president of India, Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam , [57] French 2007 presidential candidate Ségolène Royal , [58] and the president of Ecuador Rafael Correa . [59]
On November 30, 2012, Stallman gave the opening lecture at the Goiano Free Software Forum in Brazil, talking about successful cases of switching to free software in government, business and at universities. [60]
Stallman has participated in protests about software patents, [61] DRM , [62] [63] and proprietary software .
Protesting against proprietary software in April 2006, Stallman held a "Don't buy from ATI , enemy of your freedom" placard at a speech by an ATI representative in the building where Stallman worked, resulting in the police being called. [64] ATI has since merged with AMD Corporation and has taken steps to make their hardware documentation available for use by the free software community. [65]
In response to Apple 's Macintosh look and feel lawsuits against Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard in 1988, Stallman called for a boycott of Apple products on the grounds that a successful look-and-feel lawsuit would "put an end to free software that could substitute for commercial software". [66] The boycott was lifted in 1995, which meant the FSF started to accept patches to GNU software for Apple operating systems. [67]
Stallman has characterized Steve Jobs as having a "malign influence" on computing because of Jobs' leadership in guiding Apple to produce closed platforms . [68] [69] In 1993, while Jobs was at NeXT , Jobs asked Stallman if he could distribute a modified GCC in two parts, one part under GPL and the other part, an Objective-C preprocessor under a proprietary license. Stallman initially thought this would be legal, but since he also thought it would be "very undesirable for free software", he asked a lawyer for advice. The response he got was that judges would consider such schemes to be "subterfuges" and would be very harsh toward them, and a judge would ask whether it was "really" one program, rather than how the parts were labeled. Therefore, Stallman sent a message back to Jobs which said they believed Jobs' plan was not allowed by the GPL, which resulted in NeXT releasing the Objective-C front end under GPL. [70]
Commenting on Jobs' death, he said
Stallman's remark stirred up accusations of being in bad taste, while Eric S. Raymond , author of The Cathedral and the Bazaar , observed that Stallman's statement was not personal, but was simply criticizing walled gardens . [68]
For a period of time, Stallman used a notebook from the One Laptop per Child program. Stallman's computer is a refurbished ThinkPad X60 with Libreboot , a free BIOS replacement, and the GNU/Linux distribution Trisquel . [71] Before the ThinkPad, Stallman used the Lemote Yeeloong netbook (using the same company's Loongson processor) which he chose because, like the X60, it could run with free software at the BIOS level, stating "freedom is my priority. I've campaigned for freedom since 1983, and I am not going to surrender that freedom for the sake of a more convenient computer." [72] Stallman's Lemote was stolen from him in 2012 while in Argentina . [73] Before Trisquel, Stallman has used the gNewSense operating system. [74] [75]

Copyright reduction
Stallman has regularly given a talk entitled "Copyright vs. Community" where he reviews the state of DRM and names many of the products and corporations which he boycotts. His approach to DRM is best summed up by the FSF Defective by Design campaign. In the talks, he makes proposals for a "reduced copyright" and suggests a 10-year limit on copyright. He suggests that, instead of restrictions on sharing, authors be supported using a tax, with revenues distributed among them based on cubic roots of their popularity to ensure that "fairly successful non-stars" receive a greater share than they do now (compare with private copying levy which is associated with proponents of strong copyright), or a convenient anonymous micropayment system for people to support authors directly. He indicates that no form of non-commercial sharing of copies should be considered a copyright violation. [76] [77] He has advocated civil disobedience in a comment on Ley Sinde . [77] [78]
Stallman has also helped and supported the International Music Score Library Project in getting back on-line, after it had been taken down on October 19, 2007 following a cease and desist letter from Universal Edition . [79]
Stallman mentions the dangers some e-books bring compared to paper books, with the example of the Amazon Kindle e-reader that prevents the copying of e-books and allows Amazon to order automatic deletion of a book. He says that such e-books present a big step backward with respect to paper books by being less easy to use, copy, lend to others or sell, also mentioning that Amazon e-books cannot be bought anonymously. His short story " The Right to Read " provides a picture of a dystopian future if the right to share books is impeded. He objects to many of the terms within typical end-user license agreements that accompany e-books. [77] [79] [80]
Stallman discourages the use of several storage technologies such as DVD or Blu-ray video discs because the content of such media is encrypted. He considers manufacturers' use of encryption on non-secret data ( to force the user to view certain promotional material ) as a conspiracy. [81]
He recognized the Sony BMG copy protection rootkit scandal to be a criminal act by Sony. Stallman supports a general boycott of Sony for its legal actions against George Hotz . [82]
Stallman has suggested that the United States government may encourage the use of software as a service because this would allow them to access users' data without needing a search warrant . [83] [84] [85] [86]

Surveillance resistance
Stallman professes admiration for whistleblowers Julian Assange [87] and Edward Snowden ; [88] he advocates for Snowden in a prefix at the beginning of each of his emails, which can be found in several mailing lists, after Snowden leaked the PRISM scandal in 2013:

Terminology
Stallman places great importance on the words and labels people use to talk about the world, including the relationship between software and freedom. He asks people to say, free software and GNU/Linux , and to avoid the terms intellectual property and piracy (in relation to copyright). One of his criteria for giving an interview to a journalist is that the journalist agree to use his terminology throughout the article. [89] He has been known to turn down speaking requests over some terminology issues. [90]
Stallman argues that the term "intellectual property" is designed to confuse people, and is used to prevent intelligent discussion on the specifics of copyright , patent, trademark, and other laws by lumping together areas of law that are more dissimilar, than similar. [91] He also argues that by referring to these laws as property laws, the term biases the discussion when thinking about how to treat these issues.
An example of cautioning others to avoid other terminology while also offering suggestions for possible alternatives is this sentence of an e-mail by Stallman to a public mailing list:

Rejections

Open source for free software
His requests that people use certain terms, and his ongoing efforts to convince people of the importance of terminology, are a source of regular misunderstanding and friction with parts of the free software and open source communities .
After initially accepting the concept, [94] Stallman rejects a common alternative term , open source software , because it does not call to mind what Stallman sees as the value of the software: freedom . [95]
Thus, he believes that the use of the term will not inform people of the freedom issues, and will not lead to people valuing and defending their freedom. [97] Two alternatives which Stallman does accept are software libre and unfettered software , but free software is the term he asks people to use in English. For similar reasons, he argues for the term " proprietary software " rather than " closed source software ", when referring to software that is not free software.

Linux for the GNU Project
Stallman asks that the term GNU/Linux, which he pronounces "GNU slash Linux", be used to refer to the operating system created by combining the GNU system and the Linux kernel. Stallman refers to this operating system as "a variant of GNU, and the GNU Project is its principal developer." [90] He claims that the connection between the GNU project's philosophy and its software is broken when people refer to the combination as merely, Linux. [98] Starting around 2003, he began also using the term GNU+Linux, which he pronounces "GNU plus Linux", to prevent others from pronouncing the phrase "GNU/Linux" as "GNU Linux", which would erroneously imply that the Linux kernel is maintained by the GNU project. [ citation needed ]

Personal life
Stallman has said that he is "an atheist of Jewish ancestry" [99] and often wears a button that reads "Impeach God". [13] [100] He denies being an anarchist despite his wariness of some legislation and the fact that he has "advocated strongly for user privacy and his own view of software freedom". [101]
Stallman refers to mobile phones as "portable surveillance and tracking devices ", [102] and says he refuses to own a cell phone until there's one that runs entirely on free software. [103] He also avoids using a key card to enter his office building [50] since key card systems track each location and time that someone enters the building using a card. According to Stallman, with the exception of a few sites, such as his own website or sites related to his work with GNU and the FSF, he usually does not browse the web directly from his personal computer in order to prevent being connected with his browsing history. Instead, he uses wget or similar programs that fetch content from web servers and then send the content to his email. [71] [104] More recently he stated that he accesses all web sites other than Wikipedia via Tor . [105] [106]

 Honors and awards
Stallman has received recognition for his work, including:

Selected publications

See also
WebPage index: 00028
Yongle Encyclopedia
The Yongle Encyclopedia or Yongle Dadian ( simplified Chinese : 永乐大典 ; traditional Chinese : 永樂大典 ; pinyin : Yǒnglè Dàdiǎn ; Wade–Giles : Yung-lo Ta-tien ; literally: "Great Canon of Yongle") was a Chinese leishu encyclopedia commissioned by the Yongle Emperor of the Ming dynasty in 1403 and completed by 1408. Its sheer scope and size made it the world's largest paper-based general encyclopedia. [1]

Development
The Yongle Dadian was commissioned by the Yongle Emperor (r. 1402–24) and completed in 1408. 2,169 scholars spent four years compiling the leishu encyclopedia, under the leadership of general editor Yao Guangxiao (姚廣孝). [2]
The scholars incorporated 8,000 texts from ancient times through the early Ming dynasty . Many subjects were covered, including agriculture , art , astronomy , drama , geology , history , literature , medicine , natural sciences , religion and technology , as well as descriptions of unusual natural events. [3]
The encyclopedia was completed in 1408 [4] at the Guozijian in Nanjing (now Nanjing University ). It comprised 22,937 manuscript rolls [4] or chapters, in 11,095 volumes, occupying roughly 40 cubic meters (1400 ft 3 ), and using 370 million Chinese characters . [3] [5] It was designed to include all that had been written on the Confucian canon , as well as all history, philosophy, arts and sciences. It was a massive collation of excerpts and works from the entirety of Chinese literature and knowledge.

Disappearance
The Yongle Dadian was not printed for the general public, because the treasury had run out of funds when it was completed in 1408. In 1557, during the reign of the Jiajing Emperor , the encyclopedia was narrowly saved from a fire that burnt down three palaces in the Forbidden City . A manuscript copy was made in 1567. [2]
The original manuscript of the Yongle Dadian was almost completely lost by the end of the Ming dynasty, [2] but 90 percent of the 1567 manuscript survived until the Second Opium War in the Qing dynasty . In 1860, the Anglo-French invasion of Beijing resulted in extensive burning and looting of the city, [6] with the British and French soldiers taking large portions of the manuscript as souvenirs. [2] 5,000 volumes remained by 1875, less than half of the original, which dwindled to 800 by 1894. During the Boxer Rebellion and the 1900 Eight-Nation Alliance occupation of Beijing , allied soldiers took hundreds of volumes, and many were destroyed in the Hanlin Academy fire. Only 60 volumes remained in Beijing. [2]

Current status
Fewer than 400 volumes survive today, [3] comprising about 800 chapters (rolls), or 3.5 percent of the original work. [6] The most complete collection is kept at the National Library of China in Beijing, which holds 221 volumes. [3] The next largest collection is at the National Palace Museum in Taipei , Taiwan which holds 62 volumes. [7]
51 volumes are in the United Kingdom held at the British Library , the Bodleian Library in Oxford , the School of Oriental and African Studies of the University of London , and Cambridge University Library ; The Library of Congress of the United States holds 41 volumes; Cornell University Library has 6 volumes; and 5 volumes are held in various libraries in Germany . [8]

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00029
King Juan Carlos University
King Juan Carlos University ( Spanish : Universidad Rey Juan Carlos , URJC ) is a Spanish public research university located in the Southern area of the Community of Madrid ( Spain ), with four campuses at Móstoles , Alcorcón , Vicálvaro and Fuenlabrada .
It is named after king Juan Carlos I of Spain . It was established in 1996 and has the Latin motto Non nova, sed nove ("Not new things, but in a new way").
With 37,939 students, it is the second biggest public university in the Community of Madrid. [2] URJC is one of 8 universities in the Community of Madrid, and it is the second newest university in the Community.

Studies
King Juan Carlos University offers a range of degrees, all adapted to the European Higher Education Area . This includes 64 undergraduate degrees, 44 dual degrees, 6 English-taught degrees, 6 university degrees on-line, 18 diplomas, 8 Engineering degrees, as well as a wide range of official master’s (81), doctoral programs and their own degrees and training (34), all related to the areas of Health Sciences, Experimental Sciences and Technology, Communication Sciences, and Law and Social Sciences. King Juan Carlos University has four campuses in Madrid , Fuenlabrada , Móstoles and Vicálvaro , and a Foundation headquartered on Madrid’s Plaza de Manuel Becerra.

Campus
The URJC is divided into four campuses. Each campus is composed of one or more schools:
Each school or college is governed by a Dean or School Director, and is divided into academic departments.
Affiliated centers:
Colleges:
University Centers:
King Juan Carlos University organizes its Summer courses in Aranjuez .

Academic programs
Studies include: Computer Science , Telecommunication Engineering , Chemical engineering , Environmental Science , Odontology , Medicine , Nursing , Physiotherapy , Audiovisual Communication , Telecommunications , Tourism , Journalism , Law , Economy , Business Administration and Management , Sociology , History , Accounting and Finance , Marketing , Food Science and Technology , Biology , Odontology , Psychology , Preschool Education , International Relations , Visual Arts and Dance , Criminology ,among others.

Gallery

Controversies
Fernando Suárez Bilbao , president of the Rey Juan Carlos University until early 2017 has committed extensive plagiarism in his academic publications, and nonetheless maintained almost unanimous support from the faculty. [3] His hand-picked successor, dean of the telecommunication school Javier Ramos, was then found to have illegally run a business without seeking permission from the university. [4]

Honorary doctorates
In 2007 Juan Velarde Fuertes, Iñaki Gabilondo , Luis del Olmo and Antonio Mingote were awarded a Honorary Doctorate from King Juan Carlos University. In January 2008, Bernardo Kliksberg became the first foreigner to receive an honorary doctorate degree from the university with Jaime Gil Aluja, José Antonio Pastor Ridruejo and Fernando Sánchez Calero. In 2011 Honorary doctorate was awarded to Harald zur Hausen , Ramón Tamames and Peter Waldmann. [5]
In 2014 James A. Yorke , distinguished University Professor of Mathematics and Physics at the University of Maryland and recipient of the 2003 Japan Prize in Science and Technology, was awarded an Honorary Doctorate from King Juan Carlos University. [6] Prof. Yorke, is worldwide known for the definition of the mathematical term chaos in 1975.
WebPage index: 00030
New York (magazine)
New York is a bi-weekly magazine concerned with life, culture, politics, and style generally, and with a particular emphasis on New York City . Founded by Milton Glaser and Clay Felker in 1968 as a competitor to The New Yorker , it was brasher and less polite, and established itself as a cradle of New Journalism . [2] Over time, it became more national in scope, publishing many noteworthy articles on American culture by writers such as Tom Wolfe , Jimmy Breslin , Nora Ephron , John Heilemann , Frank Rich , and Rebecca Traister .
In its current incarnation under editor-in-chief Adam Moss , "The nation's best and most-imitated city magazine is often not about the city—at least not in the overcrowded, traffic-clogged, five-boroughs sense", wrote then Washington Post media critic Howard Kurtz , as the magazine has increasingly published political and cultural stories of national significance. [3]
Since its redesign and relaunch in 2004, the magazine has won more National Magazine Awards than any other publication, which includes the 2013 award for Magazine of the Year. [4] It was one of the first dual-audience " lifestyle magazines ", and its format and style have been emulated by some other American regional city publications.
In 2009, its paid and verified circulation was 408,622, with 95.8% of that coming from subscriptions. Its websites—NYmag.com, Vulture.com, The Cut, and Grub Street—receive visits from more than 14 million users per month. [5]

History

1960s
New York began life in 1963 as the Sunday-magazine supplement of the New York Herald Tribune newspaper. Edited first by Sheldon Zalaznick and then by Clay Felker , the magazine showcased the work of several talented Tribune contributors, including Tom Wolfe , Barbara Goldsmith , and Jimmy Breslin . [6] Soon after the Tribune went out of business in 1966–67, Felker and his partner, Milton Glaser , purchased the rights with money loaned to them by C. Gerald Goldsmith (Barbara Goldsmith's husband at the time), and reincarnated the magazine as a stand-alone glossy. Joining them was managing editor Jack Nessel, Felker's number-two at the Herald Tribune. New York' s first issue was dated April 8, 1968. [7] Among the by-lines were many familiar names from the magazine's earlier incarnation, including Breslin, Wolfe (who wrote Tell if You're a Honk or a Wonk in the inaugural issue [8] ), and George Goodman , a financial writer who wrote as " Adam Smith ."
Within a year, Felker had assembled a team of contributors who would come to define the magazine's voice. Breslin became a regular, as did Gloria Steinem , who wrote the city-politics column, and Gail Sheehy . (Sheehy would eventually marry Felker, in 1984.) Harold Clurman was hired as the theater critic. Judith Crist wrote movie reviews. Alan Rich covered the classical-music scene. Barbara Goldsmith was a Founding Editor of New York magazine and the author of the widely imitated series, "The Creative Environment," in which she interviewed such subjects as Marcel Breuer , I. M. Pei , George Balanchine , and Pablo Picasso about their creative process. Gael Greene , writing under the rubric "The Insatiable Critic," reviewed restaurants , cultivating a baroque writing style that leaned heavily on sexual metaphor . [ citation needed ] Woody Allen contributed a few stories for the magazine in its early years. The magazine's regional focus and innovative illustrations inspired numerous imitators across the country. [6] The office for the magazine was on the top floor of the old Tammany Hall clubhouse at 207 East 32nd Street, which Glaser owned. [9]

1970s
Wolfe, a regular contributor to the magazine, wrote a story in 1970 that captured the spirit of the magazine (if not the age): " Radical Chic : That Party at Lenny's". The article described a benefit party for the Black Panthers , held in Leonard Bernstein 's apartment, in a collision of high culture and low that paralleled New York magazine's ethos. In 1972, New York also launched Ms. magazine, which began as a special issue. [6] New West , a sister magazine on New York 's model that covered California life, was also published for a few years in the 1970s.
As the 1970s progressed, Felker continued to broaden the magazine's editorial vision beyond Manhattan, covering Richard Nixon and the Watergate scandal closely. In 1976, journalist Nik Cohn contributed a story called " Tribal Rites of the New Saturday Night ," about a young man in a working-class Brooklyn neighborhood who, once a week, went to a local disco called Odyssey 2001; the story was a sensation and served as the basis for the film Saturday Night Fever . Twenty years later, Cohn admitted that he'd done no more than drive by Odyssey's door, and that he'd made the rest up. [10] It was a recurring problem of what Wolfe, in 1972, had labeled "The New Journalism ."
In 1976, the Australian media baron Rupert Murdoch bought the magazine in a hostile takeover , forcing Felker and Glaser out. [11] A succession of editors followed, including Joe Armstrong and John Berendt .

1980s
In 1980, Murdoch hired Edward Kosner, who had worked at Newsweek . Murdoch also bought Cue , a listings magazine created by Mort Glankoff , that had covered the city since 1932, and folded it into New York , simultaneously creating a useful going-out guide and eliminating a competitor. [12] Kosner's magazine tended toward a mix of newsmagazine-style stories, trend pieces, and pure "service" features—long articles on shopping and other consumer subjects—as well as close coverage of the glitzy 1980s New York City scene epitomized by financiers Donald Trump and Saul Steinberg . The magazine was profitable for most of the 1980s. [ citation needed ] The term "the Brat Pack " was coined for a 1985 story in the magazine. [13]

1990s
Murdoch got out of the magazine business in 1991 by selling his holdings to K-III Communications , a partnership controlled by financier Henry Kravis .
In 1993, budget pressure from K-III frustrated Kosner, and he left for Esquire magazine. After several months' search, during which the magazine was run by managing editor Peter Herbst, K-III hired Kurt Andersen , the co-creator of Spy , a humor monthly of the late 1980s and early 1990s. Andersen quickly replaced several staff members, bringing in many emerging and established writers (including Jim Cramer , Walter Kirn , Michael Tomasky , and Jacob Weisberg ) and editors (including Michael Hirschorn, Kim France, Dany Levy , and Maer Roshan), and generally making the magazine faster-paced, younger in outlook, and more knowing in tone. [ citation needed ]
In August 1996, Bill Reilly fired Andersen from his editorship, citing the publication's financial results. [14] According to Andersen, he was fired for refusing to kill a story about a rivalry between investment bankers Felix Rohatyn and Steven Rattner that had upset Henry Kravis , a member of the firm's ownership group. [15] His replacement was Caroline Miller, who came from Seventeen , another K-III title.

2000s
In 2002 and 2003, Michael Wolff , the media critic hired by Miller in 1998, won two National Magazine Awards for his column. At the end of 2003, New York was sold again, to financier Bruce Wasserstein , for $55 million. [16]
Wasserstein replaced Miller with Adam Moss , known for editing the short-lived New York weekly of the late 1980s "7 Days" and the New York Times Magazine . [17]
In late 2004 the magazine was relaunched, most notably with two new sections: "The Strategist," devoted mostly to utility, and "The Culture Pages," covering the city's arts scene. Moss also rehired Kurt Andersen as a columnist. In early 2006, the company began an aggressive digital expansion with the relaunch of the magazine's website, previously nymetro.com, as nymag.com.
Since 2004, the magazine has won twenty four National Magazine Awards, more than any other magazine over this time period, [18] including Magazine of the Year in 2013, General Excellence in Print four times, and General Excellence Online three times. During this same period it has been a finalist an additional 48 times in categories that included Profile Writing, Reviews and Criticism, Commentary, Public Service, Magazine Section, Leisure Interests, Personal Service, Single-Topic Issue, Photography, Photojournalism, Photo Portfolio, and Design. In 2007, when the magazine for the first time dominated the awards, much of the coverage the next day noted that The New Yorker took home no awards that night, despite receiving nine nominations, and also noted that New York was the first magazine to win for both its print and Internet editions in the same year.
The February 25, 2008 issue featured a series of nude photographs of Lindsay Lohan . Shot by Bert Stern , the series replicated several poses from Stern's widely reproduced final photos of Marilyn Monroe , shot shortly before the actress's fatal drug overdose. That week, the magazine's website received over 60 million hits and with traffic 2000 percent higher than usual. [ citation needed ]
The magazine is especially known for its food writing (its restaurant critic Adam Platt won a James Beard Award in 2009, and its Underground Gourmet critics Rob Patronite and Robin Raisfeld have won two National Magazine Awards); and also for its political coverage, especially John Heilemann 's reporting on the 2008 presidential election, which led to his (and Mark Halperin 's) best-selling book Game Change , and for coverage of the first two years of the Obama administration; The New Republic praised its "hugely impressive political coverage" during this period. [19]
The magazine's current stable of writers includes national political columnist and correspondent John Heilemann , Steve Fishman, Jesse Green, Vanessa Grigoriadis , Joe Hagan, Mark Jacobson , Jennifer Senior, Gabriel Sherman, Christopher Smith, and Jonathan Van Meter. Its culture critics include David Edelstein (movies), Matt Zoller Seitz(TV), Jerry Saltz (art), Justin Davidson (classical music and architecture), and Kathryn Schulz (books), who won the National Book Critics Circle 's Nona Balakian Citation for Excellence in Reviewing in 2012.
New York has been widely recognized for its design during this period, with back-to-back design wins at the National Magazine Awards and Magazine of the Year wins from the Society of Publication Designers (SPD) in 2006 and 2007. The 2008 Eliot Spitzer "Brain" cover was named Cover of the Year by the American Society of Magazine Editors (ASME) and Advertising Age and 2009's " Bernie Madoff , Monster" was named Best News & Business Cover by ASME. New York won back-to-back ASME Cover of the Year awards in 2012 and 2013, for "Is She Just Too Old for This?" and "The City and the Storm" respectively. Design director Chris Dixon and photography director Jody Quon were named "Design Team of the Year" by Adweek in 2008.
In 2009, after Bruce Wasserstein 's death, the magazine's ownership passed to his family. Many obituaries noted Wasserstein's revival of the magazine. "While previous owners had required constant features in the magazine about the best place to get a croissant or a beret," wrote David Carr of The New York Times , "it was clear that Wasserstein wanted a publication that was the best place to learn about the complicated apparatus that is modern New York. In enabling as much, Mr. Wasserstein recaptured the original intent of the magazine's founder, Clay Felker ." [20]

2010s
On March 1, 2011. it was announced that Frank Rich would leave The New York Times to become an essayist and editor-at-large for New York . Rich began his relationship with the magazine starting in June 2011. [21]
New York ' s "Encyclopedia of 9/11", published on the tenth anniversary of the attacks, was widely praised, with Gizmodo calling it "heartbreaking, locked in the past, and entirely current"; the issue won a National Magazine Award for Single-Topic Issue. [22] [23] [24]
New York ' s offices in lower Manhattan were without electricity in the week following Hurricane Sandy, so the editorial staff published an issue from the midtown office of Wasserstein & Company, the firm that owns New York Media. [25] The issue's cover, shot by photographer Iwan Baan from a helicopter and showing Manhattan half in darkness, almost immediately became an iconic image of the storm, [26] and was named the magazine cover of the year by Time. [27] The photograph on the cover was published as a poster by the Museum of Modern Art, with proceeds benefiting Hurricane Sandy relief efforts. [28]
In 2013, New York magazine took the top honor at the National Magazine Awards again receiving magazine of the year for its print and digital coverage. [29]
In December 2013, the magazine announced plans to move to a biweekly format in March 2014, reducing from 42 annual issues to 29. [30]

Puzzles and competitions
New York magazine was once known for its competitions and unique crossword puzzles . For the first year of the magazine's existence, the composer and lyricist Stephen Sondheim contributed an extremely complex cryptic crossword to every third issue. In the style of British crosswords (as they are sometimes called), the cryptic crosswords feature clues that include a straight definition and a wordplay definition. Richard Maltby, Jr. took over thereafter. Since 1980, the magazine has also run an American-style crossword. For the first 30 years the puzzle was always by Maura B. Jacobson, but beginning in the summer of 2010, Cathy Allis Millhauser's byline began appearing in alternate weeks, and the magazine announced her as permanent co-constructor in September 2010. The cryptic crosswords were eventually dropped.
In the remaining two weeks out of every three, Sondheim's friend Mary Ann Madden edited [31] an extremely popular witty literary competition calling for readers to send in humorous poetry or other bits of wordplay on a theme that changed with each installment. (A typical entry, in a competition calling for humorous epitaphs, supplied this one for Geronimo: "Requiescat in Apache.") Altogether, Madden ran 973 installments of the competition, retiring in 2000. Hundreds, sometimes thousands, of entries were received each week, and winners included David Mamet , Herb Sargent , and Dan Greenburg . David Halberstam once claimed that he had submitted entries 137 times without winning. Sondheim, Woody Allen , and Nora Ephron were fans.
The Competition's demise, when Madden retired, was greatly lamented among its fans. In August 2000, the magazine published a letter from an Irish contestant, John O'Byrne, who wrote: "How I'll miss the fractured definitions, awful puns, conversation stoppers, one-letter misprints, ludicrous proverbs, openings of bad novels, near misses, et al. (what a nice guy Al is!)." Many entrants have since migrated to The Washington Post ' s similar " Style Invitational " feature. Three volumes of Competition winners were published, titled Thank You for the Giant Sea Tortoise , Son of Giant Sea Tortoise , and Maybe He's Dead: And Other Hilarious Results of New York Magazine Competitions .

Digital expansion and blogs
In 2006, New York 's website, nymag.com, underwent a year-long relaunch, transforming the site from a magazine companion to an up-to-the-minute news and service destination. In 2008 parent company New York Media purchased the online restaurant and menu resource MenuPages, which serves eight markets across the U.S., as a complement to its own online restaurant listings and to gain a foothold in seven additional cities. [32] In 2011 MenuPages was sold to Seamless. [33] As of July 2010, digital revenue accounted for fully one third of company advertising revenue. [34]
The website includes several branded destination sites: Daily Intelligencer (up-to-date news), The Cut (fashion and beauty), Grub Street (food and restaurants), Vulture (pop culture) and Science of Us (pop science). David Carr noted in an August 2010 column, "In a way, New York magazine is fast becoming a digital enterprise with a magazine attached." [35]
Grub Street, covering food and restaurants, was expanded in 2009 to five additional cities served by former nymag.com sister site MenuPages.com. [36] In 2013 it was announced that Grub Street would close its city blogs outside New York, and bring a more national focus to GrubStreet.com. [37]

Books
In the 2000s New York published four books: New York Look Book: A Gallery of Street Fashion (New York: Melcher Media, 2007), [38] New York Stories: Landmark Writing From Four Decades of New York Magazine , [39] My First New York: Early Adventures in the Big City (As Remembered by Actors, Artists, Athletes, Chefs, Comedians, Filmmakers, Mayors, Models, Moguls, Porn Stars, Rockers, Writers, and Others) (New York: Ecco/HarperCollins, 2010), [40] and In Season: More Than 150 Fresh and Simple Recipes from New York Magazine Inspired by Farmers' Market Ingredients (New York: Blue Rider Press, 2012). [41]

Television
Michael Hirschorn's Ish Entertainment developed a TV pilot for Bravo inspired by the magazine's popular weekly Approval Matrix feature, which has appeared in the magazine since November 2004. [42]
New York ' s art critic Jerry Saltz is a judge on Bravo's fine art reality competition series Work of Art: The Next Great Artist . [43] Additionally, Grub Street Senior Editor Alan Sytsma appeared as a guest on judge on three episodes of the third season of Top Chef: Masters .

Notable contributors

See also
WebPage index: 00031
Apple Inc.
Coordinates : 37°19′55″N 122°01′52″W ﻿ / ﻿ 37.33182°N 122.03118°W ﻿ / 37.33182; -122.03118
Apple Inc. is an American multinational technology company headquartered in Cupertino, California that designs, develops, and sells consumer electronics , computer software , and online services. The company's hardware products include the iPhone smartphone, the iPad tablet computer, the Mac personal computer, the iPod portable media player, the Apple Watch smartwatch, and the Apple TV digital media player. Apple's consumer software includes the macOS and iOS operating systems, the iTunes media player, the Safari web browser, and the iLife and iWork creativity and productivity suites. Its online services include the iTunes Store , the iOS App Store and Mac App Store , Apple Music , and iCloud .
Apple was founded by Steve Jobs , Steve Wozniak , and Ronald Wayne in April 1976 to develop and sell personal computers. It was incorporated as Apple Computer, Inc. in January 1977, and sales of its computers saw significant momentum and revenue growth for the company. Within a few years, they had hired a staff of computer designers and had a production line. Apple went public in 1980 to instant financial success. Over the next few years, Apple shipped new computers featuring innovative graphical user interfaces , and Apple's marketing commercials for its products received widespread critical acclaim. However, the high price tag of its products and limited software titles caused problems, as did power struggles between executives at the company. Jobs resigned from Apple and created his own company . As the market for personal computers increased, Apple's computers saw diminishing sales due to lower-priced products from competitors, in particular those offered with the Microsoft Windows operating system. More executive job shuffles happened at Apple until then-CEO Gil Amelio in 1997 decided to buy Jobs' company to bring him back. Jobs regained position as CEO, and began a process to rebuild Apple's status, which included opening Apple's own retail stores in 2001, making numerous acquisitions of software companies to create a portfolio of software titles, and changed some of the hardware technology used in its computers. It again saw success and returned to profitability. In January 2007, Jobs announced that Apple Computer, Inc. would be renamed Apple Inc. to reflect its shifted focus toward consumer electronics, and announced the iPhone , which saw critical acclaim and significant financial success. In August 2011, Jobs resigned as CEO due to health complications, and Tim Cook became the new CEO. Two months later, Jobs died, marking the end of an era for the company.
Apple is the world's largest information technology company by revenue, and the world's second-largest mobile phone manufacturer after Samsung . In February 2015, Apple became the first U.S. company to be valued at over US$ 700 billion. The company employs 115,000 full-time employees as of July 2015 [update] and maintains 496 retail stores in 21 countries as of May 2017 [update] . It operates the iTunes Store, which is the world's largest music retailer. As of January 2016 [update] , more than one billion Apple products are actively in use worldwide.
Apple's worldwide annual revenue totaled $215 billion for the 2016 fiscal year . The company enjoys a high level of brand loyalty and has been repeatedly ranked as the world's most valuable brand. However, it receives significant criticism regarding the labor practices of its contractors and its environmental and business practices, including the origins of source materials.

History

1976–84: Founding and incorporation
Apple was founded on April 1, 1976, by Steve Jobs , Steve Wozniak and Ronald Wayne [5] [6] to sell the Apple I personal computer kits. The Apple I kits were computers single-handedly designed and hand-built by Wozniak [7] [8] and first shown to the public at the Homebrew Computer Club . [9] Apple I was sold as a motherboard (with CPU , RAM , and basic textual-video chips), which was less than what is now considered a complete personal computer. [10] The Apple I went on sale in July 1976 and was market-priced at $666.66 ($2,806 in 2016 dollars, adjusted for inflation). [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16]
Apple was incorporated on January 3, 1977, [17] [18] without Wayne, who sold the share of the company back to Jobs and Wozniak for $800. [6] Multimillionaire Mike Markkula provided essential business expertise and funding of $250,000 during the incorporation of Apple. [19] [20] During the first five years of operations revenues grew exponentially, doubling about every four months. Between September 1977 and September 1980 yearly sales grew from $775,000 to $118m, an average annual growth rate of 533%. [21] [22]
The Apple II , also invented by Wozniak, was introduced it on April 16, 1977, at the first West Coast Computer Faire . It differed from its major rivals, the TRS-80 and Commodore PET , because of its character cell-based color graphics and open architecture . While early Apple II models used ordinary cassette tapes as storage devices, they were superseded by the introduction of a 5 1/4 inch floppy disk drive and interface called the Disk II . [23] The Apple II was chosen to be the desktop platform for the first " killer app " of the business world: VisiCalc , a spreadsheet program . VisiCalc created a business market for the Apple II and gave home users an additional reason to buy an Apple II: compatibility with the office. [24] Before VisiCalc, Apple had been a distant third place competitor to Commodore and Tandy . [25] [26]
By the end of 1970's, Apple had a staff of computer designers and a production line. The company introduced the Apple III in May 1980 in an attempt to compete with IBM and Microsoft in the business and corporate computing market. [27] Jobs and several Apple employees, including Jef Raskin , visited Xerox PARC in December 1979 to see the Xerox Alto . Xerox granted Apple engineers three days of access to the PARC facilities in return for the option to buy 100,000 shares (800,000 split-adjusted shares) of Apple at the pre-IPO price of $10 a share. [28]
Jobs was immediately convinced that all future computers would use a graphical user interface ( GUI ), and development of a GUI began for the Apple Lisa . [29] [30] In 1982, however, he was pushed from the Lisa team due to infighting. Jobs took over Jef Raskin's low-cost-computer project, the Macintosh . A race broke out between the Lisa team and the Macintosh team over which product would ship first. Lisa won the race in 1983 and became the first personal computer sold to the public with a GUI, but was a commercial failure due to its high price tag and limited software titles. [31]
On December 12, 1980, Apple went public at $22 per share, [18] generating more capital than any IPO since Ford Motor Company in 1956 and immediately creating 300 millionaires. [32]

1984–91: Success with Macintosh
In 1984, Apple launched the Macintosh, the first personal computer to be sold without a programming language . [33] Its debut was signified by "1984" , a $1.5 million television commercial directed by Ridley Scott that aired during the third quarter of Super Bowl XVIII on January 22, 1984. [34] The commercial is now hailed as a watershed event for Apple's success [35] and was called a "masterpiece" by CNN [36] and one of the greatest commercials of all time by TV Guide . [37] [38]
The Macintosh initially sold well, but follow-up sales were not strong [39] due to its high price and limited range of software titles. The machine's fortunes changed with the introduction of the LaserWriter , the first PostScript laser printer to be sold at a reasonable price, and PageMaker , an early desktop publishing package. It has been suggested that the combination of these three products were responsible for the creation of the desktop publishing market. [40] The Macintosh was particularly powerful in the desktop publishing market due to its advanced graphics capabilities, which had necessarily been built in to create the intuitive Macintosh GUI.
In 1985, a power struggle developed between Jobs and CEO John Sculley , who had been hired two years earlier. [41] The Apple board of directors instructed Sculley to "contain" Jobs and limit his ability to launch expensive forays into untested products. Rather than submit to Sculley's direction, Jobs attempted to oust him from his leadership role at Apple. Sculley found out that Jobs had been attempting to organize a coup and called a board meeting at which Apple's board of directors sided with Sculley and removed Jobs from his managerial duties. [39] Jobs resigned from Apple and founded NeXT Inc. the same year. [42]
After Jobs' departure, the Macintosh product line underwent a steady change of focus to higher price points, the so-called "high-right policy" named for the position on a chart of price vs. profits. Jobs had argued the company should produce products aimed at the consumer market and aimed for a $1000 price for the Macintosh, which they were unable to meet. Newer models selling at higher price points offered higher profit margin , and appeared to have no effect on total sales as power users snapped up every increase in power. Although some worried about pricing themselves out of the market, the high-right policy was in full force by the mid-1980s, notably due to Jean-Louis Gassée 's mantra of "fifty-five or die", referring to the 55% profit margins of the Macintosh II . [43]
This policy began to backfire in the last years of the decade as new desktop publishing programs appeared on PC clones that offered some or much of the same functionality of the Macintosh but at far lower price points. The company lost its monopoly in this market, and had already estranged many of its original consumer customer base who could no longer afford their high priced products. The Christmas season of 1989 was the first in the company's history that saw declining sales, and led to a 20% drop in Apple's stock price. [44] Gassée's objections were overruled, and he was forced from the company in 1990. Later that year, Apple introduced three lower cost models, the Macintosh Classic , Macintosh LC and Macintosh IIsi , all of which saw significant sales due to pent up demand.
In 1991, Apple introduced the PowerBook , replacing the "luggable" Macintosh Portable with a design that set the current shape for almost all modern laptops. The same year, Apple introduced System 7 , a major upgrade to the operating system which added color to the interface and introduced new networking capabilities. It remained the architectural basis for the Classic Mac OS . The success of the PowerBook and other products brought increasing revenue. [41] For some time, Apple was doing incredibly well, introducing fresh new products and generating increasing profits in the process. The magazine MacAddict named the period between 1989 and 1991 as the "first golden age" of the Macintosh. [45]
Apple believed the Apple II series was too expensive to produce and took away sales from the low-end Macintosh. [46] In 1990, Apple released the Macintosh LC , which featured a single expansion slot for the Apple IIe Card to help migrate Apple II users to the Macintosh platform; [46] the Apple IIe was discontinued in 1993.

1991–97: Decline and restructuring
The success of Apple's lower-cost consumer models, especially the LC, also led to cannibalization of their higher priced machines. To address this, management introduced several new brands, selling largely identical machines at different price points aimed at different markets. These were the high-end Quadra , the mid-range Centris line, and the ill-fated Performa series. This led to significant market confusion, as customers did not understand the difference between models. [48]
Apple also experimented with a number of other unsuccessful consumer targeted products during the 1990s, including digital cameras , portable CD audio players , speakers , video consoles , the eWorld online service, and TV appliances . Enormous resources were also invested in the problem-plagued Newton division based on John Sculley's unrealistic market forecasts. [ citation needed ] Ultimately, none of these products helped and Apple's market share and stock prices continued to slide. [ citation needed ]
Throughout this period, Microsoft continued to gain market share with Windows by focusing on delivering software to cheap commodity personal computers, while Apple was delivering a richly engineered but expensive experience. [49] Apple relied on high profit margins and never developed a clear response; instead, they sued Microsoft for using a GUI similar to the Apple Lisa in Apple Computer, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp. [50] The lawsuit dragged on for years before it was finally dismissed. At this time, a series of major product flops and missed deadlines sullied Apple's reputation, and Sculley was replaced as CEO by Michael Spindler . [51]
By the early 1990s, Apple was developing alternative platforms to the Macintosh, such as A/UX . The Macintosh platform itself was becoming outdated because it was not built for multitasking and because several important software routines were programmed directly into the hardware. In addition, Apple was facing competition from OS/2 and UNIX vendors such as Sun Microsystems . The Macintosh would need to be replaced by a new platform or reworked to run on more powerful hardware. [52]
In 1994, Apple allied with IBM and Motorola in the AIM alliance with the goal of creating a new computing platform (the PowerPC Reference Platform ), which would use IBM and Motorola hardware coupled with Apple software. The AIM alliance hoped that PReP's performance and Apple's software would leave the PC far behind and thus counter Microsoft. The same year, Apple introduced the Power Macintosh , the first of many Apple computers to use Motorola's PowerPC processor. [53]
In 1996, Spindler was replaced by Gil Amelio as CEO. Amelio made numerous changes at Apple, including extensive layoffs and cut costs. [54] After numerous failed attempts to improve Mac OS, first with the Taligent project and later with Copland and Gershwin , Amelio chose to purchase NeXT and its NeXTSTEP operating system and bring Steve Jobs back to Apple. [55]

1997–2007: Return to profitability
The NeXT deal was finalized on February 9, 1997, [56] bringing Jobs back to Apple as an advisor. On July 9, 1997, Amelio was ousted by the board of directors after overseeing a three-year record-low stock price and crippling financial losses. Jobs acted as the interim CEO and began restructuring the company's product line; it was during this period that he identified the design talent of Jonathan Ive , and the pair worked collaboratively to rebuild Apple's status. [57]
At the 1997 Macworld Expo , Jobs announced that Apple would join Microsoft to release new versions of Microsoft Office for the Macintosh, and that Microsoft had made a $150 million investment in non-voting Apple stock. [58] On November 10, 1997, Apple introduced the Apple Online Store , which was tied to a new build-to-order manufacturing strategy. [59] [60]
On August 15, 1998, Apple introduced a new all-in-one computer reminiscent of the Macintosh 128K : the iMac . The iMac design team was led by Ive, who would later design the iPod and the iPhone . [61] [62] The iMac featured modern technology and a unique design, and sold almost 800,000 units in its first five months. [63]
During this period, [ when? ] Apple completed numerous acquisitions to create a portfolio of digital production software for both professionals and consumers. In 1998, Apple purchased Macromedia 's Key Grip software project, signaling an expansion into the digital video editing market. The sale was an outcome of Macromedia's decision to solely focus upon web development software. The product, still unfinished at the time of the sale, was renamed " Final Cut Pro " when it was launched on the retail market in April 1999. [64] [65] The development of Key Grip also led to Apple's release of the consumer video-editing product iMovie in October 1999. [66] Next, Apple successfully acquired the German company Astarte, which had developed DVD authoring technology, as well as Astarte's corresponding products and engineering team in April 2000. Astarte's digital tool DVDirector was subsequently transformed into the professional-oriented DVD Studio Pro software product. Apple then employed the same technology to create iDVD for the consumer market. [66] In 2002, Apple purchased Nothing Real for their advanced digital compositing application Shake , [67] as well as Emagic for the music productivity application Logic . The purchase of Emagic made Apple the first computer manufacturer to own a music software company. The acquisition was followed by the development of Apple's consumer-level GarageBand application. [68] The release of iPhoto in the same year completed the iLife suite. [69]
Mac OS X , based on NeXT's OPENSTEP and BSD Unix , was released on March 24, 2001, after several years of development. Aimed at consumers and professionals alike, Mac OS X aimed to combine the stability, reliability and security of Unix with the ease of use afforded by an overhauled user interface. To aid users in migrating from Mac OS 9 , the new operating system allowed the use of OS 9 applications within Mac OS X via the Classic Environment . [70]
On May 19, 2001, Apple opened its first official eponymous retail stores in Virginia and California. [71] On October 23 of the same year, Apple debuted the iPod portable digital audio player. The product, which was first sold on November 10, 2001, was phenomenally successful with over 100 million units sold within six years. [72] [73] In 2003, Apple's iTunes Store was introduced. The service offered online music downloads for $0.99 a song and integration with the iPod. The iTunes Store quickly became the market leader in online music services, with over five billion downloads by June 19, 2008. [74] [75] Two years later, the iTunes Store was the world's largest music retailer. [76] [77]
At the Worldwide Developers Conference keynote address on June 6, 2005, Jobs announced that Apple would begin producing Intel -based Mac computers in 2006. [78] On January 10, 2006, the new MacBook Pro and iMac became the first Apple computers to use Intel's Core Duo CPU. By August 7, 2006, Apple made the transition to Intel chips for the entire Mac product line—over one year sooner than announced. [78] The Power Mac, iBook and PowerBook brands were retired during the transition; the Mac Pro , MacBook , and MacBook Pro became their respective successors. [79] [80] On April 29, 2009, The Wall Street Journal reported that Apple was building its own team of engineers to design microchips. [81] Apple also introduced Boot Camp in 2006 to help users install Windows XP or Windows Vista on their Intel Macs alongside Mac OS X. [82]
Apple's success during this period was evident in its stock price. Between early 2003 and 2006, the price of Apple's stock increased more than tenfold, from around $6 per share (split-adjusted) to over $80. In January 2006, Apple's market cap surpassed that of Dell . [83] Nine years prior, Dell's CEO Michael Dell had said that if he ran Apple he would "shut it down and give the money back to the shareholders." [84] Although Apple's market share in computers had grown, it remained far behind competitors using Microsoft Windows, accounting for about 8% of desktops and laptops in the US. [ citation needed ]
Since 2001, Apple's design team has progressively abandoned the use of translucent colored plastics first used in the iMac G3 . This design change began with the titanium -made PowerBook and was followed by the iBook 's white polycarbonate structure and the flat-panel iMac . [85] [86]

2007–11: Success with mobile devices
During his keynote speech at the Macworld Expo on January 9, 2007, Jobs announced that Apple Computer, Inc. would thereafter be known as "Apple Inc.", because the company had shifted its emphasis from computers to consumer electronics. [88] [89] This event also saw the announcement of the iPhone [90] [91] and the Apple TV . [92] [93] The company sold 270,000 iPhone units during the first 30 hours of sales, [94] and the device was called "a game changer for the industry". [95] Apple would achieve widespread success with its iPhone, iPod Touch and iPad products, which introduced innovations in mobile phones , portable music players and personal computers respectively. [96] Furthermore, by early 2007, 800,000 Final Cut Pro users were registered. [97]
In an article posted on Apple's website on February 6, 2007, Jobs wrote that Apple would be willing to sell music on the iTunes Store without digital rights management (DRM), thereby allowing tracks to be played on third-party players, if record labels would agree to drop the technology. [98] On April 2, 2007, Apple and EMI jointly announced the removal of DRM technology from EMI's catalog in the iTunes Store, effective in May 2007. [99] Other record labels eventually followed suit and Apple published a press release in January 2009 to announce the corresponding changes to the iTunes Store. [100]
In July 2008, Apple launched the App Store to sell third-party applications for the iPhone and iPod Touch . [101] Within a month, the store sold 60 million applications and registered an average daily revenue of $1 million, with Jobs speculating in August 2008 that the App Store could become a billion-dollar business for Apple. [102] By October 2008, Apple was the third-largest mobile handset supplier in the world due to the popularity of the iPhone. [103]
On December 16, 2008, Apple announced that 2009 would be the last year the corporation would attend the Macworld Expo, after more than 20 years of attendance, and that senior vice president of Worldwide Product Marketing Philip Schiller would deliver the 2009 keynote address in lieu of the expected Jobs. The official press release explained that Apple was "scaling back" on trade shows in general, including Macworld Tokyo and the Apple Expo in Paris, France, primarily because the enormous successes of the Apple Retail Stores and website had rendered trade shows a minor promotional channel. [104] [105]
On January 14, 2009, Jobs announced in an internal memo that he would be taking a six-month medical leave of absence from Apple until the end of June 2009 and would spend the time focusing on his health. In the email, Jobs stated that "the curiosity over my personal health continues to be a distraction not only for me and my family, but everyone else at Apple as well", and explained that the break would allow the company "to focus on delivering extraordinary products". [106] Despite Jobs's absence, Apple recorded its best non-holiday quarter (Q1 FY 2009) during the recession with revenue of $8.16 billion and profit of $1.21 billion. [107] [108]
After years of speculation and multiple rumored "leaks", Apple unveiled a large screen, tablet-like media device known as the iPad on January 27, 2010. The iPad ran the same touch-based operating system as the iPhone, and many iPhone apps were compatible with the iPad. This gave the iPad a large app catalog on launch, despite very little development time before the release. Later that year on April 3, 2010, the iPad was launched in the US. It sold more than 300,000 units on its first day, and 500,000 by the end of the first week. [109] In May of the same year, Apple's market cap exceeded that of competitor Microsoft for the first time since 1989. [110]
In June 2010, Apple released the iPhone 4 , [111] which introduced video calling , multitasking , and a new uninsulated stainless steel design that acted as the phone's antenna. Later that year, Apple again refreshed its iPod line of MP3 players by introducing a multi-touch iPod Nano , an iPod Touch with FaceTime , and an iPod Shuffle that brought back the buttons of earlier generations. [112] [113] [114] Additionally, on October 20, Apple updated the MacBook Air laptop, iLife suite of applications, and unveiled Mac OS X Lion , the last version with the name Mac OS X . [115] [116]
In October 2010, Apple shares hit an all-time high, eclipsing $300. [117]
On January 6, 2011, the company opened its Mac App Store , a digital software distribution platform similar to the iOS App Store. [118]
Alongside peer entities such as Atari and Cisco Systems, Apple was featured in the documentary Something Ventured , which premiered in 2011 and explored the three-decade era that led to the establishment and dominance of Silicon Valley. [119]
On January 17, 2011, Jobs announced in an internal Apple memo that he would take another medical leave of absence for an indefinite period to allow him to focus on his health. Chief Operating Officer Tim Cook assumed Jobs's day-to-day operations at Apple, although Jobs would still remain "involved in major strategic decisions". [120] Apple became the most valuable consumer-facing brand in the world. [121] In June 2011, Jobs surprisingly took the stage and unveiled iCloud , an online storage and syncing service for music, photos, files and software which replaced MobileMe, Apple's previous attempt at content syncing. [122]
This would be the last product launch Jobs would attend before his death. It has been argued that Apple has achieved such efficiency in its supply chain that the company operates as a monopsony (one buyer, many sellers) and can dictate terms to its suppliers. [123] [124] [125] In July 2011, due to the American debt-ceiling crisis , Apple's financial reserves were briefly larger than those of the U.S. Government . [126]
On August 24, 2011, Jobs resigned his position as CEO of Apple. [127] He was replaced by Cook and Jobs became Apple's chairman. Prior to this, Apple did not have a chairman and instead had two co-lead directors, Andrea Jung and Arthur D. Levinson , who continued with those titles until Levinson became Chairman of the Board in November. [128]

2011–present: Post-Steve Jobs era; Tim Cook leadership
On October 5, 2011, Steve Jobs died, marking the end of an era for Apple. [129] [130] The first major product announcement by Apple following Jobs's passing occurred on January 19, 2012, when Apple's Phil Schiller introduced iBooks Textbooks for iOS and iBook Author for Mac OS X in New York City. [131] Jobs had stated in his biography that he wanted to reinvent the textbook industry and education.
From 2011 to 2012, Apple released the iPhone 4S [132] [133] and iPhone 5 , [134] [135] which featured improved cameras, an intelligent software assistant named Siri , and cloud-sourced data with iCloud; the third and fourth generation iPads, which featured Retina displays ; [136] [137] [138] and the iPad Mini , which featured a 7.9-inch screen in contrast to the iPad's 9.7-inch screen. [139] These launches were successful, with the iPhone 5 (released September 21, 2012) becoming Apple's biggest iPhone launch with over two million pre-orders [140] and sales of three million iPads in three days following the launch of the iPad Mini and fourth generation iPad (released November 3, 2012). [141] Apple also released a third-generation 13-inch MacBook Pro with a Retina display and new iMac and Mac Mini computers. [138] [139] [142]
On August 20, 2012, Apple's rising stock price increased the company's market capitalization to a world-record $624 billion. This beat the non-inflation-adjusted record for market capitalization set by Microsoft in 1999. [143] On August 24, 2012, a US jury ruled that Samsung should pay Apple $1.05 billion (£665m) in damages in an intellectual property lawsuit. [144] Samsung appealed the damages award, which the Court reduced by $450 million. [145] The Court further granted Samsung's request for a new trial. [145] On November 10, 2012, Apple confirmed a global settlement that would dismiss all lawsuits between Apple and HTC up to that date, in favor of a ten-year license agreement for current and future patents between the two companies. [146] It is predicted that Apple will make $280 million a year from this deal with HTC. [147]
A previously confidential email written by Jobs a year before his death was presented during the proceedings of the Apple Inc. v. Samsung Electronics Co. lawsuits and became publicly available in early April 2014. With a subject line that reads "Top 100 – A," the email was sent only to the company's 100 most senior employees and outlines Jobs's vision of Apple Inc.'s future under 10 subheadings. Notably, Jobs declares a "Holy War with Google" for 2011 and schedules a "new campus" for 2015. [148]
In March 2013, Apple filed a patent for an augmented reality (AR) system that can identify objects in a live video stream and present information corresponding to these objects through a computer-generated information layer overlaid on top of the real-world image. [149] The company also made several high-profile hiring decisions in 2013. On July 2, 2013, Apple recruited Paul Deneve , Belgian President and CEO of Yves Saint Laurent as a vice president reporting directly to Tim Cook. [150] A mid-October 2013 announcement revealed that Burberry executive Angela Ahrendts will commence as a senior vice president at Apple in mid-2014. Ahrendts oversaw Burberry's digital strategy for almost eight years and, during her tenure, sales increased to about US$3.2 billion and shares gained more than threefold. [151]
Alongside Google vice-president Vint Cerf and AT&T CEO Randall Stephenson, Cook attended a closed-door summit held by President Obama on August 8, 2013, in regard to government surveillance and the Internet in the wake of the Edward Snowden NSA incident . [152] [153] On February 4, 2014, Cook met with Abdullah Gül , the President of Turkey , in Ankara to discuss the company's involvement in the Fatih project . [154] Cook also confirmed that Turkey 's first Apple Retail Store would be opened in Istanbul in April 2014. [155]
An anonymous Apple employee revealed to the Bloomberg media publication that the opening of a Tokyo , Japan, store was planned for 2014. A Japanese analyst has stated, "For Apple, the Japanese market is appealing in terms of quantity and price. There is room to expand tablet sales and a possibility the Japanese market expands if Apple's mobile carrier partners increase." [156] As of June 13, 2014 [update] , Apple operated three stores in Tokyo. [157]
Apple Inc. reported that the company sold 51 million iPhones in the Q1 of 2014 (an all-time quarterly record), compared to 47.8 million in the year-ago quarter. Apple also sold 26 million iPads during the quarter, also an all-time quarterly record, compared to 22.9 million in the year-ago quarter. The Company sold 4.8 million Macs, compared to 4.1 million in the year-ago quarter. [158] On May 28, 2014, Apple confirmed its intent to acquire Dr. Dre and Jimmy Iovine 's audio company Beats Electronics —producer of the Beats by Dr. Dre line of headphones and speaker products, and operator of the music streaming service Beats Music —for $3 billion, and to sell their products through Apple's retail outlets and resellers. Iovine felt that Beats had always "belonged" with Apple, as the company modeled itself after Apple's "unmatched ability to marry culture and technology." [159] [160] [161] In August 2014, an Apple representative confirmed to the media that Anand Lal Shimpi , editor and publisher of the AnandTech website, had been recruited by Apple without elaborating on Lal Shimpi's role. [162]
Apple has been at the top of Interbrand 's annual Best Global Brands report for 4 years in a row; 2013, [163] 2014, [164] 2015, [165] and 2016, with a valuation of $178.1 billion. [166]
In December 2015, Apple bought a 70,000 square foot wafer fab building in San Jose, CA from Maxim Integrated for $18.2 million. [167]
In January 2016, it was announced that one billion Apple devices are in active use worldwide. [168] [169]
In 2016, it was revealed that Apple would be making its first original scripted series, [170] a six-episode drama about the life of Dr. Dre. Music Video director Paul Hunter will direct the series. [170]
On May 12, 2016, Apple Inc., invested US$ 1 billion in Didi Chuxing , a Chinese competitor to Uber . [171] [172] [173] The Information reported in October 2016 that Apple had taken a board seat in Didi Chuxing, [174] a move that James Vincent of The Verge speculated could be a strategic company decision by Apple to get closer to the automobile industry, [175] particularly Didi Chuxing's reported interest in self-driving cars. [176]
On June 6, 2016, Forbes released their list of companies ranked on revenue generation. In the trailing fiscal year, Apple appeared on the list as the top tech company. [177] It ranked third, overall, with $233 billion in revenue. [177] This represents a movement upward of two spots from the previous year's list. [177]
On April 6, 2017, Apple launched Clips , an app that allows iPad and iPhone users to make and edit videos. The app provides a way to produce short videos to share with other users on the Messages app, Instagram , Facebook and other social networks. Apple also introduced Live Titles for Clips that allows users to add live animated captions and titles using their voice. [178]
On April 30, 2017, The Wall Street Journal reported that Apple had cash reserves of $250 billion, [179] officially confirmed by Apple as specifically $256.8 billion a few days later. [180] Coupled with a strong market capitalization around the same time, reports predicted Apple will soon become the world's first $1 trillion dollar company. [181] [182]
Apple has gradually expanded its efforts in getting its products into the Indian market. In July 2012, during a conference call with investors, CEO Tim Cook said that he "[loves] India", but that Apple saw larger opportunities outside the region. [183] India's requirement that 30% of products sold be manufactured in the country was described as "really adds cost to getting product to market". [184] In October 2013, Indian Apple executives unveiled a plan for selling devices through instalment plans and store-within-a-store concepts, in an effort to expand further into the market. The news followed Cook's acknowledgment of the country in July when sales results showed that iPhone sales in India grew 400% during the second quarter of 2013. [185] [186] In March 2016, The Times of India reported that Apple had sought permission from the Indian government to sell refurbished iPhones in the country. [187] [188] However, two months later, the application was rejected, citing official country policy. [189] [190] In May 2016, Apple opened an iOS app development center in Bangalore . [191] [192] [193] In February 2017, Apple once again requested permission to sell used iPhones in the country. [194] [195] The same month, Bloomberg reported that Apple was close to receiving permission to open its first retail store in the country. [196] [197] In March, The Wall Street Journal reported that Apple would begin manufacturing iPhone models in India "over the next two months", [198] [199] and in May, the Journal wrote that an Apple manufacturer had begun production of iPhone SE in the country, [200] [201] while Apple told CNBC that the manufacturing was for a "small number" of units. [202]
Towards the end of May 2017, Apple refreshed two of its website designs. Its public relations "Apple Press Info" website was changed to a new "Apple Newsroom" site, featuring a greater emphasis on imagery and therefore lower information density, and combines press releases, news items and photos. Its "Apple Leadership" overview of company executives was also refreshed, adding a simpler layout with a prominent header image and two-column text fields. 9to5Mac noted the design similarities to several of Apple's redesigned apps in iOS 10 , particularly its Apple Music and News software. [203]

Products

Mac
Macs currently in production::
Apple sells a variety of computer accessories for Macs, including Thunderbolt Display , Magic Mouse , Magic Trackpad , Magic Keyboard , the AirPort wireless networking products, and Time Capsule .

iPod
On October 23, 2001, Apple introduced the iPod digital music player. Several updated models have since been introduced, and the iPod brand is now the market leader in portable music players by a significant margin. More than 350 million units have shipped as of September 2012 [update] . [204] Apple has partnered with Nike to offer the Nike+iPod Sports Kit, enabling runners to synchronize and monitor their runs with iTunes and the Nike+ website.
Apple currently sells three variants of the iPod:

iPhone
At the Macworld Conference & Expo in January 2007, Steve Jobs introduced the long-anticipated [206] iPhone , a convergence of an Internet-enabled smartphone and iPod. [207] The first-generation iPhone was released on June 29, 2007, for $499 (4 GB) and $599 (8 GB) with an AT&T contract. [208] On February 5, 2008, it was updated to have 16 GB of memory, in addition to the 8 GB and 4 GB models. [209] It combined a 2.5G quad band GSM and EDGE cellular phone with features found in handheld devices, running scaled-down versions of Apple's Mac OS X (dubbed iPhone OS, later renamed iOS ), with various Mac OS X applications such as Safari and Mail . It also includes web-based and Dashboard apps such as Google Maps and Weather . The iPhone features a 3.5-inch (89 mm) touchscreen display, Bluetooth , and Wi-Fi (both "b" and "g"). [207]
A second version, the iPhone 3G , was released on July 11, 2008, with a reduced price of $199 for the 8 GB version and $299 for the 16 GB version. [210] This version added support for 3G networking and assisted-GPS navigation. The flat silver back and large antenna square of the original model were eliminated in favor of a glossy, curved black or white back. Software capabilities were improved with the release of the App Store , which provided iPhone-compatible applications to download. On April 24, 2009, the App Store [211] surpassed one billion downloads. [212] On June 8, 2009, Apple announced the iPhone 3GS . It provided an incremental update to the device, including faster internal components, support for faster 3G speeds, video recording capability, and voice control.
At the Worldwide Developers Conference (WWDC) on June 7, 2010, Apple announced the redesigned iPhone 4 . [213] It featured a 960 × 640 display, the Apple A4 processor, a gyroscope for enhanced gaming, a 5MP camera with LED flash, front-facing VGA camera and FaceTime video calling. Shortly after its release, reception issues were discovered by consumers, due to the stainless steel band around the edge of the device, which also serves as the phone's cellular signal and Wi-Fi antenna. The issue was corrected by a "Bumper Case" distributed by Apple for free to all owners for a few months. In June 2011, Apple overtook Nokia to become the world's biggest smartphone maker by volume. [214] On October 4, 2011, Apple unveiled the iPhone 4S , which was first released on October 14, 2011. [215] It features the Apple A5 processor and Siri voice assistant technology, the latter of which Apple had acquired in 2010. [216] It also features an updated 8MP camera with new optics. Apple began a new accessibility feature, Made for iPhone Hearing Aids with the iPhone 4S. [217] Made for iPhone Hearing Aids feature Live Listen, it can help the user hear a conversation in a noisy room or hear someone speaking across the room. [218] Apple sold 4 million iPhone 4S phones in the first three days of availability. [219]
On September 12, 2012, Apple introduced the iPhone 5 . [220] It has a 4-inch display, 4G LTE connectivity, and the upgraded Apple A6 chip, among several other improvements. [221] Two million iPhones were sold in the first twenty-four hours of pre-ordering [222] and over five million handsets were sold in the first three days of its launch. [223] Upon the launch of the iPhone 5S and iPhone 5C , Apple set a new record for first-weekend smartphone sales by selling over nine million devices in the first three days of its launch. [224] The release of the iPhone 5S and 5C was the first time that Apple simultaneously launched two models. [225]
A patent filed in July 2013 revealed the development of a new iPhone battery system that uses location data in combination with data on the user's habits to moderate the handsets power settings accordingly. Apple is working towards a power management system that will provide features such as the ability of the iPhone to estimate the length of time a user will be away from a power source to modify energy usage and a detection function that adjusts the charging rate to best suit the type of power source that is being used. [226]
In a March 2014 interview, Apple designer Jonathan Ive used the iPhone as an example of Apple's ethos of creating high-quality, life-changing products. He explained that the phones are comparatively expensive due to the intensive effort that is used to make them:
On September 9, 2014, Apple introduced the iPhone 6 , alongside the iPhone 6 Plus that both have screen sizes over 4-inches. [227] One year later, Apple introduced the iPhone 6S , and iPhone 6S Plus , which introduced a new technology called 3D Touch, including an increase of the rear camera to 12 MP, and the FaceTime camera to 5 MP. [228] On March 21, 2016, Apple introduced the iPhone SE that has a 4-inch size last used with the 5S and has the same internal hardware as the 6S. [229]
On September 7, 2016, Apple introduced the iPhone 7 and the iPhone 7 Plus , which feature improved system and graphics performance, add water resistance, a new rear dual-camera system on the 7 Plus model, and, controversially, remove the 3.5 mm headphone jack. [230] [231]
In July 2016, Apple announced that one billion iPhones had been sold. [87] [232]

iPad
On January 27, 2010, Apple introduced their much-anticipated media tablet , the iPad . [233] [234] It offers multi-touch interaction with multimedia formats including newspapers, e-books, photos, videos, music, word processing documents, video games, and most existing iPhone apps using a 9.7-inch screen. [235] It also includes a mobile version of Safari for web browsing, as well as access to the App Store, iTunes Library, iBookstore , Contacts, and Notes. Content is downloadable via Wi-Fi and optional 3G service or synced through the user's computer. [236] AT&T was initially the sole U.S. provider of 3G wireless access for the iPad. [237]
On March 2, 2011, Apple introduced the iPad 2 , which had a faster processor and a camera on the front and back. It also added support for optional 3G service provided by Verizon in addition to AT&T . [238] The availability of the iPad 2 was initially limited as a result of a devastating earthquake and tsunami in Japan in March 2011. [239]
The third-generation iPad was released on March 7, 2012, and marketed as " the new iPad ". It added LTE service from AT&T or Verizon, an upgraded A5X processor, and Retina display. The dimensions and form factor remained relatively unchanged, with the new iPad being a fraction thicker and heavier than the previous version and featuring minor positioning changes. [240]
On October 23, 2012, Apple's fourth-generation iPad came out, marketed as the " iPad with Retina display ". It added the upgraded A6X processor and replaced the traditional 30-pin dock connector with the all-digital Lightning connector . [241] The iPad Mini was also introduced. It featured a reduced 7.9-inch display and much of the same internal specifications as the iPad 2. [242]
On October 22, 2013, Apple introduced the iPad Air and the iPad Mini with Retina Display, both featuring a new 64-bit Apple A7 processor. [243]
The iPad Air 2 was unveiled on October 16, 2014. It added better graphics and central processing and a camera burst mode as well as minor updates. The iPad Mini 3 was unveiled at the same time. [243]
Since its launch, iPad users have downloaded over three billion apps. The total number of App Store downloads, as of June 2015 [update] , is over 100 billion. [244]
On September 9, 2015, Apple announced the iPad Pro , an iPad with a 12.9-inch display that supports two new accessories, the Smart Keyboard and Apple Pencil . [245] A 9.7-inch iPad Pro was announced on March 21, 2016. [246]

Apple Watch
The Apple Watch smartwatch was announced by Cook on September 9, 2014, [248] [249] and released on April 24, 2015. [250] [251] [252] The wearable device consists of fitness-tracking capabilities that are similar to Fitbit , and must be used in combination with an iPhone to work (only the iPhone 5 , or later models, are compatible with the Apple Watch). [253] [254]
The second generation of Apple Watch, Apple Watch Series 2 and Apple Watch Series 1 were released in September 2016. [255]

Apple TV
At the 2007 Macworld conference, Jobs demonstrated the Apple TV (previously known as the iTV), [256] a set-top video device intended to bridge the sale of content from iTunes with high-definition televisions. The device links up to a user's TV and syncs, either via Wi-Fi or a wired network, with one computer's iTunes library and streams content from an additional four. The Apple TV originally incorporated a 40 GB hard drive for storage, included outputs for HDMI and component video , and played video at a maximum resolution of 720p . [257] On May 31, 2007, a 160 GB hard disk drive was released alongside the existing 40 GB model. [258] A software update released on January 15, 2008, allowed media to be purchased directly from the Apple TV. [259]
In September 2009, Apple discontinued the original 40 GB Apple TV and now continues to produce and sell the 160 GB Apple TV. On September 1, 2010, Apple released a completely redesigned Apple TV. The new device is 1/4 the size, runs quieter, and replaces the need for a hard drive with media streaming from any iTunes library on the network along with 8 GB of flash memory to cache media downloaded. Like the iPad and the iPhone, Apple TV runs on an A4 processor. The memory included in the device is half of that in the iPhone 4 at 256 MB; the same as the iPad, iPhone 3GS, third and fourth-generation iPod Touch . [260]
It has HDMI out as the only video out source. Features include access to the iTunes Store to rent movies and TV shows (purchasing has been discontinued), streaming from internet video sources, including YouTube and Netflix , and media streaming from an iTunes library. Apple also reduced the price of the device to $99. A third generation of the device was introduced at an Apple event on March 7, 2012, with new features such as higher resolution (1080p) and a new user interface.
At the September 9, 2015, event, Apple unveiled an overhauled Apple TV, which now runs a variant of OS X, tvOS , and contains 32GB or 64 GB of NAND Flash to store games, programs, and to cache the current media playing. The release also coincided with the opening of a separate Apple TV App Store and a new Siri Remote with a glass touchpad , gyroscope , and microphone .

Software
Apple develops its own operating system to run on Macs, macOS , the latest version being macOS Sierra (version 10.12). Apple also independently develops computer software titles for its macOS operating system. Much of the software Apple develops is bundled with its computers. An example of this is the consumer-oriented iLife software package that bundles iMovie , iPhoto and GarageBand . For presentation, page layout and word processing, iWork is available, which includes Keynote , Pages , and Numbers . iTunes, QuickTime media player, and Software Update are available as free downloads for both macOS and Windows .
Apple also offers a range of professional software titles. Their range of server software includes the operating system macOS Server ; Apple Remote Desktop , a remote systems management application; and Xsan , a Storage Area Network file system. For the professional creative market, there is Final Cut Pro , a video production suite; Logic Pro , a comprehensive music toolkit; and Motion , an advanced effects composition program.
Apple also offers online services with iCloud , which provides cloud storage and syncing for a wide range of data, including email, contacts, calendars, photos, and documents. It also offers iOS device backup, and is able to integrate directly with third-party apps for even greater functionality. iCloud is the fourth generation of online services provided by Apple, and was preceded by MobileMe , .Mac and iTools, all which met varying degrees of success.

Electric vehicles
According to the Sydney Morning Herald , Apple wants to start producing an electric car with autonomous driving as soon as 2020. Apple has made efforts to recruit battery development engineers and other electric automobile engineers from A123 Systems , LG Chem , Samsung Electronics , Panasonic , Toshiba , Johnson Controls and Tesla Motors . [261]

Apple Energy
Apple Energy, LLC is a wholly owned subsidiary of Apple Inc. that sells solar energy . As of June 6, 2016, Apple's solar farms in California and Nevada have been declared to provide 217.9 megawatts of solar generation capacity. [262] [263] In addition to the company's solar energy production, Apple has received regulatory approval to construct a landfill gas energy plant in North Carolina . Apple will use the methane emissions to generate electricity. [264] Apple's North Carolina data center is already powered entirely with energy from renewable sources. [265]

Corporate identity

Logo
According to Steve Jobs, the company's name was inspired by his visit to an apple farm while on a fruitarian diet. Jobs thought the name "Apple" was "fun, spirited and not intimidating". [267]
Apple's first logo, designed by Ron Wayne, depicts Sir Isaac Newton sitting under an apple tree. It was almost immediately replaced by Rob Janoff 's "rainbow Apple", the now-familiar rainbow-colored silhouette of an apple with a bite taken out of it. Janoff presented Jobs with several different monochromatic themes for the "bitten" logo, and Jobs immediately took a liking to it. However, Jobs insisted that the logo be colorized to humanize the company. [268] [269] The logo was designed with a bite so that it would not be confused with a cherry. [270] The colored stripes were conceived to make the logo more accessible, and to represent the fact the Apple II could generate graphics in color. [270] This logo is often erroneously referred to as a tribute to Alan Turing , with the bite mark a reference to his method of suicide . [271] [272] Both Janoff and Apple deny any homage to Turing in the design of the logo. [270] [273]
On August 27, 1999 [274] (the year following the introduction of the iMac G3 ), Apple officially dropped the rainbow scheme and began to use monochromatic logos nearly identical in shape to the previous rainbow incarnation. An Aqua -themed version of the monochrome logo was used from 1998 to 2003, and a glass-themed version was used from 2007 to 2013. [275]
Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak were Beatles fans, [276] [277] but Apple Inc. had name and logo trademark issues with Apple Corps Ltd. , a multimedia company started by the Beatles in 1967. This resulted in a series of lawsuits and tension between the two companies. These issues ended with settling of their most recent lawsuit in 2007. [278]

Advertising
Apple's first slogan, " Byte into an Apple", was coined in the late 1970s. [279] From 1997 to 2002, the slogan " Think Different " was used in advertising campaigns, and is still closely associated with Apple. [280] Apple also has slogans for specific product lines — for example, "iThink, therefore iMac" was used in 1998 to promote the iMac, [281] and "Say hello to iPhone" has been used in iPhone advertisements. [282] "Hello" was also used to introduce the original Macintosh, Newton , iMac ("hello (again)"), and iPod. [283]
From the introduction of the Macintosh in 1984 with the 1984 Super Bowl commercial to the more modern ' Get a Mac ' adverts, Apple has been recognized for its efforts towards effective advertising and marketing for its products. However, claims made by later campaigns were criticized , [284] particularly the 2005 Power Mac ads. [285] Apple's product commercials gained a lot of attention as a result of their eye-popping graphics and catchy tunes. [286] Musicians who benefited from an improved profile as a result of their songs being included on Apple commercials include Canadian singer Feist with the song " 1234 " and Yael Naïm with the song " New Soul ". [286]

Brand loyalty
Apple customers gained a reputation for devotion and loyalty early in the company's history. BYTE in 1984 stated that [288]
Apple evangelists were actively engaged by the company at one time, but this was after the phenomenon had already been firmly established. Apple evangelist Guy Kawasaki has called the brand fanaticism "something that was stumbled upon," [289] while Ive explained in 2014 that "People have an incredibly personal relationship" with Apple's products. [57] Apple Store openings and new product releases can draw crowds of hundreds, with some waiting in line as much as a day before the opening. [290] [291] [292] [293] The opening of New York City 's Fifth Avenue "Cube" store in 2006 became the setting of a marriage proposal, and had visitors from Europe who flew in for the event. [294] The high level of brand loyalty has been criticized and ridiculed, applying the epithet " Apple fanboy " and mocking the lengthy lines before a product launch. [295] An internal memo leaked in 2015 suggested the company planned to discourage long lines and direct customers to purchase its products on its website. [296]
Fortune magazine named Apple the most admired company in the United States in 2008, and in the world from 2008 to 2012. [297] [298] [299] [300] [301] On September 30, 2013, Apple surpassed Coca-Cola to become the world's most valuable brand in the Omnicom Group 's "Best Global Brands" report. [302] Boston Consulting Group has ranked Apple as the world's most innovative brand every year since 2005. [303]
John Sculley told The Guardian newspaper in 1997: "People talk about technology, but Apple was a marketing company. It was the marketing company of the decade." [304] Research in 2002 by NetRatings indicate that the average Apple consumer was usually more affluent and better educated than other PC company consumers. The research indicated that this correlation could stem from the fact that on average Apple Inc. products were more expensive than other PC products. [305] [306]
In response to a query about the devotion of loyal Apple consumers, Jonathan Ive responded:

Home page
The Apple website home page has been used to commemorate, or pay tribute to, milestones and events outside of Apple's product offerings:

Headquarters
Apple Inc.'s world corporate headquarters are located in the middle of Silicon Valley , at 1–6 Infinite Loop , Cupertino , California. This Apple campus has six buildings that total 850,000 square feet (79,000 m 2 ) and was built in 1993 by Sobrato Development Cos. [319]
Apple has a satellite campus in neighboring Sunnyvale, California , where it houses a testing and research laboratory. [320] AppleInsider published article in March 2014 claiming that Apple has a tucked away a top-secret facility where is developing the SG5 electric vehicle project codenamed "Titan" under the shell company name SixtyEight Research . [321]
In 2006, Apple announced its intention to build a second campus in Cupertino about 1 mile (1.6 km) east of the current campus and next to Interstate 280. [322] The new campus building will be designed by Norman Foster . [323] The Cupertino City Council approved the proposed "spaceship" design campus on October 15, 2013, after a 2011 presentation by Jobs detailing the architectural design of the new building and its environs. The new campus is planned to house up to 13,000 employees in one central, four-storied, circular building surrounded by extensive landscape. It will feature a café with room for 3,000 sitting people and parking underground as well as in a parking structure. The 2.8 million square foot facility will also include Jobs's original designs for a fitness center and a corporate auditorium. [324]
Apple's headquarters for Europe, the Middle East and Africa (EMEA) are located in Cork in the south of Ireland . [325] [326] [327] [328] [329] [330] [331] The facility, which opened in 1980, was Apple's first location outside of the United States. [332] Apple Sales International, which deals with all of Apple's international sales outside of the USA, is located at Apple's campus in Cork [333] along with Apple Distribution International, which similarly deals with Apple's international distribution network. [334] On April 20, 2012, Apple added 500 new jobs at its European headquarters, increasing the total workforce from around 2,800 to 3,300 employees. [324] [326] [335] The company will build a new office block on its Hollyhill Campus to accommodate the additional staff. [336] Its United Kingdom headquarters is at Stockley Park on the outskirts of London . [337]
In February 2015, Apple opened their new 180,000-square-foot headquarters in Herzliya , Israel , which will accommodate approximately 800 employees. This opening was Apple's third office located within Israel; the first, also in Herzliya, was obtained as part of the Anobit acquisition, and the other is a research center in Haifa . [338] [339]

Stores
Apple has 496 retail stores in 21 countries as of May 2017 [update] . [340] As of July 2015 [update] , it employs 115,000 employees worldwide. [341]
Each store is designed to suit the needs of the location and regulatory authorities. Apple has received numerous architectural awards for its store designs, particularly its midtown Manhattan location on Fifth Avenue . [342] [343]
The Apple Store in Regent Street , London , was the first to open in Europe in November 2004, and is the most profitable shop in London with the highest sales per square foot, taking £60,000,000 pa, or £2,000 per square foot. [344] The Regent Street store was surpassed in size by the nearby Apple Store in Covent Garden , which was surpassed in size by the Grand Central Terminal Apple Store, New York City , in December 2011.
Of the 43,000 Apple employees in the United States 30,000 work at Apple Stores. Apple Store employees make above average pay for retail employees and are offered money toward college as well as gym memberships, 401k plans, healthcare plans, product discounts, and reduced price on purchase of stock. [345]
A May 2016 Business Insider article featuring a lengthy interview with a U.K. Apple Store retail worker highlighted significant dissatisfactions and issues for retail workers, including harassment and death threats from customers, an intense internal criticism policy that feels "like a cult", a lack of any significant bonus if a worker manages to secure a business contract worth "hundreds of thousands", a lack of promotion opportunities, and, despite a "generous" discount on any Apple product or Apple stock, are paid so little that many workers are unable to buy products themselves. [346]

Corporate affairs

Corporate culture
Apple was one of several highly successful companies founded in the 1970s that bucked the traditional notions of corporate culture . Jobs often walked around the office barefoot even after Apple became a Fortune 500 company. By the time of the "1984" television commercial, Apple's informal culture had become a key trait that differentiated it from its competitors. [347] According to a 2011 report in Fortune , this has resulted in a corporate culture more akin to a startup rather than a multinational corporation. [348]
As the company has grown and been led by a series of differently opinionated chief executives, it has arguably lost some of its original character. Nonetheless, it has maintained a reputation for fostering individuality and excellence that reliably attracts talented workers, particularly after Jobs returned to the company. Numerous Apple employees have stated that projects without Jobs's involvement often took longer than projects with it. [349] To recognize the best of its employees, Apple created the Apple Fellows program which awards individuals who make extraordinary technical or leadership contributions to personal computing while at the company. The Apple Fellowship has so far been awarded to individuals including Bill Atkinson , [350] Steve Capps , [351] Rod Holt, [350] Alan Kay , [352] [353] Guy Kawasaki , [352] [354] Al Alcorn , [355] Don Norman , [352] Rich Page , [350] and Steve Wozniak . [350]
At Apple, employees are specialists who are not exposed to functions outside their area of expertise. Jobs saw this as a means of having "best-in-class" employees in every role. For instance, Ron Johnson —Senior Vice President of Retail Operations until November 1, 2011—was responsible for site selection, in-store service, and store layout, yet had no control of the inventory in his stores (this was done by Cook, who had a background in supply-chain management). [356] Apple is also known for strictly enforcing accountability. Each project has a "directly responsible individual," or "DRI" in Apple jargon. [348] As an example, when iOS senior vice president Scott Forstall refused to sign Apple's official apology for numerous errors in the redesigned Maps app , he was forced to resign. [357] Unlike other major U.S. companies Apple provides a relatively simple compensation policy for executives that does not include perks enjoyed by other CEOs like country club fees or private use of company aircraft. The company typically grants stock options to executives every other year. [358]
An editorial article in The Verge in September 2016 by technology journalist Thomas Ricker explored some of the public's perceived lack of innovation at Apple in recent years, specifically stating that Samsung has "matched and even surpassed Apple in terms of smartphone industrial design" and citing the belief that Apple is incapable of producing another breakthrough moment in technology with its products. He goes on to write that the criticism focuses on individual pieces of hardware rather than the ecosystem as a whole, stating "Yes, iteration is boring. But it's also how Apple does business. [...] It enters a new market and then refines and refines and continues refining until it yields a success". He acknowledges that people are wishing for the "excitement of revolution", but argues that people want "the comfort that comes with harmony". Furthermore, he writes that "a device is only the starting point of an experience that will ultimately be ruled by the ecosystem in which it was spawned", referring to how decent hardware products can still fail without a proper ecosystem (specifically mentioning that Walkman didn't have an ecosystem to keep users from leaving once something better came along), but how Apple devices in different hardware segments are able to communicate and cooperate through the iCloud cloud service with features including Universal Clipboard (in which text copied on one device can be pasted on a different device) as well as inter-connected device functionality including Auto Unlock (in which an Apple Watch can unlock a Mac in close proximity). He argues that Apple's ecosystem is its greatest innovation. [359]

Customer service
In 1999 Apple retained Eight Inc. as a strategic retail design partner and began creating the Apple retail stores. Tim Kobe of Eight Inc. prepared an "Apple Retail" white paper for Jobs, outlining the ability of separate Apple retail stores to directly drive the Apple brand experience—Kobe used their recently completed work with The North Face and Nike as a basis for the white paper. [ citation needed ] The first two Apple Stores opened on May 19, 2001, in Tysons Corner, Virginia, and Glendale, California . More than 7,700 people visited Apple's first two stores in the opening weekend, spending a total of US$599,000. [360] As of June 2014 [update] , Apple maintains 425 retail stores in fourteen countries. [361] [362] In addition to Apple products, the stores sell third-party products like software titles, digital cameras, camcorders and handheld organizers. [363]
A media article published in July 2013 provided details about Apple's "At-Home Apple Advisors" customer support program that serves as the corporation's call center. The advisors are employed within the U.S. and work remotely after undergoing a four-week training program and testing period. The advisors earn between US$9 and $12 per hour and receive intensive management to ensure a high quality of customer support. [364]

Manufacturing
The company's manufacturing, procurement and logistics enable it to execute massive product launches without having to maintain large, profit-sapping inventories. In 2011, Apple's profit margins were 40 percent, compared with between 10 and 20 percent for most other hardware companies. Cook's catchphrase to describe his focus on the company's operational arm is: "Nobody wants to buy sour milk". [125] [365]
During the Mac's early history Apple generally refused to adopt prevailing industry standards for hardware, instead creating their own. [366] This trend was largely reversed in the late 1990s, beginning with Apple's adoption of the PCI bus in the 7500 / 8500 / 9500 Power Macs . Apple has since joined the industry standards groups to influence the future direction of technology standards such as USB , AGP , HyperTransport , Wi-Fi , NVMe , PCIe and others in its products. FireWire is an Apple-originated standard that was widely adopted across the industry after it was standardized as IEEE 1394 and is a legally mandated port in all Cable TV boxes in the United States. [367]

Labor practices
The company advertised its products as being made in America until the late 1990s; however, as a result of outsourcing initiatives in the 2000s, almost all of its manufacturing is now handled abroad. According to a report by The New York Times , Apple insiders "believe the vast scale of overseas factories as well as the flexibility, diligence and industrial skills of foreign workers have so outpaced their American counterparts that "Made in the U.S.A." is no longer a viable option for most Apple products". [368]
In 2006, the Mail on Sunday reported on the working conditions of the Chinese factories where contract manufacturers Foxconn and Inventec produced the iPod. [369] The article stated that one complex of factories that assembled the iPod and other items had over 200,000 workers living and working within it. Employees regularly worked more than 60 hours per week and made around $100 per month. A little over half of the workers' earnings was required to pay for rent and food from the company. [370] [371] [372]
Apple immediately launched an investigation after the 2006 media report, and worked with their manufacturers to ensure acceptable working conditions. [373] In 2007, Apple started yearly audits of all its suppliers regarding worker's rights , slowly raising standards and pruning suppliers that did not comply. Yearly progress reports have been published since 2008. [374] In 2011, Apple admitted that its suppliers' child labor practices in China had worsened. [375]
The Foxconn suicides occurred between January and November 2010, when 18 [376] Foxconn (Chinese: 富士康) employees attempted suicide , resulting in 14 deaths—the company was the world's largest contract electronics manufacturer, for clients including Apple, at the time. [376] [377] [378] The suicides drew media attention, and employment practices at Foxconn were investigated by Apple. [379] Apple issued a public statement about the suicides, and company spokesperson Steven Dowling said:
The statement was released after the results from the company's probe into its suppliers' labor practices were published in early 2010. Foxconn was not specifically named in the report, but Apple identified a series of serious labor violations of labor laws, including Apple's own rules, and some child labor existed in a number of factories. [380] Apple committed to the implementation of changes following the suicides. [381]
Also in 2010, workers in China planned to sue iPhone contractors over poisoning by a cleaner used to clean LCD screens. One worker claimed that he and his coworkers had not been informed of possible occupational illnesses. [382] After a high suicide rate in a Foxconn facility in China making iPads and iPhones, albeit a lower rate than that of China as a whole, [383] workers were forced to sign a legally binding document guaranteeing that they would not kill themselves. [384] Workers in factories producing Apple products have also been exposed to n- hexane , a neurotoxin that is a cheaper alternative than alcohol for cleaning the products. [385] [386] [387]
A 2014 BBC investigation found excessive hours and other problems persisted, despite Apple's promise to reform factory practice after the 2010 Foxconn suicides. The Pegatron factory was once again the subject of review, as reporters gained access to the working conditions inside through recruitment as employees. While the BBC maintained that the experiences of its reporters showed that labor violations were continuing since 2010, Apple publicly disagreed with the BBC and stated: "We are aware of no other company doing as much as Apple to ensure fair and safe working conditions". [381]
In December 2014, the Institute for Global Labour and Human Rights published a report which documented inhumane conditions for the 15,000 workers at a Zhen Ding Technology factory in Shenzhen, China, which serves as a major supplier of circuit boards for Apple's iPhone and iPad. According to the report, workers are pressured into 65-hour work weeks which leaves them so exhausted that they often sleep during lunch breaks. They are also made to reside in "primitive, dark and filthy dorms" where they sleep "on plywood, with six to ten workers in each crowded room." Omnipresent security personnel also routinely harass and beat the workers. [388] [389]

Environmental practices and initiatives

Energy and resources
Following a Greenpeace protest, Apple released a statement on April 17, 2012, committing to ending its use of coal and shifting to 100% renewable clean energy. [390] [391] By 2013 Apple was using 100% renewable energy to power their data centers. Overall, 75% of the company's power came from clean renewable sources. [392]
In 2010, Climate Counts , a nonprofit organization dedicated to directing consumers toward the greenest companies, gave Apple a score of 52 points out of a possible 100, which puts Apple in their top category "Striding". [393] This was an increase from May 2008, when Climate Counts only gave Apple 11 points out of 100, which placed the company last among electronics companies, at which time Climate Counts also labeled Apple with a "stuck icon", adding that Apple at the time was "a choice to avoid for the climate conscious consumer". [394]
As of 2016 [update] , Apple states that 100% of its U.S. operations run on renewable energy , 100% of Apple's data centers run on renewable energy and 93% of Apple's global operations run on renewable energy. [395] However, the facilities are connected to the local grid which usually contains a mix of fossil and renewable sources, so Apple carbon offsets its electricity use. [396] [397] The Electronic Product Environmental Assessment Tool (EPEAT) allows consumers to see the effect a product has on the environment. Each product receives a Gold, Silver, or Bronze rank depending on its efficiency and sustainability. Every Apple tablet , notebook , desktop computer , and display that EPEAT ranks achieves a Gold rating, the highest possible. Although Apple's data centers recycle water 35 times, [398] the increased activity in retail, corporate and data centers also increase the amount of water use to 573 million gallons in 2015. [399]
In May 2015, Greenpeace evaluated the state of the Green Internet and commended Apple on their environmental practices saying, "Apple's commitment to renewable energy has helped set a new bar for the industry, illustrating in very concrete terms that a 100% renewable Internet is within its reach, and providing several models of intervention for other companies that want to build a sustainable Internet." [400]
During an event on March 21, 2016, Apple provided a status update on its environmental initiative to be 100% renewable in all of its worldwide operations. Lisa P. Jackson , Apple's vice president of Environment, Policy and Social Initiatives who reports directly to CEO, Tim Cook, announced that as of March 2016, 93% of Apple's worldwide operations are powered with renewable energy. Also featured was the company's efforts to use sustainable paper in their product packaging; 99% of all paper used by Apple in the product packaging comes from post-consumer recycled paper or sustainably-managed forests, as the company continues its move to all paper packaging for all of its products. [401] [402] Apple working in partnership with Conservation Fund , have preserved 36,000 acres of working forests in Maine and North Carolina . Another partnership announced is with the World Wildlife Fund to preserve up to 1,000,000 acres of forests in China. Featured was the company's installation of a 40 MW solar power plant in the Sichuan province of China that was tailor made to coexist with the indigenous yaks that eat hay produced on the land, by raising the panels to be several feet off of the ground so the yaks and their feed would be unharmed grazing beneath the array. This installation alone compensates for more than all of the energy used in Apple's Stores and Offices in the whole of China, negating the company's energy carbon footprint in the country. In Singapore , Apple has worked with the Singaporean government to cover the rooftops of 800 buildings in the city-state with solar panels allowing Apple's Singapore operations to be run on 100% renewable energy. Liam was introduced to the world, an advanced robotic disassembler and sorter designed by Apple Engineers in California specifically for recycling outdated or broken iPhones. Reuses and recycles parts from traded in products. [403]
Apple announced on August 16, 2016, that Lens Technology, one of its major suppliers in China, has committed to power all its glass production for Apple with 100 percent renewable energy by 2018. The commitment is a large step in Apple's efforts to help manufacturers lower their carbon footprint in China. [404] Apple also announced that all 14 of its final assembly sites in China are now compliant with UL's Zero Waste to Landfill validation. The standard, which started in January 2015, certifies that all manufacturing waste is reused , recycled , composted , or converted into energy (when necessary). Since the program began, nearly, 140,000 metric tons of waste have been diverted from landfills . [405]

Toxins
Following further campaigns by Greenpeace, [406] in 2008, Apple became the first electronics manufacturer to fully eliminate all polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and brominated flame retardants (BFRs) in its complete product line. [407] [408] In June 2007, Apple began replacing the cold cathode fluorescent lamp (CCFL) backlit LCD displays in its computers with mercury -free LED-backlit LCD displays and arsenic -free glass, starting with the upgraded MacBook Pro . [409] [410] [411] [412] Apple offers comprehensive and transparent information about the CO 2 e , emissions , materials, and electrical usage concerning every product they currently produce or have sold in the past (and which they have enough data needed to produce the report), in their portfolio on their homepage. Allowing consumers to make informed purchasing decisions on the products they offer for sale. [413] In June 2009, Apple's iPhone 3GS was free of PVC, arsenic, and BFRs. [409] [414] All Apple products now have mercury-free LED-backlit LCD displays, arsenic-free glass, and non-PVC cables. All Apple products have EPEAT Gold status and beat the latest Energy Star guidelines in each product's respective regulatory category. [409] [415]
In November 2011, Apple was featured in Greenpeace's Guide to Greener Electronics, which ranks electronics manufacturers on sustainability, climate and energy policy, and how "green" their products are. The company ranked fourth of fifteen electronics companies (moving up five places from the previous year) with a score of 4.6/10. [416] [417] Greenpeace praises Apple's sustainability , noting that the company exceeded its 70% global recycling goal in 2010. It continues to score well on the products rating with all Apple products now being free of PVC plastic and BFRs. However, the guide criticizes Apple on the Energy criteria for not seeking external verification of its greenhouse gas emissions data and for not setting out any targets to reduce emissions. [418] In January 2012, Apple requested that its cable maker, Volex, begin producing halogen-free USB and power cables. [419]

Green bonds
In February 2016, Apple issued a US$1.5 billion green bond (climate bond), the first ever of its kind by a U.S. tech company. The green bond proceeds are dedicated to the financing of environmental projects. [420]

Finance
Apple is the world's largest information technology company by revenue, the world's largest technology company by total assets , [421] and the world's second-largest mobile phone manufacturer after Samsung . [422] It is also the largest publicly-traded corporation in the world by market capitalization , with an estimated market capitalization of $800 billion in May 2017. [181] In February 2015, Apple became the first U.S. corporation to be valued at over $700 billion. [423] [424]
In its fiscal year ending in September 2011, Apple Inc. reported a total of $108 billion in annual revenues—a significant increase from its 2010 revenues of $65 billion—and nearly $82 billion in cash reserves . [425] On March 19, 2012, Apple announced plans for a $2.65-per-share dividend beginning in fourth quarter of 2012, per approval by their board of directors. [426] On September 2012, Apple reached a record share price of more than $705 and closed at above 700. [427] With 936,596,000 outstanding shares (as of June 30, 2012 [update] ), [428]
The company's worldwide annual revenue in 2013 totaled $170 billion. [429] In May 2013, Apple entered the top ten of the Fortune 500 list of companies for the first time, rising 11 places above its 2012 ranking to take the sixth position. [430] As of 2016 [update] , Apple has around US$234 billion of cash and marketable securities, of which 90% is located outside the United States for tax purposes. [431]
Apple amassed 65% of all profits made by the eight largest worldwide smartphone manufacturers in quarter one of 2014, according to a report by Canaccord Genuity . In the first quarter of 2015, the company garnered 92% of all earnings. [432]

Tax practices
Apple has created subsidiaries in low-tax places such as Ireland , the Netherlands , Luxembourg and the British Virgin Islands to cut the taxes it pays around the world. According to The New York Times, in the 1980s Apple was among the first tech companies to designate overseas salespeople in high-tax countries in a manner that allowed the company to sell on behalf of low-tax subsidiaries on other continents, sidestepping income taxes. In the late 1980s Apple was a pioneer of an accounting technique known as the " Double Irish with a Dutch sandwich ," which reduces taxes by routing profits through Irish subsidiaries and the Netherlands and then to the Caribbean. [433]
British Conservative Party Member of Parliament Charlie Elphicke published research on October 30, 2012, [434] which showed that some multinational companies, including Apple Inc., were making billions of pounds of profit in the UK, but were paying an effective tax rate to the UK Treasury of only 3 percent, well below standard corporation tax . He followed this research by calling on the Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne to force these multinationals, which also included Google and The Coca-Cola Company , to state the effective rate of tax they pay on their UK revenues. Elphicke also said that government contracts should be withheld from multinationals who do not pay their fair share of UK tax. [435]
It is a matter of public record that Apple Inc. is the single largest taxpayer to the Department of the Treasury of the United States of America with an effective tax rate of approximately of 26% as of the Second Quarter of the Apple Fiscal Year 2016. [436]
In 2015, Reuters reported that Apple had earnings abroad of $54.4 billion which were untaxed by the IRS of the United States. Under U.S. tax law governed by the IRC , corporations don't pay income tax on overseas profits unless the profits are repatriated into the United States and as such Apple argues that to benefit its shareholders it will leave it overseas until a repatriation holiday or comprehensive tax reform takes place in the United States. [437] [438]
On August 30, 2016, after a three-year investigation by the EU's competition commissioner that concluded that Apple received "illegal state aid" from Ireland, the EU ordered Apple to pay 13 billion euros ($14.5 billion), plus interest, in unpaid taxes. [439] Specifically, the commissioner found that Apple had benefitted from Irish Department of Revenue tax rulings that allowed it to split the profits recorded by Apple Sales International internally between its Irish branch and a stateless "head office" entity lacking employees or premises (permitted under Irish law until 2013). [440] The Chancellor of Austria , Christian Kern , put this decision into perspective by stating that "every Viennese cafe, every sausage stand pays more tax in Austria than a multinational corporation". [441]

Ownership
Apple Inc. is a joint-stock company registered with the SEC . As of 30 December 2016 [update] , it has 5,257,816,000 outstanding shares. These are mainly held by institutional investors and funds. [442] [443]

Litigation
Apple has been a participant in various legal proceedings and claims since it began operation. [444] In particular, Apple is known for and promotes itself as actively and aggressively enforcing its intellectual property interests. Some litigation examples include Apple v. Samsung , Apple v. Microsoft , Motorola Mobility v. Apple Inc. , and Apple Corps v. Apple Computer . Apple has also had to defend itself against charges on numerous occasions of violating intellectual property rights. Most have been dismissed in the courts as shell companies known as patent trolls , with no evidence of actual use of patents in question. [445] Most recently, on December 21, 2016, Nokia announced that in the U.S. and Germany, it has filed a suit against Apple, claiming that the latter's products infringe on Nokia's patents. [446] [447]

Privacy stance
Apple has made clear its stance on privacy and as such has made available Transparency Reports on the Governmental Requests it receives. Apple states plainly, "On devices running iOS 8 and later versions, your personal data is placed under the protection of your passcode. [305] For all devices running iOS 8 and later versions, Apple will not perform iOS data extractions in response to government search warrants because the files to be extracted are protected by an encryption key that is tied to the user's passcode, which Apple does not possess." [448]
In its latest "Who Has Your Back?" report, once again the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) awarded Apple 5 out of 5 stars "commend[ing] Apple for its strong stance regarding user rights, transparency, and privacy." [449]
Following media reports about PRISM , NSA's massive electronic surveillance program , in June 2013, several technology companies were identified as participants, including Apple. According to leaks of said program, Apple joined the PRISM program in 2012. [450]

Charitable causes
Apple is a partner of (PRODUCT)RED , a fundraising campaign for AIDS charity. In November 2014, Apple arranged for all App Store revenue in a two-week period to go to the fundraiser, [451] generating more than US$ 20 million, [452] [453] and in March 2017, it released an iPhone 7 with a red color finish. [454] [455]
In November 2012, Apple donated $2.5 million to the American Red Cross to aid relief efforts after Hurricane Sandy . [456]
On April 14, 2016, Apple and the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) announced that they have engaged in a partnership to, "help protect life on our planet." Apple released a special page in the iTunes App Store , Apps for Earth. In the arrangement, Apple has committed that through April 24, WWF will receive 100% of the proceeds from the applications participating in the App Store via both the purchases of any paid apps and the In-App Purchases. Apple and WWF's Apps for Earth campaign raised more than $8 million in total proceeds to support WWF's conservation work. WWF announced the results at WWDC 2016 in San Francisco. [457] [458] [459]

See also
WebPage index: 00032
Knowledge Graph
The Knowledge Graph is a knowledge base used by Google to enhance its search engine 's search results with semantic-search information gathered from a wide variety of sources. Knowledge Graph display was added to Google's search engine in 2012, starting in the United States, having been announced on May 16, 2012. [1] It provides structured and detailed information about the topic in addition to a list of links to other sites. The goal is that users would be able to use this information to resolve their query without having to navigate to other sites and assemble the information themselves. [2] The short summary provided in the knowledge graph is often used as a spoken answer in Google Now searches. [3]
According to some news websites, the implementation of Google's Knowledge Graph has played a role in the page view decline of various language versions of Wikipedia . [4] [5] [6] [7] As of the end of 2016, knowledge graph holds over 70 billion facts. [8]

History
According to Google, the information in the Knowledge Graph is derived from many sources, including the CIA World Factbook , Wikidata , and Wikipedia . [1] The feature is similar in intent to answer engines such as Wolfram Alpha and efforts such as Linked Data and DBpedia . As of 2012 [update] , its semantic network contained over 570 million objects and more than 18 billion facts about and relationships between different objects that are used to understand the meaning of the keywords entered for the search. [9] [10]
On December 4, 2012, the Knowledge Graph was introduced in seven more languages: Spanish, French, German, Portuguese, Japanese, Russian, and Italian. [11] [12] During the Google I/O conference in May 2013, Google's Amit Singhal presented on the future of search, explaining that a search engine's three primary functions will need to evolve and that search will need to: 1. Answer, 2. Converse, and 3. Anticipate. [13] As part of his keynote talk Singhal asked: "A computer you can talk to? And it will answer everything you ask it?" [14]
In August 2014, Google announced a new initiative, the Knowledge Vault , which derives much of its data from the Knowledge Graph and the sources thereof, as well as harvesting its own data, ranking its reliability and compiling all results into a database of over 1.6 billion facts collected by machine learning algorithms . On December 16, 2014, the Freebase and Knowledge Graph team at Google announced that Freebase would shut-down in late 2015 and that they would help to transfer all of its data over to Wikidata . [15] In October 2016 Google announced that the Knowledge Graph now holds 70 billion facts. [8]

Competition
Other companies' knowledge graphs:

Knowledge panels
According to Google, information in the knowledge graph powers a "knowledge panel", which is a box containing information, and the box is presented at the top of search results. [20] In May 2016, The Washington Post reported that "knowledge panels and other sorts of 'rich answers' have mushroomed across Google, appearing atop the results on roughly one-third of its 100 billion monthly searches".
Dario Taraborelli of the Wikimedia Foundation says that Google's omission of sources in its knowledge panels is designed so that the knowledge panel will seem more authoritative. The Post reports that Google's knowledge panels are "frequently unattributed", such as a knowledge panel on the age of actress Betty White which is "as unsourced and absolute as if handed down by God". [21] Google will frequently scrape information from websites with varying degrees of success, but the increased use of Schema markup means that information on websites can be more intelligently understood and utilized in the Knowledge Graph.
In Google Assistant search results (currently only available in Google Allo and in Google Pixel search) [22] sources are included for search information in voice response and in the response card. [23]

See also
WebPage index: 00033
Transaction cost
In economics and related disciplines, a transaction cost is a cost in making any economic trade when participating in a market. [1]
In Transaction Costs, Institutions and Economic Performance (1992), Douglass C. North argues that institutions, understood as the set of rules in a society, are key in the determination of transaction costs. In this sense, institutions that facilitate low transaction costs, boost economic growth. [2]
Douglass North states that there are four factors that comprise transaction costs – "measurement," "enforcement," "ideological attitudes and perceptions," and "the size of the market." [2] Measurement refers to the calculation of the value of all aspects of the good or service involved in the transaction. [2] Enforcement can be defined as the need for an unbiased third party to ensure that neither party involved in the transaction reneges on their part of the deal. [2] These first two factors appear in the concept of ideological attitudes and perceptions, North's third aspect of transaction costs. [2] Ideological attitudes and perceptions encapsulate each individual's set of values, which influences their interpretation of the world. [2] The final aspect of transaction costs, according to North, is market size, which affects the partiality or impartiality of transactions. [2]
Transaction costs can be divided into three broad categories: [3]
For example, the buyer of a used car faces a variety of different transaction costs. The search costs are the costs of finding a car and determining the car's condition. The bargaining costs are the costs of negotiating a price with the seller. The policing and enforcement costs are the costs of ensuring that the seller delivers the car in the promised condition.

History of development
The idea that transactions form the basis of an economic thinking was introduced by the institutional economist John R. Commons (1931). He said that:
The term "transaction cost" is frequently thought to have been coined by Ronald Coase , who used it to develop a theoretical framework for predicting when certain economic tasks would be performed by firms , and when they would be performed on the market . However, the term is actually absent from his early work up to the 1970s. While he did not coin the specific term, Coase indeed discussed "costs of using the price mechanism" in his 1937 paper The Nature of the Firm , where he first discusses the concept of transaction costs, and refers to the "Costs of Market Transactions" in his seminal work, The Problem of Social Cost (1960). The term "Transaction Costs" itself can instead be traced back to the monetary economics literature of the 1950s, and does not appear to have been consciously 'coined' by any particular individual. [4]
Arguably, transaction cost reasoning became most widely known through Oliver E. Williamson 's Transaction Cost Economics . Today, transaction cost economics is used to explain a number of different behaviours. Often this involves considering as "transactions" not only the obvious cases of buying and selling , but also day-to-day emotional interactions, informal gift exchanges, etc. Oliver E. Williamson was awarded the 2009 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics . [5]
According to Williamson, the determinants of transaction costs are frequency, specificity , uncertainty, limited rationality, and opportunistic behavior.
At least two definitions of the phrase "transaction cost" are commonly used in literature. Transaction costs have been broadly defined by Steven N. S. Cheung as any costs that are not conceivable in a " Robinson Crusoe economy"—in other words, any costs that arise due to the existence of institutions . For Cheung, if the term "transaction costs" were not already so popular in economics literatures, they should more properly be called "institutional costs". [6] [7] But many economists seem to restrict the definition to exclude costs internal to an organization. [8] The latter definition parallels Coase's early analysis of "costs of the price mechanism" and the origins of the term as a market trading fee.
Starting with the broad definition, many economists then ask what kind of institutions (firms, markets, franchises , etc.) minimize the transaction costs of producing and distributing a particular good or service. Often these relationships are categorized by the kind of contract involved. This approach sometimes goes under the rubric of New Institutional Economics .

Examples
A supplier may bid in a very competitive environment with a customer to build a widget . However, to make the widget, the supplier will be required to build specialized machinery which cannot be easily redeployed to make other products. Once the contract is awarded to the supplier, the relationship between customer and supplier changes from a competitive environment to a monopoly / monopsony relationship, known as a bilateral monopoly . This means that the customer has greater leverage over the supplier such as when price cuts occur. To avoid these potential costs, "hostages" may be swapped to avoid this event. These hostages could include partial ownership in the widget factory; revenue sharing might be another way.
Car companies and their suppliers often fit into this category, with the car companies forcing price cuts on their suppliers. Defense suppliers and the military appear to have the opposite problem, with cost overruns occurring quite often. Technologies like enterprise resource planning (ERP) can provide technical support for these strategies.
An example of measurement, one of North’s four factors of transaction costs, is detailed in Mancur Olson’s work Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development (1993) – Olson writes that roving bandits calculate the success of their banditry based on how much money they can take from their citizens. [9] Enforcement, the second of North's factors of transaction costs, is exemplified in Diego Gambetta’s book The Sicilian Mafia: the Business of Private Protection (1996). Gambetta describes the concept of the “Peppe,” who occupies the role of mediator in dealings with the Sicilian mafia – the Peppe is needed because it is not certain that both parties will maintain their end of the deal. [10] Measurement and enforcement comprise North’s third factor, ideological attitudes and perceptions – each individual’s views influence how they go about each transaction. [2]

Differences from neoclassical microeconomics
Williamson argues in The Mechanisms of Governance (1996) that Transaction Cost Economics (TCE) differs from neoclassical microeconomics in the following six points:

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00034
USA Today
USA Today is an internationally distributed American daily middle-market newspaper that serves as the flagship publication of its owner, the Gannett Company . Founded by Al Neuharth on September 15, 1982, it operates from Gannett's corporate headquarters on Jones Branch Drive in McLean , Virginia , United States. [3] It is printed at 37 sites across the United States and at five additional sites internationally. Its dynamic design influenced the style of local, regional and national newspapers worldwide, through its use of concise reports, colorized images, informational graphics, and its inclusion of popular culture stories, among other distinct features. [4] [5]
With a weekly circulation of 1,021,638 and an approximate daily reach of seven million readers as of 2016 [update] , [6] USA Today shares the position of having the widest circulation of any newspaper in the United States with The Wall Street Journal and The New York Times . [7] USA Today is distributed in all 50 states , the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico , with an international edition distributed in Canada , Asia and the Pacific Islands, and Europe .

History
The development of USA Today commenced on February 29, 1980, when company staff employed for a task force known as "Project NN" met with Gannett Company chairman Al Neuharth in Cocoa Beach, Florida to develop a national newspaper. Early, regional prototypes included East Bay Today , an Oakland, California -based publication first published in the late 1970s to serve as the morning edition of the Oakland Tribune , an afternoon newspaper which Gannett owned at the time. [8] On June 11, 1981, Gannett printed the first prototypes of the proposed publication; the copies, which displayed two proposed design layouts, were mailed to various newsmakers and prominent leaders in journalism for review and input. [5] [9] The Gannett Company's Board of Directors approved the launch of the national newspaper, which would be titled USA Today , on December 5, 1981; with the launch, Neuharth was appointed president and publisher of the newspaper, adding those responsibilities to his existing position as Gannett's chief executive officer . [9] [10]
Gannett formally announced the launch of the paper on April 20, 1982. USA Today began publishing on September 15, 1982, initially launching in the Baltimore and Washington, D.C. metropolitan areas for an initial newsstand price of 25¢ (equivalent to 62¢ today). After selling out its first issue, Gannett gradually expanded the national distribution of the paper, eventually reaching an estimated circulation of 362,879 copies, double the amount of copy sales that Gannett projected that USA Today would accrue by the end of 1982. The design was unique in its incorporation of colorized graphics and photographs; initially, only its front news section pages were rendered in four-color, while the remaining pages were displayed in a spot color format. The paper's overall content style and elevated use of graphics – the result of the concept developed by Neuharth, in contribution with staff graphics designers George Rorick, Sam Ward, Suzy Parker, John Sherlock and Web Bryant – was derided by critics, who referred to it as " McPaper " or "television you can wrap fish in," because it opted to incorporate more concise, shorter-form nuggets of information akin to the style of television news rather than in-depth stories in many of its sections like traditional newspapers, which many in the newspaper industry considered to be a dumbing down of the news. [9] [10] [11]
On July 2, 1984, the newspaper switched from a largely black-and-white to a color publication, featuring full color photography and graphics in all four sections. The following week on July 10, USA Today launched an international edition intended primarily for U.S. readers abroad; this was followed four months later on October 8 with the rollout of the first via satellite publication of its international version in Singapore . On April 8, 1985, the paper published its first special bonus section, a 12-page section called "Baseball '85," which previewed the 1985 Major League Baseball season . [9]
By the fourth quarter of 1985, USA Today had become the second largest newspaper in the United States, reaching a daily circulation of 1.4 million copies; total daily readership of the paper by 1987 (according to Simmons Market Research Bureau statistics) had reached 5.5 million, the largest of any daily newspaper in the U.S. On May 6, 1986, USA Today began printing production of its international edition in Switzerland . USA Today operated at a loss for most of its first four years of operation, accumulating a total deficit of $233 million after taxes, according to figures released by Gannett in July 1987; the newspaper began turning its first profit in May 1987, six months ahead of Gannett corporate revenue projections. [9]
On January 29, 1988, USA Today published the largest edition in its history, a 78-page weekend edition featuring a section previewing Super Bowl XXII ; the edition included 44.38 pages of advertising and sold 2,114,055 copies, setting a single-day circulation record for an American newspaper (a record that the paper would beat nearly nine months later on September 2, when its Labor Day weekend edition sold 2,257,734 copies). On April 15, USA Today launched a third international printing site, based in Hong Kong . The international edition set circulation and advertising sales records during August 1988, when the publication provided extensive coverage of that year's Summer Olympics , selling more than 60,000 copies and 100 pages of advertising. [9]
By July 1991, Simmons Market Research Bureau estimated that USA Today had a total daily readership of nearly 6.6 million readers, an all-time high for the paper at the time and the largest readership of any daily newspaper in the United States. On September 1 of that year, USA Today launched a fourth printsite for its international edition in London to publish and distribute that version of the paper to the United Kingdom and the British Isles . [9] The international edition's format was changed beginning with the April 1, 1994 issue to release each issue on Monday through Fridays, rather than from Tuesday through Saturday, in order to accommodate business travelers; on February 1, 1995, USA Today opened its first editorial bureau outside of the United States at its Hong Kong publishing facility; additional editorial bureaus were launched in London and Moscow in 1996. [9]
On April 17, 1995, USA Today launched its website, www.usatoday.com, as part of the USA Today Information Network to provide real-time news coverage; the site would eventually expand to include a spin-off website that launched in June 2002, USATODAY.com Travel, providing travel information and booking tools. On August 28, 1995, a fifth international publishing site was launched in Frankfurt, Germany , to print and distribute the international edition throughout most of Europe. [9] On October 4, 1999, USA Today began running advertisements on its front page for the first time. [9]
On February 8, 2000, Gannett launched USA Today Live , a broadcast and Internet initiative designed to provide coverage from the newspaper to broadcast television stations nationwide for use in their local newscasts and their websites; the venture would also provide integration with the USA Today website, which transitioned from a text-based format to feature audio and video clips of news content. The paper launched a sixth printing site for its international edition on May 15, 2000, in Milan , Italy , followed on July 10 by the launch of an international printing facility in Charleroi, Belgium . [9]
2001 saw additional expansion of the newspaper, with the launch of two interactive units: on June 19, USA Today and Gannett Newspapers launched the USA Today Careers Network (now Careers.com ), a website featuring localized employment listings, then on July 18, the USA Today News Center was launched as an interactive television news service developed through a joint venture with the On Command Corporation that was distributed to hotels around the United States. On September 12 of that year, the newspaper set an all-time single day circulation record, selling 3,638,600 copies for its edition covering the terrorist attacks that damaged the World Trade Center and The Pentagon and a hijacking attempt tied to the two events that resulted in the crash of United Airlines Flight 93 outside of Shanksville, Pennsylvania . That November, USA Today migrated its operations from Gannett's previous corporate headquarters in Arlington, Virginia to the company's new headquarters in nearby McLean . [9]
On December 12, 2005, Gannett announced that it would combine the separate newsroom operations of USA Today ' s online and print entities, with USAToday.com's vice president and editor-in-chief Kinsey Wilson being promoted to co-executive editor, alongside existing executive editor John Hillkirk. [9] In 2010, USA Today launched the USA Today API for sharing data with partners of all types. [12]

Newsroom restructuring and 2011 graphical tweaks
On August 27, 2010, USA Today announced that it would undergo a reorganization of its newsroom, announcing the layoffs of 130 staffers. It also announced that the paper would shift its focus away from print and place more emphasis on its digital platforms (including USAToday.com and its related mobile applications ) and launch of a new publication called USA Today Sports .
On January 24, 2011, to reverse a revenue slide, the paper introduced a tweaked format that modified the appearance of its front section pages, which included a larger logo at the top of each page; coloring tweaks to section front pages; a new sans-serif font, called Prelo, for certain headlines of main stories (replacing the Gulliver typeface that had been implemented for story headers in April 2000); an updated "Newsline" feature featuring larger, "newsier" headline entry points; and the increasing and decreasing of mastheads and white space to present a cleaner style. [13] [14]

2012 redesign
On September 14, 2012, USA Today underwent the first major redesign in its history, in commemoration for the 30th anniversary of the paper's first edition. [15] Developed in conjunction with brand design firm Wolff Olins , the print edition of USA Today added a page covering technology stories and expanded travel coverage within the Life section and increased the number of color pages included in each edition, while retaining longtime elements. [16] The "globe" logo used since the paper's inception was replaced with a new logo featuring a large circle rendered in colors corresponding to each of the sections, serving as an infographic that changes with news stories, containing images representing that day's top stories. [16] [17]
The paper's website was also extensively overhauled using a new, in-house content management system known as Presto and a design created by Fantasy Interactive, that incorporates flipboard-style navigation to switch between individual stories (which obscure most of the main and section pages), clickable video advertising and a responsive design layout. The site was designed to be more interactive, provide optimizations for mobile and touchscreen devices, provide "high impact" advertising units, and provide the ability for Gannett to syndicate USA Today content to the websites of its local properties, and vice versa. To accomplish this goal, Gannett migrated its newspaper and television station websites to the Presto platform and the USA Today site design throughout 2013 and 2014 (although archive content accessible through search engines remains available through the pre-relaunch design). [18] [19]

Mid-2010s expansion and restructuring
On October 6, 2013, Gannett test launched a daily "butterfly" edition of USA Today for distribution as an insert in four of its newspapers – The Indianapolis Star , the Rochester Democrat & Chronicle , the Fort Myers -based News-Press and the Appleton, Wisconsin -based Post-Crescent . The launch of the syndicated insert caused USA Today to restructure its operations to allow seven-day-a-week production to accommodate the packaging of its national and international news content and enterprise stories (comprising about 10 pages for the weekday and Saturday editions, and up to 22 pages for the Sunday edition) into the pilot insert. Gannett later announced on December 11, that it would formally launch the condensed daily edition of USA Today in 31 additional local newspapers nationwide through April 2014 (with the Palm Springs, California -based Desert Sun and the Lafayette, Louisiana -based Advertiser being the first newspapers outside of the pilot program participants to add the supplement on December 15), citing "positive feedback" to the feature from readers and advertisers of the initial four papers. Gannett was given permission from the Alliance for Audited Media to count the circulation figures from the syndicated local insert with the total circulation count for the flagship national edition of USA Today . [20] [21]
On January 4, 2014, USA Today acquired the book and film review website, Reviewed.com. [9] In the first quarter of 2014, Gannett launched a condensed USA Today insert into 31 other newspapers in its network, thereby increasing the number of inserts to 35, in an effort to shore up USA Today ' s circulation after it regained its position as the highest circulated weekdaily newspaper in the United States in October 2013. [22] On September 3, 2014, USA Today announced that it would lay off roughly 70 employees in a restructuring of its newsroom and business operations. [23] In October 2014, USA Today and OpenWager Inc. entered into a partnership to release a Bingo app called USA TODAY Bingo Cruise. [24]
On December 3, 2015, Gannett formally launched the USA Today Network, a national digital newsgathering service providing shared content between USA Today and the company's 92 local newspapers throughout the United States as well as pooling advertising services on both a hyperlocal and national reach. The Louisville Courier-Journal had earlier soft-launched the service as part of a pilot program started on November 17, coinciding with an imaging rebrand for the Louisville, Kentucky -based newspaper; Gannett's other local newspaper properties, as well as those it acquired through its merger with the Journal Media Group , began identifying themselves as part of the USA Today Network (foregoing use of the Gannett name outside of requisite ownership references) gradually integrated into the USA Today Network through early January 2016. [25] [26] [27]

Layout and format
USA Today is known for synthesizing news down to easy-to-read-and-comprehend stories. In the main edition circulated in the United States and some Canadian cities, each edition consists of four sections: News (the oft-labeled "front page" section), Money, Sports, and Life. Since March 1998, the Friday edition of Life has been separated into two distinct sections: the regular Life focusing on entertainment (subtitled Weekend ; section E), which features television reviews and listings, a DVD column, film reviews and trends, and a travel supplement called Destinations & Diversions (section D). The international edition of the paper features two sections: News and Money in one; with Sports and Life in the other.
Atypical of most daily newspapers, the paper does not print on Saturdays and Sundays; the Friday edition serves as the weekend edition (although USA Today has published special Saturday and Sunday editions in the past, the first being published on January 19, 1991, when it released a Saturday "Extra" edition updating coverage of the Gulf War from the previous day; the paper published special seven-day-a-week editions for the first time on July 19, 1996, when it published special editions for exclusive distribution in the host city of Atlanta and surrounding areas for the two-week duration of the Summer Olympics ). [9] USA Today prints each complete story on the front page of the respective section with the exception of the cover story. The cover story is a longer story that requires a jump (readers must turn to another page in the paper to complete the story, usually the next page of that section). On certain days, the news or sports section will take up two paper sections, and there will be a second cover story within the second section.
Each section is denoted by a certain color to differentiate sections beyond lettering and is seen in a box the top-left corner of the first page; the principal section colors are blue for News (section A), green for Money (section B), red for Sports (section C), and purple for Life (section D); in the paper's early years, the Life and Money sections were also assigned blue nameplates and spot color, as the presses used at USA Today ' printing facilities did not yet accommodate the use of other colors to denote all four original sections. [28] Orange is used for bonus sections (section E or above), which are published occasionally such as for business travel trends and the Olympics ; other bonus sections for sports (such as for the PGA Tour preview, NCAA Basketball Tournaments , Memorial Day auto races ( Indianapolis 500 and Coca-Cola 600 ), NFL opening weekend and the Super Bowl ) previously used the orange color, but now use the red designated for sports in their bonus sections. To increase their ties to USA Today , Gannett incorporated the USA Today coloring scheme into an internally created graphics package for news programming that the company began phasing in across its television station group – which were spun-off in July 2015 into the separate broadcast and digital media company Tegna – in late 2012 (the package utilizes the color scheme for a rundown graphic used on most stations – outside of those that Gannett acquired in 2014 from London Broadcasting, which began implementing the package in late 2015 – that persists throughout its stations' newscasts, as well as bumpers for individual story topics). Gannett's television stations began to a new on-air appearance that uses a color-coding system identical to that of the paper. [29]
In many ways, USA Today is set up to break the typical newspaper layout. Some examples of that divergence from tradition include using the left-hand quarter of each section as reefers (front-page paragraphs referring to stories on inside pages [30] ), sometimes using sentence-length blurbs to describe stories inside; the lead reefer is the cover page feature "Newsline," which shows summarized descriptions of headline stories featured in all four main sections and any special sections. As a national newspaper, USA Today cannot focus on the weather for any one city. Therefore, the entire back page of the News section is used for weather maps for the continental United States , Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands , and temperature lists for many cities throughout the U.S. and the world (temperatures for individual cities on the primary forecast map and temperature lists are suffixed with a one- or two-letter code, such as "t" for thunderstorms , referencing the expected weather conditions); the colorized forecast map, originally created by staff designer George Rorick (who left USA Today for a similar position at The Detroit News in 1986), was copied by newspapers around the world, breaking from the traditional style of using monochrome contouring or simplistic text to denote temperature ranges. [11] [31] National precipitation maps for the next three days (previously five days until the 2012 redesign), and four-day forecasts and Air Quality Indexes for 36 major U.S. cities (originally 16 cities prior to 1999) – with individual cities color-coded by the temperature contour corresponding to the given area on the forecast map – are also featured. Weather data is provided by AccuWeather , which has served as the forecast provider for USA Today for most of the paper's existence (with an exception from January 2002 to September 2012, when The Weather Channel provided data through a long-term multimedia content agreement with Gannett). [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] In the bottom left-hand corner of the weather page is "Weather Focus", a graphic which explains various meteorological phenomena. On some days, the Weather Focus could be a photo of a rare meteorological event.
On Mondays, the Money section uses its back page for "Market Trends," a feature that launched in June 2002 and presents an unusual graphic depicting the performance of various industry groups as a function of quarterly, monthly, and weekly movements against the S&P 500 . On days featuring bonus sections or business holidays, the Money and Life sections are usually combined into one section, while combinations of the Friday Life editions into one section are common during quiet weeks. Advertising coverage is seen in the Monday Money section, which often includes a review of a current television ad, and after Super Bowl Sunday , a review of the ads aired during the broadcast with the results of the Ad Track live survey. Stock tables for individual stock exchanges (comprising one subsection for companies traded on the New York Stock Exchange , and another for companies trading on NASDAQ and the American Stock Exchange ) and mutual indexes were discontinued with the 2012 redesign due to the myriad of electronic ways to check individual stock prices, in line with most newspapers.
Book coverage, including reviews and a national sales chart (the latter of which debuted on October 28, 1994), is seen on Thursdays in Life, with the official full A.C. Nielsen television ratings chart printed on Wednesdays or Thursdays, depending on release. The paper also publishes the Mediabase survey for several genres of music, based on radio airplay spins on Tuesdays, along with their own chart of the top ten singles in general on Wednesdays. Because of the same limitations cited for its nationalized forecasts, the television page in Life – which provides prime time and late night listings (running from 8:00 p.m. to 12:30 a.m. Eastern Time ) – incorporates a boilerplate " Local news " or " Local programming " descriptions to denote time periods in which the five major English language broadcast networks ( ABC , NBC , CBS , Fox and The CW ) cede airtime to allow their affiliates to carry syndicated programs or local newscasts; the television page has never been accompanied by a weekly listings supplement with broader scheduling information similar to those featured in local newspapers. Like most national papers, USA Today does not carry comic strips .
One of the staples of the News section is "Across the USA," a state-by-state roundup of headlines. The summaries consist of paragraph-length Associated Press reports highlighting one story of note in each state, the District of Columbia , and one U.S. territory. Similarly, the "For the Record" page of the Sports section (which features sports scores for both the previous four days of league play and individual non-league events, seasonal league statistics and wagering lines for the current day's games) also features a rundown of winning numbers from the previous deadline date for all participating state lotteries and individual multi-state lotteries.
Some traditions have been retained, however. The lead story still appears on the upper-right hand of the front page. Commentary and political cartoons occupy the last few pages of the News section. Stock and mutual fund data are presented in the Money section. But USA Today is sufficiently different in aesthetics to be recognized on sight, even in a mix of other newspapers, such as at a newsstand . The overall design and layout of USA Today has been described as neo-Victorian. [37]
Also, in most of the sections' front pages, on the lower left hand corner, are "USA Today Snapshots", which give statistics of various lifestyle interests according to the section it is in (for example, a snapshot in "Life" could show how many people tend to watch a certain genre of television show based upon the type of mood they are in at the time). These "Snapshots" are shown through graphs which are made up of various illustrations of objects that roughly pertain to the graphs subject matter (using the example above, the graph's bars could be made up of several TV sets, or ended by one). These are usually loosely based on research by a national institute (with the credited source mentioned in fine print in the box below the graph).
The newspaper also features an occasional magazine supplement called Open Air , which launched on March 7, 2008 and appears several times a year. Various other advertorials appear throughout the year, mainly on Fridays.

Opinion section
The opinion section prints USA Today editorials, columns by guest writers and members of the Editorial Board of Contributors, [38] letters to the editor, and editorial cartoons. One unique feature of the USA Today editorial page is the publication of opposing points of view; alongside the editorial board's piece on the day's topic runs an opposing view by a guest writer, often an expert in the field. The opinion pieces featured in each edition are decided by the Board of Contributors, which are separate from the paper's news staff. [39]
As of 2010 [update] , the editorial page editor was Brian Gallagher, who has worked for the newspaper since its founding in 1982. Other members of the Editorial Board included deputy editorial page editor Bill Sternberg, executive forum editor John Siniff, op-ed/forum page editor Glen Nishimura, operations editor Thuan Le Elston, letters editor Michelle Poblete, web content editor Eileen Rivers, and editorial writers Dan Carney, George Hager, and Saundra Torry. [40] The newspaper's website calls this group "demographically and ideologically diverse." [39]
USA Today has traditionally maintained a policy not to endorse candidates for the United States Presidency or any other state or federal political office, which it has refrained from doing since its inception. Since 1984 , its political editorials during the Presidential election cycle has focused instead on providing opinion on major issues relevant to the campaign based on the differing concerns of voters, the vast amount of information on ongoing Presidential campaigns, and the Board of Contributors' aim to provide a fair viewpoint through the diverse political ideologies of its members and avoid reader perceptions of bias. However, the board re-evaluates its non-endorsement policy through an independent process during each four-year election cycle, with any decision to circumvent the policy based on a consensus vote in which fewer than two of the editorial board's members dissent or hold differing opinions. [41]
The editorial board broke from this stance for the first time on September 29, 2016, when it published an op-ed piece condemning the candidacy of Republican nominee Donald Trump , calling him "unfit for the presidency" due to his inflammatory campaign rhetoric (particularly that aimed at military veterans, immigrants, and various ethnic and religious groups); his temperament and lack of financial transparency; his "checkered" business record; his use of false and hyperbolic statements; the inconsistency of his viewpoints and issues with his vision on domestic and foreign policy; and, based on comments he has made during his campaign and criticisms by both Democrats and Republicans on these views, the potential risks to national security and constitutional ethics under a Trump administration, asking voters to "resist the siren song of a dangerous demagogue". [42] The board noted that the piece was not a "qualified endorsement" of Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton , for whom the board was unable to reach a consensus for endorsing (some editorial board members expressed that Clinton's public service record would help her "serve the nation ably as its president," while others had "serious reservations about [her] sense of entitlement, [...] lack of candor and [...] extreme carelessness in handling classified information "), instead advising voters to decide whether to vote for Clinton, Libertarian nominee Gary Johnson , Green Party nominee Jill Stein or a write-in candidate; or focus on Senate, House and other down-ballot political races. [43] [44] [45]

Personnel
In May 2012, Larry Kramer – a 40-year media industry veteran and former president of CBS Digital Media – was appointed president and publisher of USA Today , replacing David Hunke , who had been publisher of the newspaper since 2009. [46] Kramer was tasked with developing a new strategy for the paper as it sought to increase revenue from its digital operations. [47]
In July 2012, Kramer hired David Callaway – whom the former had hired as lead editor of MarketWatch in 1999, two years after Kramer founded the website during his tenure at CBS News – as the paper's editor-in-chief. Callaway had previously worked at Bloomberg covering the banking, investment-banking and asset-management businesses throughout Europe and at the Boston Herald , where he co-wrote a daily financial column on "comings and goings in the Boston business district". [48] Conservative activist Peter Gemma has written more than 100 op-ed pieces for USA Today . [49]
The current Editor-in-Chief is Patty Michalski. [1] [2]

Editorial board

Related publications and services

USA Weekend
USA Weekend is a defunct sister publication that launched in 1953 as Family Weekly , a national weekend newsmagazine supplement intended for the Sunday editions of various U.S. newspapers; it adopted its final title following Gannett's purchase of the magazine in 1985. [50] The magazine – which was distributed to approximately 800 newspapers nationwide at its peak with most Gannett-owned local newspapers carrying it by default within their Sunday editions – focused primarily on social issues, entertainment, health, food and travel. [50] [51] On December 5, 2014, Gannett announced that it would cease publishing USA Weekend after the December 26–28 edition, citing increasing operational costs and reduced advertising revenue, with most of its participating newspapers choosing to replace it with competing Sunday magazine Parade . [52] [53] [54] [55]

USA Today Sports Weekly
USA Today Sports Weekly is a weekly magazine that covers news and statistics from Major League Baseball , minor league and NCAA baseball, the National Football League (NFL) and NASCAR . It was first published on April 5, 1991 as USA Today Baseball Weekly , a tabloid -sized baseball-focused publication released on Wednesdays, on a weekly basis during the baseball season and bi-weekly during the off-season; the magazine expanded its sports coverage on September 4, 2002, when it adopted its current title after added stories about the NFL. Sports Weekly added coverage of NASCAR on February 15, 2006, lasting only during that year's race season; and added coverage of NCAA college football on August 8, 2007. The editorial operations of Sports Weekly originally operated autonomously from USA Today , before being integrated with the newspaper's sports department in late 2005.

The Big Lead
The Big Lead is a sports blog operated by USA Today that was launched in February 2006 by original owner Fantasy Sports Ventures (co-founded by Jason McIntyre and David Lessa), which was purchased by the Gannett Company – which, beginning in April 2008, had maintained a strategic content and marketing partnership with the former company – in January 2012. [56] The site – which is usually updated on a routine basis of 10 to 15 times per day between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Eastern Time – mainly covers sports, but also provides news and commentary on other news topics, ranging from politics to pop culture . [57]

USA Today: The Television Show
In 1987, Gannett and producer Grant Tinker began developing a newsmagazine series for first-run syndication that attempted to bring the breezy style of USA Today to television. [58] The result was USA Today: The Television Show (later retitled USA Today on TV , then shortened to simply USA Today ), which premiered on September 12, 1988. [59] Correspondents on the program included Edie Magnus, Robin Young , Boyd Matson , Kenneth Walker, Dale Harimoto, Ann Abernathy, Bill Macatee and Beth Ruyak. As with the newspaper itself, the show was divided into four "sections" corresponding to the different parts of the paper: News (focusing on the major headlines of the day), Money (focusing on financial news and consumer reports), Sports (focusing on sports news and scores) and Life (focusing on entertainment and lifestyle-related stories).
The series was plagued by low ratings and negative reviews from critics throughout its run. The program also suffered from being scheduled in undesirable timeslots in certain markets; this was a particular case in New York City , the country's largest media market , where CBS owned-and-operated station WCBS-TV (channel 2) aired the program in a pre-dawn early morning slot, before the program moved to NBC O&O WNBC five months into its run in a 9:30 a.m. slot, where it did not fare any better despite being placed in a more palatable time period [60] (in contrast, CITY-TV in Toronto , Ontario , Canada [now the flagship station of the City television network], ran it at 5:00 p.m.). [61] ) These setbacks led to the cancellation of the TV version of USA Today in November 1989 after one-and-a-half seasons; the final edition aired on January 7, 1990. [62]
Gannett announced plans to develop a USA Today -branded weekly half-hour television program, to have been titled "Sports Page", as part of a renewed initiative to extend the brand into television; this program, which was tapped for a fall 2004 debut, ultimately never launched. [9]

VRtually There
VRtually There is a weekly virtual reality news program produced by the USA Today Network, which debuted on October 20, 2016. The program, which is available on the USA Today mobile app and on YouTube (which maintains content exclusivity through the program's dedicated channel for 60 days after each broadcast), showcases three original segments outlining news stories through a first-person perspective, recorded and produced by journalists from USA Today and its co-owned local newspapers. The program also incorporates "cubemercials," long-form advertisements created by Gannett's in-house creative studio GET Creative, which are designed to allow consumer engagenent in fully immersive experiences through virtual reality. [63]

Awards
[71] [72]

In popular culture
A futuristic 2015 edition of USA Today ( Hill Valley edition) is seen in Back to the Future Part II (1989). As a tribute to the movie, the newspaper ran a recreation of the front page, featuring the exact headlines portrayed in the movie, on October 22, 2015, the exact date of the edition that the protagonist Marty McFly read in the movie (the character, played by Michael J. Fox , travels to October 21, 2015, and reads the following day's edition of the paper. [73]

See also

Notes

External links
WebPage index: 00035
CBS
CBS (an initialism of the network's former name, the Columbia Broadcasting System ) is an American commercial broadcast television network that is a flagship property of CBS Corporation . The company is headquartered at the CBS Building in New York City with major production facilities and operations in New York City (at the CBS Broadcast Center ) and Los Angeles (at CBS Television City and the CBS Studio Center ).
CBS is sometimes referred to as the "Eye Network", in reference to the company's iconic logo, in use since 1951. It has also been called the "Tiffany Network", alluding to the perceived high quality of CBS programming during the tenure of William S. Paley . [2] It can also refer to some of CBS's first demonstrations of color television , which were held in a former Tiffany & Co. building in New York City in 1950. [3]
The network has its origins in United Independent Broadcasters Inc., a collection of 16 radio stations that was purchased by Paley in 1928 and renamed the Columbia Broadcasting System. [4] Under Paley's guidance, CBS would first become one of the largest radio networks in the United States, and eventually one of the Big Three American broadcast television networks . In 1974, CBS dropped its former full name and became known simply as CBS, Inc. The Westinghouse Electric Corporation acquired the network in 1995, renamed its corporate entity to the current CBS Broadcasting, Inc. in 1997, and eventually adopted the name of the company it had acquired to become CBS Corporation. In 2000, CBS came under the control of Viacom , which was formed as a spin-off of CBS in 1971. In late 2005, Viacom split itself into two separate companies, and re-established CBS Corporation – through the spin-off of its broadcast television, radio and select cable television and non-broadcasting assets – with the CBS television network at its core. CBS Corporation is controlled by Sumner Redstone through National Amusements , which also controls the current Viacom.
CBS continues to operate the CBS Radio network, which now mainly provides news and features content for its portfolio of owned-and-operated radio stations in large and mid-sized markets, and affiliated radio stations in various other markets. The television network has more than 240 owned-and-operated and affiliated television stations throughout the United States.

History

Early years
The origins of CBS date back to January 27, 1927, with the creation of the "United Independent Broadcasters" network in Chicago by New York City talent-agent Arthur Judson . The fledgling network soon needed additional investors though, and the Columbia Phonograph Company, manufacturers of Columbia Records , rescued it in April 1927; as a result, the network was renamed the "Columbia Phonographic Broadcasting System" on September 18 of that year. Columbia Phonographic went on the air on September 18, 1927, with a presentation by the Howard Barlow Orchestra [5] from flagship station WOR in Newark, New Jersey , and fifteen affiliates. [6]
Operational costs were steep, particularly the payments to AT&T for use of its land lines, and by the end of 1927, Columbia Phonograph wanted out. [7] In early 1928 Judson sold the network to brothers Isaac and Leon Levy, owners of the network's Philadelphia affiliate WCAU , and their partner Jerome Louchenheim. None of the three were interested in assuming day-to-day management of the network, so they installed wealthy 26-year-old William S. Paley , son of a Philadelphia cigar family and in-law of the Levys, as president. With the record company out of the picture, Paley quickly streamlined the corporate name to "Columbia Broadcasting System". [7] He believed in the power of radio advertising since his family's "La Palina" cigars had doubled their sales after young William convinced his elders to advertise on radio. [8] By September 1928, Paley bought out the Louchenheim share of CBS and became its majority owner with 51% of the business. [9]

Turnaround: Paley's first year
During Louchenheim's brief regime, Columbia paid $410,000 to A.H. Grebe 's Atlantic Broadcasting Company for a small Brooklyn station, WABC (no relation to the current WABC ), which would become the network's flagship station. WABC was quickly upgraded, and the signal relocated to 860 kHz . [10] The physical plant was relocated also – to Steinway Hall on West 57th Street in Manhattan , where much of CBS's programming would originate. By the turn of 1929, the network could boast to sponsors of having 47 affiliates. [11]
Paley moved right away to put his network on a firmer financial footing. In the fall of 1928, he entered into talks with Adolph Zukor of Paramount Pictures , who planned to move into radio in response to RCA 's forays into motion pictures with the advent of talkies. [12] The deal came to fruition in September 1929: Paramount acquired 49% of CBS in return for a block of its stock worth $3.8 million at the time. [8] The agreement specified that Paramount would buy that same stock back by March 1, 1932 for a flat $5 million, provided CBS had earned $2 million during 1931 and 1932. [12] For a brief time there was talk that the network might be renamed "Paramount Radio", but it only lasted a month – the 1929 stock market crash sent all stock value tumbling. It galvanized Paley and his troops, who "had no alternative but to turn the network around and earn the $2,000,000 in two years.... This is the atmosphere in which the CBS of today was born." [12] The near-bankrupt movie studio sold its CBS shares back to CBS in 1932. [13] In the first year of Paley's watch, CBS's gross earnings more than tripled, going from $1.4 million to $4.7 million. [14]
Much of the increase was a result of Paley's second upgrade to the CBS business plan – improved affiliate relations. There were two types of program at the time: sponsored and sustaining , i.e., unsponsored. Rival NBC paid affiliates for every sponsored show they carried and charged them for every sustaining show they ran. [15] It was onerous for small and medium stations, and resulted in both unhappy affiliates and limited carriage of sustaining programs. Paley had a different idea, designed to get CBS programs emanating from as many radio sets as possible: [16] he would give the sustaining programs away for free, provided the station would run every sponsored show, and accept CBS's check for doing so. [17] CBS soon had more affiliates than either NBC Red or NBC Blue . [18]
Paley was a man who valued style and taste, [19] and in 1929, once he had his affiliates happy and his company's creditworthiness on the mend, he relocated his concern to sleek, new 485 Madison Avenue , the "heart of the advertising community, right where Paley wanted his company to be" [20] and where it would stay until its move to its own Eero Saarinen -designed headquarters, the CBS Building , in 1965. When his new landlords expressed skepticism about the network and its fly-by-night reputation, Paley overcame their qualms by inking a lease for $1.5 million. [20]

CBS takes on the Red and the Blue (1930s)
Since NBC was the broadcast arm of radio set manufacturer RCA, its chief David Sarnoff approached his decisions as both a broadcaster and as a hardware executive; NBC's affiliates had the latest RCA equipment, and were often the best-established stations, or were on " clear channel " frequencies. Yet Sarnoff's affiliates were mistrustful of him. Paley had no such split loyalties: his – and his affiliates' – success rose and fell with the quality of CBS programming. [16]
Paley had an innate, pitch-perfect, sense of entertainment, "a gift of the gods, an ear totally pure", [21] wrote David Halberstam . "[He] knew what was good and would sell, what was bad and would sell, and what was good and would not sell, and he never confused one with another." [22] As the 1930s loomed, Paley set about building the CBS talent stable. The network became the home of many popular musical and comedy stars, among them Jack Benny , ("Your Canada Dry Humorist"), Al Jolson , George Burns & Gracie Allen , and Kate Smith , whom Paley personally selected for his family's La Palina Hour because she was not the type of woman to provoke jealousy in American wives. [23] When, on a mid-ocean voyage, Paley heard a phonograph record of a young unknown crooner, he rushed to the ship's radio room and "cabled" New York to sign Bing Crosby immediately to a contract for a daily radio show. [24]
While the CBS prime-time lineup featured music, comedy and variety shows, the daytime schedule was a direct conduit into American homes – and into the hearts and minds of American women; for many, it was the bulk of their adult human contact during the course of the day. CBS time salesmen recognized early on that this intimate connection could be a bonanza for advertisers of female-interest products. [25] Starting in 1930, astrologer Evangeline Adams would consult the heavens on behalf of listeners who sent in their birthdays, a description of their problems – and a box-top from sponsor Forhan's toothpaste. [26] The low-key murmuring of smooth-voiced Tony Wons, backed by a tender violin, "made him a soul mate to millions of women" [27] on behalf of the R. J. Reynolds tobacco company, whose cellophane-wrapped Camel cigarettes were "as fresh as the dew that dawn spills on a field of clover". [28] The most popular radio-friend of all was M. Sayle Taylor, The Voice Of Experience , though his name was never uttered on air. [28] Women mailed descriptions of the most intimate of relationship problems to The Voice in the tens of thousands per week; sponsors Musterole ointment and Haley's M–O laxative enjoyed sales increases of several hundred percent in just the first month of The Voice Of Experience ' s run. [29]
As the decade progressed, a new genre joined the daytime lineup: serial dramas – soap operas , so named for the products that sponsored them, by way of the ad agencies that actually produced them. Although the form, usually in quarter-hour episodes, proliferated widely in the mid- and late 1930s, they all had the same basic premise: that characters "fell into two categories: 1) those in trouble and 2) those who helped people in trouble. The helping-hand figures were usually older." [30] At CBS, Just Plain Bill brought human insight and Anacin pain reliever into households; Your Family and Mine came courtesy of Sealtest Dairy products; Bachelor's Children first hawked Old Dutch Cleanser, then Wonder Bread ; Aunt Jenny's Real Life Stories was sponsored by Spry Vegetable Shortening . Our Gal Sunday (Anacin again), The Romance of Helen Trent (Angélus cosmetics), Big Sister ( Rinso laundry soap) and many others filled the daytime ether. [31]
Thanks to its daytime and primetime schedules, CBS prospered in the 1930s. In 1935, gross sales were $19.3 million, yielding a profit of $2.27 million. [32] By 1937, the network took in $28.7 million and had 114 affiliates, [16] almost all of which cleared 100% of network-fed programming, thus keeping ratings, and revenue, high. In 1938, CBS even acquired the American Record Corporation , parent of its one-time investor Columbia Records. [33]
In 1938, NBC and CBS each opened studios in Hollywood to attract the entertainment industry's top talent to their networks – NBC at Radio City on Sunset Boulevard and Vine Street , CBS two blocks away at Columbia Square . [34]

CBS launches an independent news division
The extraordinary potential of radio news showed itself in 1930, when CBS suddenly found itself with a live telephone connection to a prisoner called "The Deacon" who described, from the inside and in real time, a riot and conflagration at the Ohio Penitentiary ; for CBS, it was "a shocking journalistic coup". [35] Yet as late as 1934, there was still no regularly scheduled newscast on network radio: "Most sponsors did not want network news programming; those that did were inclined to expect veto rights over it." [36] There had been a longstanding wariness between radio and the newspapers as well; the papers had rightly concluded that the upstart radio business would compete with them on two counts – advertising dollars and news coverage. By 1933, they fought back, many no longer publishing radio schedules for readers' convenience, or allowing "their" news to be read on the air for radio's profit. [37] Radio, in turn, pushed back when urban department stores, newspapers' largest advertisers and themselves owners of many radio stations, threatened to withhold their ads from print. [38] A short-lived attempted truce in 1933 even saw the papers proposing that radio be forbidden from running news before 9:30 a.m., and then only after 9:00 p.m. – and that no news story could air until it was 12 hours old. [39]
It was in this climate that Paley set out to "enhance the prestige of CBS, to make it seem in the public mind the more advanced, dignified and socially aware network". [40] He did it through sustaining programming like the New York Philharmonic , the thoughtful drama of Norman Corwin – and an in-house news division to gather and present news, free of fickle suppliers like newspapers and wire services . [40] In the fall of 1934, CBS launched an independent news division, shaped in its first years by Paley's vice-president, former New York Times columnist Ed Klauber, and news director Paul White . Since there was no blueprint or precedent for real-time news coverage, early efforts of the new division used the shortwave link-up CBS had been using for five years [41] to bring live feeds of European events to its American air.
A key early hire was Edward R. Murrow in 1935; his first corporate title was Director of Talks. He was mentored in microphone technique by Robert Trout , the lone full-time member of the News Division, and quickly found himself in a growing rivalry with boss White. [42] Murrow was glad to "leave the hothouse atmosphere of the New York office behind" [43] when he was dispatched to London as CBS's European Director in 1937, a time when the growing Hitler menace underscored the need for a robust European Bureau. Halberstam described Murrow in London as "the right man in the right place in the right era". [44] Murrow began assembling the staff of broadcast journalists – including William L. Shirer , Charles Collingwood , Bill Downs , and Eric Sevareid – who would become known as " Murrow's Boys ". They were "in [Murrow's] own image, sartorially impeccable, literate, often liberal, and prima donnas all". [45] They covered history in the making, and sometimes made it themselves: on March 12, 1938, Hitler boldly annexed nearby Austria and Murrow and Boys quickly assembled coverage with Shirer in London, Edgar Ansel Mowrer in Paris, Pierre Huss in Berlin , Frank Gervasi in Rome and Trout in New York. [46] This bore the News Round-Up format, which is still ubiquitous today in broadcast news.
Murrow's nightly reports from the rooftops during the dark days of the London Blitz galvanized American listeners: even before Pearl Harbor , the conflict became "the story of the survival of Western civilization, the most heroic of all possible wars and stories. He was indeed reporting on the survival of the English-speaking peoples." [47] With his "manly, tormented voice", [48] Murrow contained and mastered the panic and danger he felt, thereby communicating it all the more effectively to his audience. [48] Using his trademark self-reference "This reporter", [49] he did not so much report news as interpret it, combining simplicity of expression with subtlety of nuance. [48] Murrow himself said he tried "to describe things in terms that make sense to the truck driver without insulting the intelligence of the professor". [48] When he returned home for a visit late in 1941, Paley threw an "extraordinarily elaborate reception" [50] for Murrow at the Waldorf-Astoria . Of course, its goal was more than just honoring CBS's latest "star" – it was an announcement to the world that Mr. Paley's network was finally more than just a pipeline carrying other people's programming: it had now become a cultural force in its own right. [51]
Once the war was over and Murrow returned for good, it was as "a superstar with prestige and freedom and respect within his profession and within his company". [52] He possessed enormous capital within that company, and as the unknown form of television news loomed large, he would spend it freely, first in radio news, then in television, taking on Senator Joseph McCarthy first, then eventually William S. Paley himself, [53] and with a foe that formidable, even the vast Murrow account would soon run dry.

Panic: 
On October 30, 1938, CBS gained a taste of infamy when The Mercury Theatre on the Air broadcast a radio adaptation of H. G. Wells 's The War of the Worlds , performed by Orson Welles . Its unique format, a contemporary version of the story in the form of faux news broadcasts, had panicked many listeners into believing invaders from Mars were actually invading and devastating Grover's Mill, New Jersey , despite three disclaimers during the broadcast that it was a work of fiction. The flood of publicity after the broadcast had two effects: an FCC ban on faux news bulletins within dramatic programming, and sponsorship for The Mercury Theatre on the Air – the former sustaining program became The Campbell Playhouse to sell soup. [54] Welles, for his part, summarized the episode as "the Mercury Theater's own radio version of dressing up in a sheet and jumping out of a bush and saying 'Boo!'" [55]

CBS recruits Edmund A. Chester
Before the onset of World War II , in 1940, CBS recruited Edmund A. Chester from his position as Bureau Chief for Latin America at the Associated Press to serve as Director of Latin American Relations and Director of Short Wave Broadcasts for the CBS radio network. In this capacity, Mr. Chester coordinated the development of the Network of the Americas (La Cadena de las Americas) with the Department of State , the Office for Inter-American Affairs (as chaired by Nelson Rockefeller ) and Voice of America . This network provided vital news and cultural programming throughout South America and Central America during the crucial World War II era and fostered diplomatic relations between the United States and the less developed nations of the continent. It featured such popular radio broadcasts as Viva América [56] which showcased leading musical talent from both North and South America, accompanied by the CBS Pan American Orchestra under the musical direction of Alfredo Antonini . The post-war era also marked the beginning of CBS's dominance in the field of radio as well. [57]

Zenith of network radio (1940s)
As 1939 wound down, Bill Paley announced that 1940 would "be the greatest year in the history of radio in the United States." [58] He turned out to be right by more than anyone could imagine: the decade of the 1940s would indeed be the apogee of network radio by every gauge. Nearly 100% of the advertisers who made sponsorship deals in 1939 renewed their contracts for 1940; manufacturers of farm tractors made radios standard equipment on their machines. [59] Wartime rationing of paper limited the size of newspapers – and effectively advertisements – and when papers turned them away, they migrated to radio sponsorship. [60] A 1942 act by Congress made advertising expenses a tax benefit [60] and that sent even automobile and tire manufacturers – who had no products to sell since they had been converted to war production – scurrying to sponsor symphony orchestras and serious drama on radio. [61] In 1940, only one-third of radio programs were sponsored, while two-thirds were sustaining; by the middle of the decade, the statistics had swapped – two out of three shows now had cash-paying sponsors and only one-third were sustaining. [62]
The CBS of the 1940s was vastly different from that of the early days; many of the old guard veterans had died, retired or simply left the network. [63] No change was greater than that in Paley himself: he had become difficult to work for, and had "gradually shifted from leader to despot". [63] He spent much of his time seeking social connections and in cultural pursuits; his "hope was that CBS could somehow learn to run itself". [63] His brief to an interior designer remodeling his townhouse included a requirement for closets that would accommodate 300 suits, 100 shirts and had special racks for a hundred neckties. [64]
As Paley grew more remote, he installed a series of buffer executives who sequentially assumed more and more power at CBS: first Ed Klauber, then Paul Kesten, and finally Frank Stanton . Second only to Paley as the author of CBS's style and ambitions in its first half-century, Stanton was "a magnificent mandarin who functioned as company superintendent, spokesman, and image-maker". [65] He had come to the network in 1933 after sending copies of his Ph.D. thesis "A Critique Of Present Methods and a New Plan for Studying Radio Listening Behavior" to CBS top brass and they responded with a job offer. [66] He scored an early hit with his study "Memory for Advertising Copy Presented Visually vs. Orally," which CBS salesmen used to great effect bringing in new sponsors. [66] In 1946, Paley appointed Stanton as President of CBS and promoted himself to Chairman. Stanton's colorful, but impeccable, wardrobe – slate-blue pinstripe suit, ecru shirt, robin's egg blue necktie with splashes of saffron – made him, in the mind of one sardonic CBS vice-president, "the greatest argument we have for color television". [67]
Despite the influx of advertisers and their cash, or perhaps because of them, the 1940s were not without bumps for the radio networks. The biggest challenge came in the form of the FCC's chain broadcasting investigation – the "monopoly probe", as it was often called. [68] Though it started in 1938, the investigation only gathered steam in 1940 under new-broom chairman James L. Fly . [69] By the time the smoke had cleared in 1943, NBC had already spun off its Blue Network, which became the American Broadcasting Company (ABC). CBS was also hit, though not as severely: Paley's brilliant 1928 affiliate contract which had given CBS first claim on local stations' air during sponsored time – the network option – came under attack as being restrictive to local programming. [70] The final compromise permitted the network option for three out of four hours during certain dayparts, but the new regulations had virtually no practical effect, since most all stations accepted the network feed, especially the sponsored hours that earned them money. [70] Fly's panel also forbade networks from owning artists' representation bureaus, so CBS sold its bureau to Music Corporation of America and it became Management Corporation of America. [71]
On the air, the war affected almost every show. Variety shows wove patriotism through their comedy and music segments; dramas and soaps had characters join the service and go off to fight. Even before hostilities commenced in Europe, one of the most played songs on radio was Irving Berlin 's " God Bless America ", popularized by CBS personality Kate Smith. [72] Although an Office of Censorship sprang up within days of Pearl Harbor, censorship would be totally voluntary. A few shows submitted scripts for review; most did not. [73] The guidelines that the Office did issue banned weather reports (including announcement of sports rainouts), news about troop, ship or plane movements, war production and live man-on-the-street interviews. The ban on ad-libbing caused quizzes, game shows and amateur hours to wither for the duration. [73]
Surprising was "the granite permanence" of the shows at the top of the ratings. [74] The vaudevillians and musicians who were hugely popular after the war were the same stars who had been huge in the 1930s: Jack Benny, Bing Crosby, Burns and Allen , and Edgar Bergen all had been on the radio almost as long as there had been network radio. [75] A notable exception to this was relative newcomer Arthur Godfrey who, as late as 1942, was still doing a local morning show in Washington, D.C. [76] Godfrey, who had been a cemetery-lot salesman and a cab driver, pioneered the style of talking directly to the listener as an individual , with a singular "you" rather than phrases like "Now, folks..." or "Yes, friends...". [77] His combined shows contributed as much as 12% of all CBS revenues; by 1948, he was pulling down $500,000 a year. [76]
In 1947, Paley, still the undisputed "head talent scout" of CBS, [65] led a much-publicized "talent raid" on NBC. One day, while Freeman Gosden and Charles Correll were hard at work at NBC writing their venerable Amos and Andy show, a knock came on the door; it was Paley himself, with an astonishing offer: "Whatever you are getting now I will give you twice as much." [78] Capturing NBC's cornerstone show was enough of a coup , but Paley repeated in 1948 with longtime NBC stars Edgar Bergen, Charlie McCarthy and Red Skelton , as well as former CBS defectors Jack Benny, radio's top-rated comedian, and Burns and Allen. Paley achieved this rout with a legal agreement reminiscent of his 1928 contract that caused some NBC radio affiliates to jump ship and join CBS. [78] CBS would buy the stars' names as a property, in exchange for a large lump sum and a salary. [79] The plan relied on the vastly different tax rates between income and capital gains, so not only would the stars enjoy more than twice their income after taxes, but CBS would preclude any NBC counterattack because CBS owned the performers' names. [78]
As a result of this, Paley got in 1949 something he had sought for 20 years: CBS finally beat NBC in the ratings. [80] But it was not just to one-up rival Sarnoff that Paley led his talent raid; he, and all of radio, had their eye on the coming force that threw a shadow over radio throughout the 1940s – television.

Prime time radio gives way to television (1950s)
In the spring of 1940, CBS staff engineer Peter Goldmark devised a system for color television that CBS management hoped would leapfrog the network over NBC and its existing black-and-white RCA system. [81] [82] The CBS system "gave brilliant and stable colors", while NBC's was "crude and unstable but 'compatible'". [83] Ultimately, the FCC rejected the CBS system because it was incompatible with RCA's; that, and the fact that CBS had moved to secure many UHF, not VHF, television licenses, left CBS flatfooted in the early television age. [84] In 1946, only 6,000 television sets were in operation, most in greater New York City where there were already three stations; by 1949, the number had increased to 3 million sets, and by 1951, had risen to 12 million. [85] 64 American cities had television stations, though most of them only had one. [86]
Radio continued to be the backbone of the company, at least in the early 1950s, but it was "a strange, twilight period". [75] NBC's venerable Fred Allen saw his ratings plummet when he was pitted against upstart ABC's game show Stop The Music! ; within weeks, he was dropped by longtime sponsor Ford Motor Company and was shortly gone from the scene. [87] Radio powerhouse Bob Hope 's ratings plunged from a 23.8 share in 1949 to 5.4 in 1953. [88] By 1952, "death seemed imminent for network radio" in its familiar form; [89] most telling of all, the big sponsors were eager for the switch.
Gradually, as the television network took shape, radio stars began to migrate to the new medium. Many programs ran on both media while making the transition. The radio soap opera The Guiding Light moved to television in 1952 and ran another 57 years; Burns & Allen, back "home" from NBC, made the move in 1950; Lucille Ball a year later; Our Miss Brooks in 1952 (though it continued simultaneously on radio for its full television life). The high-rated Jack Benny Program ended its radio run in 1955, and Edgar Bergen's Sunday night show went off the air in 1957. When CBS announced in 1956 that its radio operations had lost money, while the television network had made money, [90] it was clear where the future lay. When the soap opera Ma Perkins went off the air on November 25, 1960, only eight, relatively minor series remained. Prime time radio ended on September 30, 1962, when Yours Truly, Johnny Dollar and Suspense aired for the final time. [91]

CBS's radio programming after 1972
The retirement of Arthur Godfrey in April 1972 marked the end of long-form programming on CBS radio; programming thereafter consisted of hourly news summaries and news features, known in the 1970s as Dimension , and commentaries, including the Spectrum series that evolved into the "Point/Counterpoint" feature on the television network's 60 Minutes and First Line Report , a news and analysis feature delivered by CBS correspondents. The network also continued to offer traditional radio programming through its weeknightly CBS Radio Mystery Theater , the lone sustained holdout of dramatic programming, from 1974 to 1982, though shorter runs were given to the General Mills Radio Adventure Theater and the Sears Radio Theater in the 1970s; otherwise, most new dramatic radio was carried on public and to some extent religious stations. [92] The CBS Radio Network continues to this day, offering hourly newscasts, including its centerpiece CBS World News Roundup in the morning and evening, weekend sister program CBS News Weekend Roundup , the news-related feature segment The Osgood File , What's In the News , a one-minute summary of one story, and various other segments such as commentary from Seattle radio personality Dave Ross , tip segments from various other sources, and technology coverage from CBS Interactive property CNET .
CBS is the last of the original Big Four radio networks to continue to be owned by its founding company, although the CBS parent itself ceased to exist when it was acquired by Westinghouse Electric in 1995, CBS radio continues to be operated by CBS. In contrast, ABC Radio was sold to Citadel Broadcasting in 2007 (and is now a part of Cumulus Media ) while Mutual (now defunct) and NBC Radio were acquired by Westwood One in the 1980s (Westwood One and CBS were under common ownership from 1993 to 2007; the former would be acquired outright by Dial Global in October 2011).

Television years: expansion and growth
CBS's involvement in television dates back to the opening of experimental station W2XAB in New York City on July 21, 1931, using the mechanical television system that had been more-or-less perfected in the late 1920s. Its initial broadcast featured New York Mayor Jimmy Walker , Kate Smith , and George Gershwin . The station boasted the first regular seven-day broadcasting schedule in American television, broadcasting 28 hours a week.
Announcer-director Bill Schudt was the station's only paid employee; all other talent was volunteer. W2XAB pioneered program development including small-scale dramatic acts, monologues, pantomime, and the use of projection slides to simulate sets. Engineer Bill Lodge devised the first synchronized sound wave for a television station in 1932, enabling W2XAB to broadcast picture and sound on a single shortwave channel instead of the two previously needed. On November 8, 1932, W2XAB broadcast the first television coverage of presidential election returns. The station suspended operations on February 20, 1933, as monochrome television transmission standards were in flux, and in the process of changing from a mechanical to an all-electronic system. W2XAB returned to the air with an all-electronic system in 1939 from a new studio complex in Grand Central Station and a transmitter atop the Chrysler Building , broadcasting on channel 2. [93] W2XAB transmitted the first color broadcast in the United States on August 28, 1940. [94]
On June 24, 1941, W2XAB received a commercial construction permit and program authorization as WCBW . The station went on the air at 2:30 p.m. on July 1, one hour after rival WNBT (channel 1, formerly W2XBS and now WNBC ), making it the second authorized fully commercial television station in the United States. The FCC issued permits to CBS and NBC at the same time, and intended WNBT and WCBW to sign on simultaneously on July 1, so no one station could claim to be the "first".
During the World War II years, commercial television broadcasting was reduced dramatically. Toward the end of the war, commercial television began to ramp up again, with an increased level of programming evident from 1944 to 1947 on the three New York television stations which operated in those years (the local stations of NBC, CBS and DuMont ). But as RCA and DuMont raced to establish networks and offer upgraded programming, CBS lagged, advocating an industry-wide shift and restart to UHF for their incompatible (with black and white) color system; the FCC putting an indefinite "freeze" on television licenses that lasted until 1952 also did not help matters. Only in 1950, when NBC was dominant in television and black and white transmission was widespread, did CBS begin to buy or build their own stations (outside of New York City) in Los Angeles, Chicago and other major cities. Up to that point, CBS programming was seen on such stations as KTTV in Los Angeles, which CBS – as a bit of insurance and to guarantee program clearance in that market – quickly purchased a 50% interest in that station, partnering with the Los Angeles Times newspaper. CBS then sold its interest in KTTV (now the West Coast flagship of the Fox network) and purchased outright Los Angeles pioneer station KTSL in 1950, renaming it KNXT (after CBS's existing Los Angeles radio property, KNX), later to become KCBS-TV . In 1953, CBS bought pioneer television station WBKB in Chicago, which had been signed on by former investor Paramount Pictures (and would become a sister company to CBS again decades later) as a commercial station in 1946, and changed that station's call sign to WBBM-TV , moving the CBS affiliation away from WGN-TV .
WCBS-TV would ultimately be the only station (as of 2013) built and signed on by CBS. The rest of the stations would be acquired by CBS, either in an ownership stake or outright purchase. In television's early years, the network bought Washington, D.C. affiliate WOIC (now WUSA ) in a joint venture with The Washington Post in 1950, only to sell its stake to the Post in 1954 due to then-tighter FCC ownership regulations. CBS would also temporarily return to relying on its own UHF technology by owning WXIX in Milwaukee (now CW affiliate WVTV ) and WHCT in Hartford, Connecticut (now Univision affiliate WUVN ), but as UHF was not viable for broadcasting at the time (due to the fact that most television sets of the time were not equipped with UHF tuners), CBS decided to sell those stations off and affiliate with VHF stations WITI and WTIC-TV (now WFSB ), respectively (ironically, CBS would later be forced back onto UHF in Milwaukee due to the affiliation agreement with New World Communications that resulted in WITI disaffiliating from the network in 1994 to join Fox ; it is now affiliated with WDJT-TV in that market). More long-term, CBS bought stations in Philadelphia ( WCAU , now owned by NBC) and St. Louis (KMOX-TV, now KMOV ), but CBS would eventually sell these stations off as well; before buying KMOX-TV, CBS had attempted to purchase and sign on the channel 11 license in St. Louis, now KPLR-TV . [95]
CBS did attempt to sign on a station in Pittsburgh after the "freeze" was lifted, as that city was then the sixth-largest market but only had one commercial VHF station in DuMont-owned WDTV, while the rest were either on UHF (the modern-day WPGH-TV and WINP-TV ) or public television ( WQED ). Although the FCC turned down CBS's request to buy the channel 9 license in nearby Steubenville, Ohio and move it to Pittsburgh (that station, initially CBS affiliate WSTV-TV, is now NBC affiliate WTOV-TV ), CBS did score a major coup when Pittsburgh-based Westinghouse Electric (a co-founder of NBC with RCA) bought WDTV from struggling DuMont and opted to affiliate the now-recalled KDKA-TV with CBS instead of NBC (like KDKA radio ) due to NBC extorting and coercing Westinghouse to trade KYW radio and WPTZ (now KYW-TV ) for Cleveland stations WTAM , WTAM-FM (now WMJI ), and WNBK (now WKYC ); the trade ended up being reversed in 1965 by order of the FCC and the United States Department of Justice after an eight-year investigation. [96] Had CBS not been able to affiliate with KDKA-TV, it would have affiliated with eventual NBC affiliate WIIC-TV (now WPXI ) once it signed on in 1957 instead. [97] This coup would eventually lead to a much stronger relationship between Westinghouse and CBS decades later.

Programming (1945–1970)
The "talent raid" on NBC of the mid-1940s had brought over established radio stars, who became stars of CBS television programs as well. One reluctant CBS star refused to bring her radio show, My Favorite Husband , to television unless the network would recast the show with her real-life husband in the lead.
I Love Lucy debuted in October 1951, and was an immediate sensation, with 11 million out of a population of 15 million Television sets watching (73% share ). [98] Paley and network president Frank Stanton had so little faith in the future of Lucille Ball 's series, that they granted her wish and allowed her husband, Desi Arnaz , to take financial control of the comedy's production. This was the making of the Ball-Arnaz Desilu empire, and became the template for series production to this day; it also served as the template for some television conventions that continue to exist including the use of a multiple cameras to film scenes , the use of a studio audience and the airing of past episodes for syndication to other television outlets. [99]
As television came to the forefront of American entertainment and information, CBS dominated television as it once had radio. [ citation needed ] In 1953, the CBS television network would make its first profit, [100] and would maintain dominance on television between 1955 and 1976 as well. [100] By the late 1950s, the network often controlled seven or eight of the slots on the "top ten" ratings list with well-respected shows like Route 66 .
During the Presidency of James T. Aubrey (1958–1965), CBS was able to balance prestigious television projects (befitting the Tiffany Network image), with more low culture , broad appeal programs. So the network had challenging fare like The Twilight Zone , The Defenders , and East Side/West Side , as well as The Andy Griffith Show , The Beverly Hillbillies , Gomer Pyle, U.S.M.C. , and Gilligan's Island . [101]
This success would continue for many years, with CBS being bumped from first place only due to the rise of ABC in the mid-1970s. Perhaps because of its status as the top-rated network, during the late 1960s and early 1970s CBS felt freer to gamble with controversial properties like the Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour and All in the Family (and its many spinoffs) during this period.

Programming: "Rural purge" and success in the 1970s and early-mid 1980s (1971–86)
By the end of the 1960s, CBS was very successful in television ratings , but many of its shows (including The Beverly Hillbillies , Gunsmoke , Mayberry R.F.D. , Petticoat Junction , Hee Haw and Green Acres ) were appealing more to older and more rural audiences and less to the young, urban and more affluent audiences that advertisers sought to target. Fred Silverman (who would later head ABC , and then later NBC ) made the decision to cancel most of those otherwise hit shows by mid-1971 in what became colloquially referred to as the " Rural Purge ", with Green Acres cast member Pat Buttram remarking that the network cancelled "anything with a tree in it". [102] [103]
While the "rural" shows got the axe, new hits, like The Mary Tyler Moore Show , All in the Family , The Bob Newhart Show , Cannon , Barnaby Jones , Kojak and The Sonny & Cher Comedy Hour took their place on the network's schedule and kept CBS at the top of the ratings through the early 1970s. The majority of these hits were overseen by then East Coast vice president Alan Wagner . [104] 60 Minutes also moved to the 7:00 p.m. Eastern Time slot on Sundays in 1975 and became the first ever prime time television news program to enter the Nielsen Top 10 in 1978 .
One of CBS's most popular shows during the period was M*A*S*H , a dramedy that ran for 11 seasons from 1972 to 1983 and was based on the hit Robert Altman film; as with the film , the series was set during the Korean War in a Mobile Army Surgical Hospital . The 2½-hour series finale , in its initial airing on February 28, 1983, had peak viewership of up to 125 million Americans (77% of all television viewership in the U.S. that night), which established it as the all-time most watched single U.S. television episode; it also held the ubiquitous distinction of having the largest single-night primetime viewership of any television program in U.S. history until it was surpassed by the Super Bowl , which have taken the record consistently since 2010 (through the annual championship game's alternating telecasts by CBS and rival networks Fox and NBC).
Silverman also first developed his strategy of spinning new shows off from established hit series while at CBS, with Rhoda and Phyllis spun from The Mary Tyler Moore Show , Maude and The Jeffersons spun from All in the Family and Good Times from Maude . After Silverman's departure, CBS dropped behind ABC for second place in the 1976–77 season , but still rated strongly, based on its earlier hits and some new ones: One Day at a Time , Alice , Lou Grant , WKRP in Cincinnati , The Dukes of Hazzard (a suspiciously "rural" series) and, the biggest hit of the early 1980s, Dallas , the latter of which holds the record for the all-time most watched non- series finale single U.S. television episode - the November 21, 1980, primetime telecast of the resolution episode of the internationally prominent " Who Shot J.R.? " cliffhanger .
By 1982, ABC had run out of steam, NBC was in dire straits with many failed programming efforts greenlighted by Silverman during his tenure as network president (a four-year run which began in 1978), and CBS once more nosed ahead, courtesy of the major success of Dallas (and its spin-off Knots Landing ), as well as hits in Falcon Crest , Magnum, P.I. , Simon & Simon and 60 Minutes . CBS also acquired the broadcast rights to the NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Tournament in 1982 (taking over for NBC ), which the network has broadcast every March since. CBS was takeover the Dennis B. Kane's production company and formed new company CBS/Kane Productions International (CKPI). The network managed to pull out a few new hits over the next couple of years – namely Kate & Allie , Newhart , Cagney & Lacey , Scarecrow and Mrs. King , and Murder, She Wrote – however, this resurgence would be short-lived. CBS had become mired in debt as a result of a failed takeover effort by Ted Turner , which CBS chairman Thomas Wyman successfully helped to fend off. The network sold its St. Louis owned-and-operated station KMOX-TV , and allowed the purchase of a large portion of its shares (under 25 percent) by Loew's Inc. chairman Laurence Tisch . Consequently, collaboration between Paley and Tisch led to the slow dismissal of Wyman, with Tisch taking over as chief operating officer , and Paley returning as chairman. [105]

Programming: Tiffany Network in distress (1986–2002)
By the end of the 1987–88 season , CBS had fallen to third place behind both ABC and NBC for the first time, and had some major rebuilding to do.
In 1984, The Cosby Show and Miami Vice debuted on NBC and immediately garnered high ratings, helping to bring that network back to first place by the 1985–86 season with a slate that included several other hits (such as Amen , Family Ties , Cheers , The Golden Girls , The Facts Of Life , L.A. Law and 227 ). ABC had in turn also rebounded with hits such as Dynasty , Who's the Boss? , Hotel , Growing Pains , The Wonder Years , and Roseanne .
Some of the groundwork had been laid as CBS fell in the ratings, with hits Simon & Simon , Falcon Crest , Murder, She Wrote , Kate & Allie and Newhart still on the schedule from the most recent resurgence, and future hits Designing Women , Murphy Brown , Jake and the Fatman and newsmagazine 48 Hours having debuted during the late 1980s. The network was also still getting decent ratings for 60 Minutes , Dallas and Knots Landing ; however, the ratings for Dallas were a far cry from what they were in the early 1980s. During the early 1990s, the network would bolster its sports lineup by obtaining the broadcast television rights to Major League Baseball from ABC and NBC and the Winter Olympics from ABC despite losing the National Basketball Association to NBC after the 1989–90 NBA season .
Under network president Jeff Sagansky, the network was able to earn strong ratings from new shows Diagnosis: Murder ; Touched by an Angel ; Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman ; Walker, Texas Ranger , Picket Fences and a resurgent Jake and the Fatman during this period, and CBS was able to reclaim the first place crown briefly, in the 1992–93 season ; however, a drawback for the network during this time-frame was that its programming slate skewed towards an older demographic than ABC, NBC or even Fox, with its relatively limited presence at that time; a joke even floated around that CBS was "the network for the living dead" during this period. [106] In 1993, the network made a breakthrough in establishing a successful late-night talk show franchise to compete with NBC's The Tonight Show when it signed David Letterman away from NBC after the Late Night host was passed over as Johnny Carson 's successor on Tonight in favor of Jay Leno .
Despite having success with Late Show with David Letterman , 1993 saw the network suffer to a time where television changed forever. The network lost the rights to two major sports leagues: the network terminated its contract with Major League Baseball (after losing approximately US$ 500 million over a four-year span), with the league reaching a new contract with NBC and ABC. Then on December 17 of that year, in a move that surprised many media analysts and television viewers, Fox – then a fledgling network that in its then-seven years on the air had begun to accrue several popular programs in the Nielsen Top 20 alongside its established counterparts – outbid CBS for the broadcast rights to the National Football Conference , stripping the elder network of National Football League game telecasts for the first time since CBS began broadcasting games from the pre- merger NFL in 1955; Fox bid $1.58 billion for the NFC television rights, significantly higher than CBS's reported offer of $290 million to retain the contract. [107]
The acquisition of the NFC rights, which took effect with the 1994 NFL season , and which led to CBS being nicknamed "Can't Broadcast Sports", [108] resulted in Fox striking a series of affiliation deals with longtime affiliates of each of the Big Three networks; CBS bore the brunt of the switches, with many of its existing affiliates being lured away by Fox (especially those owned by New World Communications , which Fox struck its largest affiliation deal with [109] ) while most of the stations that CBS ended up affiliating with to replace the previous affiliates it lost to Fox were former Fox affiliates and independent stations , most of which had limited to no local news presence prior to joining CBS. The network attempted to fill the loss of NFL by going after the rights to the National Hockey League ; however, when CBS countered with a bid, Fox also outbid the network for the NHL rights. [110]
The loss of the NFL, along with an ill-fated effort to court younger viewers, led to a drop in CBS's ratings. One of the shows that was affected was the Late Show with David Letterman , which saw its viewership decline in large part due to the affiliation switches, at times even landing in third place in its timeslot behind ABC's Nightline ; as a result, NBC's The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , which the Late Show often dominated over during the first two years of that show's run, became the top-rated late-night talk show. [111] Still, CBS was able to produce some hits during the mid-1990s, such as The Nanny , JAG (which moved to the network from NBC), Chicago Hope , Cosby , Cybill , Touched by an Angel and Everybody Loves Raymond .
CBS attempted to court families on Fridays with the launch of a family-oriented comedy block, the " CBS Block Party ", in the 1997–98 season (consisting of Family Matters , Step by Step , Meego and The Gregory Hines Show , all but the latter coming from Miller-Boyett Productions , which had maintained a relationship with ABC during the late 1980s and 1990s). The lineup failed to compete against ABC's " TGIF " lineup (which saw its own viewership erode that season): Meego and Hines were cancelled by November, while Family Matters and Step by Step were put on hiatus and ended their runs in the summer of 1998. That winter, CBS aired its last Olympic Games to date with its telecast of the 1998 Winter Games in Nagano ; NBC, which had already held the rights to the Summer Olympics since 1988 , took over coverage of the Winter Olympics beginning with the 2002 Games .
The building blocks for the network's return to the top of the ratings were put in place in 1997, when CBS regained the NFL through its acquisition of the broadcast television rights to the American Football Conference (stripping that package from NBC after 32 years), effective with the 1998 season . [112] The contract was struck shortly before the AFC's emergence as the dominant NFL conference over the NFC, spurred in part by the turnaround of the New England Patriots in the 2000s. With the help of the AFC package, CBS surpassed NBC for first place in the 1999–2000 season ; however, it was beaten by ABC the following year. The network gained additional hits in the late 1990s and early 2000s with series such as The King of Queens , Nash Bridges , Judging Amy , Becker and Yes, Dear .

Programming: Return to first place and rivalry with Fox (2002–present)
Another turning point for CBS came in the summer of 2000 when it debuted the summer reality shows Survivor and Big Brother , which became surprise summer hits for the network. In January 2001, CBS debuted the second season of Survivor after its broadcast of Super Bowl XXXV and scheduled it on Thursdays at 8:00 p.m. Eastern Time; it also moved the investigative crime drama CSI (which had debuted that fall in the Friday 9:00 p.m. time slot) to follow Survivor at 9:00 p.m. on Thursdays. The pairing of the two shows was both able to chip away at and eventually beat NBC's Thursday night lineup, and attract younger viewers to the network.
During the 2000s, CBS found additional successes with a slew of police procedurals (several of which were produced by Jerry Bruckheimer ) including Cold Case , Without a Trace , Criminal Minds , NCIS and The Mentalist , along with CSI spinoffs CSI: Miami and CSI: NY as well as sitcoms Still Standing , Two and a Half Men , How I Met Your Mother , The New Adventures of Old Christine , Rules of Engagement and The Big Bang Theory . The network's programming slate, buoyed largely by the success of CSI , briefly led the network to retake first place in the ratings from NBC in the 2002–03 season . The decade also saw CBS finally make ratings headway on Friday nights, a perennial weak spot for the network, with a focus toward drama series such as Ghost Whisperer and the relatively short-lived but critically acclaimed Joan of Arcadia .
CBS became the most watched American broadcast television network once again in the 2005–06 season , an achievement that the network proclaimed in on-air promotions as being "America's Most Watched Network" (a term it would use again in the 2011–12 season ). This lasted until the 2007–08 season , when Fox overtook CBS for first, becoming the first non- Big Three network to earn the title as the most watched network overall in the United States; despite CBS's continued strong lineup, Fox's first-place finish that season was primarily due to its reliance on American Idol (the longest reigning #1 prime time U.S. television program from 2004 to 2011). CBS retook its place as the top-rated network in the 2008–09 season , where it has remained every season since. [113] Fox and CBS, both having ranked as the highest rated of the major broadcast networks during the 2000s, tend to nearly equal one another in the 18–34, 18–49 and 25–54 demographics, with either network alternating in placing first in either of these groups by very close margins. NCIS , which has been the flagship of CBS's Tuesday lineup for much of its run, became the network's highest-rated drama by the 2007–08 season.
The 2010s saw additional hits for the network including drama series The Good Wife ; police procedurals Person of Interest , Blue Bloods , Elementary , Hawaii Five-0 and NCIS spin-off NCIS: Los Angeles ; reality series Undercover Boss ; and sitcoms 2 Broke Girls and Mike & Molly . The Big Bang Theory , one of several sitcoms from veteran writer/producer Chuck Lorre , started off with modest ratings but saw its viewership skyrocket (earning per episode ratings of up to 17 million viewers) to become the top-rated network sitcom in the U.S. by the 2010–11 season , as well as the second most watched U.S. television program starting from the 2013–14 season , when the series became the anchor of the network's Thursday lineup. Meanwhile, the Lorre-produced series it overtook for the position, Two and a Half Men , saw its ratings decline to respectable levels for its final four seasons following the 2011 firing of original star Charlie Sheen (due to a dispute with Lorre) and the addition of Ashton Kutcher as its primary lead.
Until 2012, CBS ranked in second place among adults 18-49, but after the ratings declines Fox experienced during the 2012–13 fall season , the network was able to take the top spot in the demographic as well as in total viewership (for the fifth year in a row) by the start of 2013. At the end of the 2012–13 season, the tenth season of NCIS took the top spot among the season's most watched network programs, which gave CBS its top-rated show after American Idol ended its eight-year nationwide primetime lead (with NBC Sunday Night Football taking over the top spot from Idol the year before and from NCIS the year after), for the first time since the 2002–03 season (when CSI: Crime Scene Investigation led Nielsen's seasonal prime time network ratings).
The strength of its 2013–14 slate led to a surplus of series on CBS's 2014–15 schedule , with 21 series held over from the previous season, along with eight new series including moderate hits in Madam Secretary , NCIS: New Orleans and Scorpion . Also, midseason hits The Odd Couple reboot and CSI spinoff CSI: Cyber . The network also expanded its NFL coverage through a partnership with NFL Network to carry Thursday Night Football games during the first eight weeks of the NFL season. [114]

CBS television news operations
Upon becoming commercial station WCBW in 1941, the pioneer CBS television station in New York City broadcast two daily news programs, at 2:30 and 7:30 p.m. weekdays, anchored by Richard Hubbell. Most of the newscasts featured Hubbell reading a script with only occasional cutaways to a map or still photograph. When Pearl Harbor was bombed on December 7, 1941, WCBW (which was usually off-the-air on Sundays to give the engineers a day off), took to the air at 8:45 p.m. that evening with an extensive special report. The national emergency even broke down the unspoken wall between CBS radio and television. WCBW executives convinced radio announcers and experts such as George Fielding Elliot and Linton Wells to come down to the station's Grand Central Station studios during the evening, and give information and commentary on the attack. Although WCBW's special report that night lasted less than 90 minutes, that special broadcast pushed the limits of live television in 1941 and opened up new possibilities for future broadcasts. As CBS wrote in a special report to the FCC, the unscheduled live news broadcast on December 7 "was unquestionably the most stimulating challenge and marked the greatest advance of any single problem faced up to that time". Additional newscasts were scheduled in the early days of the war.
In May 1942, WCBW (like almost all television stations) sharply cut back its live program schedule and cancelled its newscasts, as the station temporarily suspended studio operations, resorting exclusively to the occasional broadcast of films. This was primarily due to the fact that much of the staff had either joined the service or were redeployed to war-related technical research, and to prolong the life of the early, unstable cameras which were now impossible to repair due to the lack of parts available during wartime. In May 1944, as the war began to turn in favor of the Allies, WCBW reopened its studios and resumed production of its newscasts, which were briefly anchored by Ned Calmer , and then by Everett Holles. [115] After the war, WCBW (which changed its call letters to WCBS-TV in 1946) introduced expanded news programs on its schedule – first anchored by Milo Boulton, and later by Douglas Edwards . On May 3, 1948, Edwards began anchoring CBS Television News , a regular 15-minute nightly newscast on the rudimentary CBS television network, including WCBS-TV. Airing every weeknight at 7:30 p.m., it was the first regularly scheduled, network television news program featuring an anchor (the nightly Lowell Thomas NBC radio network newscast was simulcast on television locally on NBC's WNBT (now WNBC ) for a time in the early 1940s and Hubbell, Calmer, Holles and Boulton on WCBW in the early and mid-1940s, but these were local television broadcasts seen only in the New York City market).
The NBC television network's offering at the time NBC Television Newsreel (premiering in February 1948) was simply film footage with voice narration to provide illustration of the stories.
In 1949, CBS offered the first live television coverage of the proceedings of the United Nations General Assembly . This journalistic tour-de-force was under the direction of Edmund A. Chester, who was appointed to the post of Director for News, Special Events and Sports at CBS Television in 1948.
In 1950, the nightly newscast was retitled Douglas Edwards with the News , and the following year, it became the first news program to be broadcast on both coasts, thanks to a new coaxial cable connection, prompting Edwards to use the greeting, "Good evening everyone, coast to coast" to begin each edition. The broadcast was renamed the CBS Evening News when Walter Cronkite replaced Edwards in 1962. [116] Edwards remained with CBS News as anchor/reporter for various daytime television and radio news broadcasts until his retirement on April 1, 1988.

Color technology (1953–1967)
Although CBS Television was the first with a working color television system, the network lost out to RCA in 1953, due in part because the CBS color system was incompatible with existing black-and-white sets. Although RCA – then-parent company of NBC – made its color system available to CBS, the network was not interested in boosting RCA's profits and televised only a few specials in color for the rest of the decade.
The specials included the Ford Star Jubilee programs (which included the first telecast ever of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM)'s 1939 film classic The Wizard of Oz ) as well as the 1957 telecast of Rodgers and Hammerstein 's Cinderella ; Cole Porter 's musical version of Aladdin ; and Playhouse 90 ' s only color broadcast, the 1958 production of The Nutcracker , featuring choreography by George Balanchine . The Nutcracker telecast was based on the famous production staged annually since 1954 in New York, and performed by the New York City Ballet. CBS would later show two other versions of the ballet, a semi-forgotten one-hour German-American version hosted by Eddie Albert , shown annually for three years beginning in 1965, and the well-loved Mikhail Baryshnikov production from 1977 to 1981 (this production later moved to PBS ).
Beginning in 1959, The Wizard of Oz , now telecast by CBS as a family special in its own right (after the cancellation of Ford Star Jubilee ), became an annual tradition on color television. However, it was the success of NBC's 1955 telecast of the musical Peter Pan , starring Mary Martin , the most watched television special of its time, that inspired CBS to telecast The Wizard of Oz , Cinderella and Aladdin .
From 1960 to 1965, the CBS television network limited its color broadcasts to only a few special presentations such as The Wizard of Oz , and only then if the sponsor would pay for it. Red Skelton was the first CBS host to telecast his weekly programs in color, using a converted movie studio, in the early 1960s; he tried unsuccessfully to persuade the network to use his facility for other programs, and was then forced to sell it. Color was being pushed hard by rival NBC; even ABC had several color programs, beginning in the fall of 1962; however, those were limited because of financial and technical issues that the network was going through at the time. One particularly notable television special aired by CBS during this era was the Charles Collingwood-hosted tour of the White House with First Lady Jackie Kennedy , which was broadcast in black-and-white.
Beginning in 1963, at least one CBS show, The Lucy Show , began filming in color at the insistence of its star and producer Lucille Ball ; she realized that color episodes would command more money when they were eventually sold into syndication, but even it was broadcast in black and white through the end of the 1964–65 season . This would all change by the mid-1960s, when market pressure forced CBS Television to begin adding color programs to its regular schedule for the 1965–66 season and complete the transition to the format during the 1966–67 season . By the fall of 1967, nearly all of CBS's television programs were in color, as was the case with those aired by NBC and ABC. A notable exception was The Twentieth Century , which consisted mostly of newsreel archival footage, though even this program used at least some color footage by the late 1960s.
In 1965, CBS telecast a new color version of Rodgers and Hammerstein 's Cinderella . This version, starring Lesley Ann Warren and Stuart Damon in the roles formerly played by Julie Andrews and Jon Cypher , was shot on videotape rather than being telecast live, and would become an annual tradition on the network for the next nine years.
In 1967, NBC outbid CBS for the rights to the annual telecast of The Wizard of Oz , with the film moving to NBC beginning the following year. However, the network quickly realized their mistake in allowing what was then one of its prime ratings winners to be acquired by another network, and by 1976, CBS reacquired the television rights to the film, with the network continuing to broadcast it through the end of 1997. CBS aired The Wizard of Oz twice in 1991, in March and again the night before Thanksgiving . Thereafter, it was broadcast on the night before Thanksgiving.
By the end of the 1960s, CBS was broadcasting virtually its entire programming lineup in color.

Conglomerate
Prior to the 1960s, CBS's acquisitions had been related mainly to its broadcasting business; these had included the purchases of American Record Corporation and Hytron. During the 1950s and early 1960s, CBS operated a CBS-Columbia division, manufacturing phonographs, radios and television sets; however, the company had problems with product quality, which partly hindered any possibility of success in that field. In 1955, CBS purchased animation studio Terrytoons Inc. from its founder Paul Terry , not only acquiring Terry's backlog of cartoons for the network but continuing the studio's ongoing contract to provide theatrical cartoons for 20th Century Fox well into the 1960s.
During the 1960s, CBS began an effort to diversify its portfolio, and looked for suitable investments. In 1965, it acquired electric guitar maker Fender from Leo Fender , who agreed to sell his company due to health problems. The purchase also included that of Rhodes electric pianos, which had already been acquired by Fender. This and other acquisitions led to a restructuring of the corporation into various operating groups and divisions; the quality of the products manufactured by these acquired companies fell dramatically, resulting in the terms "pre-CBS" to refer to products of higher, sought after quality and "CBS" for products of mass-produced lower quality.
In other diversification attempts, CBS would buy (and later sell) a varied number of other properties including sports teams (especially the New York Yankees baseball club), book and magazine publishers ( Fawcett Publications including Woman's Day , and Holt, Rinehart and Winston ), map-makers and toy manufacturers ( Gabriel Toys , Child Guidance, Wonder Products, Gym Dandy and Ideal), and X-Acto knives. [117] CBS also developed an early home video system called EVR (Electronic Video Recording), but was never able to launch it successfully.
As William Paley aged, he tried to find the one person who could follow in his footsteps. However, numerous successors-in-waiting came and went. By the mid-1980s, investor Laurence Tisch had begun to acquire substantial holdings in CBS. Eventually he gained Paley's confidence, and with his support, took control of CBS in 1986. Tisch's primary interest was turning profits. When CBS faltered, underperforming units were given the axe. Among the first properties to be jettisoned was the Columbia Records group, which had been part of the company since 1938. In 1986, Tisch also shut down the CBS Technology Center in Stamford, Connecticut , which had started in New York City in the 1930s as CBS Laboratories and evolved to be the company's technology research and development unit.

Columbia Records
Columbia Records was a record label acquired by CBS in 1938. In 1962, CBS launched CBS Records International to market Columbia recordings outside of North America , where the Columbia name was controlled by other entities. In 1966, CBS Records was made a separate subsidiary of Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc. [118] CBS sold the CBS Records Group to Sony on November 17, 1987, initiating the Japanese buying spree of U.S. companies (such as MCA , Pebble Beach Co. , Rockefeller Center and the Empire State Building ) that continued into the 1990s. The record label company was rechristened Sony Music Entertainment in 1991, as Sony had a short term license on the CBS name.
Sony purchased from EMI its rights to the Columbia Records name outside the U.S., Canada, Spain and Japan. Sony now uses Columbia Records as a label name in all countries except Japan, where Sony Records remains their flagship label. Sony acquired the Spanish rights when Sony Music merged with Bertelsmann subsidiary BMG in 2004 as Sony BMG , co-owned by Sony and Bertelsmann; Sony bought out BMG's share in 2008. CBS Corporation formed a new record label named CBS Records in 2006.

Publishing
CBS entered the publishing business in 1967 by acquiring Holt, Rinehart & Winston, a publisher of trade books and textbooks as well as the magazine Field & Stream . The following year, CBS acquired the medical publishing company Saunders and merged it into Holt, Rinehart & Winston. In 1971, CBS acquired Bond/Parkhurst, the publisher of Road & Track and Cycle World . CBS greatly expanded its magazine business by purchasing Fawcett Publications in 1974, bringing in such magazines as Woman's Day . In 1984, it acquired the majority of the publications owned by Ziff Davis .
CBS sold its book publishing businesses in 1985. The educational publishing division, which retained the Holt, Rinehart & Winston name, was sold to Harcourt Brace Jovanovich ; the trade book division, renamed Henry Holt and Company , was sold to the West German publisher Holtzbrinck . CBS exited the magazine business through the sale of the unit to its executive Peter Diamandis, who later sold the magazines to Hachette Filipacchi Médias in 1988, forming Hachette Filipacchi Media U.S.

CBS Musical Instruments division
Forming the CBS Musical Instruments division, the company also acquired Fender (1965–1983), Electro-Music Inc. ( Leslie speakers ) (1965–1980), Rogers Drums (1966–1983), Steinway pianos (1972–1985), Gemeinhardt flutes, Lyon & Healy harps (in the late 1970s), Rodgers (institutional) organs, and Gulbransen home organs. The company's last musical instrument manufacturer purchase was its 1981 acquisition of the assets of then-bankrupt ARP Instruments , a developer of electronic synthesizers.
It is widely held that, between 1965 and 1985, the quality of Fender guitars and amplifiers declined significantly. Encouraged by outraged Fender fans, CBS Musical Instruments division executives executed a leveraged buyout in 1985 and created Fender Musical Instruments Corporation . At the same time, CBS divested itself of Rodgers, along with Steinway and Gemeinhardt, all of which were purchased by holding company Steinway Musical Properties. The other musical instrument manufacturing properties were also liquidated.

Film production
CBS made a brief, unsuccessful move into film production in the late 1960s, through the creation of Cinema Center Films . This profit-free unit was shut down in 1972; the distribution rights to the Cinema Center library today rest with Paramount Pictures for home video (via CBS Home Entertainment ) and theatrical release, and with CBS Television Distribution for television syndication (most other ancillary rights remain with CBS). The studio released such films as the 1969 Steve McQueen drama The Reivers and the 1970 Albert Finney musical Scrooge .
Ten years after Cinema Center ceased operations, in 1982, CBS made another attempt at a venture in the film industry, in a joint venture with Columbia Pictures and HBO called TriStar Pictures . Despite releasing such box office successes as The Natural , Places in the Heart and Rambo: First Blood Part II , CBS felt the studio was not making a profit and in 1985, sold its stake in TriStar to Columbia Pictures' then-corporate parent The Coca-Cola Company . [119]
In 2007, CBS Corporation announced its intent to get back into the feature film business, slowly launching CBS Films and hiring key executives in the spring of 2008 to start up the new venture. The CBS Films name was actually used previously in 1953, when it was briefly used for CBS's distributor of off-network and first-run syndicated programming to local television stations in the United States and internationally.

Home video
CBS entered into the home video market, when it partnered with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer to form MGM/CBS Home Video in 1978; the joint venture was dissolved by 1982. CBS later partnered with another studio, 20th Century Fox , to form CBS/Fox Video . CBS's duty was to release some of the film title released by TriStar Pictures under the CBS/Fox Video label.

Gabriel Toys
CBS entered the video game market briefly, through its acquisition of Gabriel Toys (renamed CBS Toys), publishing several arcade adaptations and original titles under the name "CBS Electronics", for the Atari 2600 , and other consoles and computers; it also produced one of the first karaoke recording/players. CBS Electronics also distributed all Coleco -related video game products in Canada, including the ColecoVision . CBS later sold Gabriel Toys to View-Master , which eventually ended up as part of Mattel .

New owners
By the early 1990s, profits had fallen as a result of competition from cable television and video rentals, and in consequence of the high cost of programming. About 20 former CBS affiliates switched to the rapidly rising Fox network in the mid-1990s, while many television markets across the United States ( KDFX in Palm Springs, California and KECY in Yuma, Arizona were reportedly the first to switch in August 1994) lost their CBS affiliate for a while. The network's ratings were acceptable, but it struggled with an image of stodginess. Laurence Tisch lost interest and sought a new buyer.

Westinghouse Electric Corporation
In the mid-1990s, CBS formed an affiliate relationship with Westinghouse Electric Corporation as a partial result of losing many longtime affiliates owned by New World Communications through an affiliation agreement with Fox that New World signed in May 1994 . The New World deal resulted in CBS affiliating with UHF stations in Detroit and Cleveland – former Fox affiliate WOIO and low-rated ethnic independent WGPR-TV (now WWJ-TV ), the latter of which was purchased by the network – after a failed attempt to woo the respective longtime ABC affiliates in those markets, WXYZ-TV and WEWS-TV (the latter of which had previously been a CBS affiliate from 1947 to 1955) to respectively replace departing affiliates WJBK and WJW-TV , a situation that the E. W. Scripps Company actually used as leverage to sign a group-wide affiliation deal with ABC that kept the network on WXYZ and WEWS. [120] [121]
Included in the Scripps deal was Baltimore NBC affiliate WMAR-TV (which had been affiliated with CBS from 1948 to 1981), displacing longtime ABC affiliate WJZ-TV , despite the fact that Westinghouse-owned WJZ-TV had long been the Baltimore market's dominant station while WMAR-TV had long been in a distant third and even nearly lost its license in 1991. [122] This did not sit well with Westinghouse, who even before the New World deal was already seeking a group-wide affiliation deal of its own, but accelerated the process after the Scripps-ABC agreement. [123]
In 1994, Westinghouse signed a long-term deal to affiliate all five of its television stations with CBS. [124] [125] Of the other four stations, two of the stations ( KPIX in San Francisco and KDKA-TV in Pittsburgh ) were already longtime affiliates of the network, while two others ( KYW-TV in Philadelphia and WBZ-TV in Boston ) were longtime affiliates of NBC. The network decided to sell off existing O&O in Philadelphia, WCAU , which would eventually be purchased by NBC, despite at the time being much higher rated locally than KYW-TV. While WJZ-TV and WBZ-TV switched to CBS in January 1995, the swap was delayed in Philadelphia when CBS discovered that an outright sale of channel 10 would have forced it to pay massive taxes on the proceeds from the deal. [126] To solve this problem, CBS, NBC and Group W entered into a complex ownership/affiliation deal in the summer of 1995. NBC traded KCNC-TV in Denver and KUTV in Salt Lake City to CBS in return for WCAU, which for legal reasons would be an even trade. CBS then traded controlling interest in KCNC and KUTV to Group W in return for a minority stake in KYW-TV. As compensation for the loss of stations, NBC and CBS traded transmitter facilities in Miami , with NBC-owned WTVJ moving to channel 6 and CBS-owned WCIX moving to channel 4 as WFOR-TV . [127]
On August 1, 1995, Westinghouse Electric Company acquired CBS outright for $5.4 billion. [128] As one of the major broadcasting group owners of commercial radio and television stations (as Group W ) since 1920, Westinghouse sought to transition from a station operator into a major media company with its purchase of CBS. Except for KUTV (which CBS sold to Four Points Media Group in 2007, and is now owned by the Sinclair Broadcast Group ), all of the stations involved in the initial Westinghouse deal as well as WWJ-TV remain owned-and-operated stations of the network to this day.
Westinghouse's acquisition of CBS had the effect of suddenly turning the combined company's all-news radio stations in New York City ( WCBS and WINS ) and Los Angeles ( KNX and KFWB ) from bitter rivals to sister stations. While KFWB switched from all-news to news/talk in 2009, WINS and WCBS remain all-news stations, with WINS (which pioneered the all-news format in 1965) concentrating its news coverage on the five core New York City boroughs and WCBS, with its much more powerful signal, covering the surrounding tri-state metropolitan area. In Chicago, the situation started out with Westinghouse's WMAQ beginning to feature long-form stories and discussions about the news, along with a business news focus to differentiate from WBBM until 2000, when an FCC ownership situation had CBS Radio deciding to move its all sports WSCR to WMAQ's signal to sell off the former WSCR facility.
In 1997, Westinghouse acquired the Infinity Broadcasting Corporation , owner of more than 150 radio stations, for $4.9 billion. Also that year, Westinghouse created CBS Cable, a division formed through the acquisition of two existing cable channels from the Gaylord Entertainment Company ( The Nashville Network (now Spike ) and Country Music Television ) and starting a new one ( CBS Eye on People , which was later sold to Discovery Communications ). CBS also owned the Spanish-language news network CBS Telenoticias .
Following the Infinity purchase, operation and sales responsibilities for the CBS Radio Network was handed to Infinity, which turned management over to Westwood One, a major radio program syndicator that Infinity managed which had previously purchased the Mutual Broadcasting System , NBC's radio networks and the rights to use the "NBC Radio Networks" name. For a time, CBS Radio, NBC Radio Networks and CNN's radio news services were all under the Westwood One umbrella. As of 2008 [update] , Westwood One continues to distribute CBS radio programming, but as a self-managed company that put itself up for sale and found a buyer for a significant amount of its stock.
Also in 1997, Westinghouse changed its name to CBS Corporation, and corporate headquarters were moved from Pittsburgh to New York City. To underline the change in emphasis, all non-entertainment assets were put up for sale. Another 90 radio stations were added to Infinity's portfolio in 1998 with the acquisition of American Radio Systems Corporation for $2.6 billion.
In 1999, CBS paid $2.5 billion to acquire King World Productions , a television syndication company whose programs included The Oprah Winfrey Show , Jeopardy! and Wheel of Fortune . By the end of 1999, all pre-CBS elements of Westinghouse's industrial past (beyond retaining rights to the name for brand licensing purposes) were gone.

Viacom
By the 1990s, CBS had become a broadcasting giant; however, in 1999, entertainment conglomerate Viacom – a company that ironically was created by CBS in 1952 as CBS Films, Inc. to syndicate old CBS series and was spun off under the Viacom name in 1971 – announced it was taking over its former parent in a deal valued at $37 billion. Following completion of this effort in 2000, Viacom became the second-largest entertainment company in the world. Coincidentally, Viacom had purchased Paramount Pictures, which had once invested in CBS, in 1994.

CBS Corporation and CBS Studios
Having assembled all the elements of a communications empire, Viacom found that the promised synergy was not there; in 2005, Viacom announced that it would split the company into two separately operated but commonly controlled entities. [129] CBS became the center of a new company, CBS Corporation . The legal successor to the old Viacom, the company's properties included the broadcasting entities (CBS and UPN , the latter of which later merged with Time Warner -owned The WB to form The CW; the Viacom Television Stations Group, which became CBS Television Stations ; and CBS Radio); Paramount Television 's production operations (now known as CBS Television Studios ); Viacom Outdoor advertising (renamed CBS Outdoor ); Showtime Networks ; Simon & Schuster ; and Paramount Parks , which the company sold in May 2006. The other company, which retained the Viacom name, kept Paramount Pictures, assorted MTV Networks , BET Networks , and Famous Music (the latter of which was sold to Sony/ATV Music Publishing in May 2007).
As a result of the Viacom/CBS corporate split, as well as other acquisitions over recent years, CBS (under the moniker CBS Studios) owns a massive film and television library spanning nine decades; these include not acquired material from Viacom and CBS in-house productions and network programs, as well as programs originally aired on competing networks. Shows and other material in this library include among others, I Love Lucy , The Honeymooners , The Twilight Zone , Hawaii Five-O (both the original and current remake), Gunsmoke , The Fugitive , The Love Boat , Little House on the Prairie (U.S. television rights only), Cheers , Becker , Family Ties , Happy Days and its spin-offs, The Brady Bunch , Star Trek , The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles (distribution rights on behalf of copyright holder Lucasfilm ), Evening Shade , Duckman , CSI: Crime Scene Investigation and its spin-offs, the CBS theatrical library (including My Fair Lady and Scrooge ), and the entire Terrytoons library from 1921 forward.
Both CBS Corporation and the new Viacom are owned by National Amusements, the Sumner Redstone-owned company that controlled the original Viacom prior to the split. As such, Paramount Home Media Distribution (formerly Paramount Home Entertainment) continues to handle DVD and Blu-ray distribution for the CBS library.

Programming
As of 2013 [update] , CBS provides 87½ hours of regularly scheduled network programming each week. The network provides 22 hours of prime time programming to affiliated stations Monday through Saturdays from 8:00–11:00 p.m. Eastern and Pacific (7:00–10:00 p.m. in all other time zones) and Sundays from 7:00–11:00 p.m. (6:00–10:00 p.m. elsewhere).
Daytime programming is also provided from 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. weekdays (with a half-hour break at 12:00 p.m. Eastern/Pacific for CBS stations to air local newscasts or syndicated programs; usage of the 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. hours for network programming vary depending on the affiliate and on time zone) featuring the game shows The Price Is Right and Let's Make a Deal , soap operas The Young and the Restless and The Bold and the Beautiful , and talk show The Talk . CBS News programming includes CBS This Morning from 7:00 to 9:00 a.m. weekdays and Saturdays; nightly editions of CBS Evening News (whose weekend editions are occasionally subject to abbreviation or preemption due to sports telecasts overrunning into the program's timeslot), the Sunday political talk show Face the Nation , early morning news programs Up to the Minute and CBS Morning News and the newsmagazines 60 Minutes , CBS News Sunday Morning and 48 Hours . Late nights feature the weeknight talk shows The Late Show with Stephen Colbert and The Late Late Show with James Corden .
Sports programming is also provided weekend afternoons at any time between 12:00 and 7:00 p.m. (9:00 a.m.-4:00 p.m. Pacific Time). Due to the unpredictable length of sporting events, CBS will occasionally delay scheduled primetime programs to allow the programs to air in their entirety (this is particularly prevalent on Sunday evenings during the NFL season, on weeks when CBS is scheduled to broadcast a late afternoon game). In addition to rights to sports events from the NFL, PGA and NCAA among other major sports organizations, CBS broadcasts the CBS Sports Spectacular , a sports anthology series which fills certain weekend afternoon time slots prior to – or in some cases, in lieu of – a major sporting event.

Daytime
CBS's daytime schedule (the longest among the major networks, in terms of total time, at 4½ hours) is the home of the long-running game show The Price Is Right , which began production in 1972 and is the longest continuously running daytime game show on network television. After being hosted by Bob Barker for 35 years, the show has been hosted since 2007 by actor/comedian Drew Carey . The network is also home to the current incarnation of Let's Make a Deal , hosted by singer/comedian Wayne Brady , which originated in 1964 on NBC and was revived by CBS in 2009 (after a 19-year absence as a regular series). As of 2015 [update] , CBS is the only commercial broadcast network that continues to broadcast daytime game shows. Notable game shows that once aired as part of the network's daytime lineup include Match Game , Tattletales , The $10/25,000 Pyramid , Press Your Luck , Card Sharks , Family Feud and Wheel of Fortune . Past game shows that have had both daytime and prime time runs on the network include Beat the Clock , To Tell the Truth and Password . Two long-running prime time-only games were the panel shows What's My Line? and I've Got a Secret .
The network is also home to The Talk , a panel talk show similar in format to ABC's The View , which debuted in October 2010 (as of 2012 [update] , the program is hosted by moderator Julie Chen , series creator/executive producer Sara Gilbert , Sharon Osbourne , Aisha Tyler and Sheryl Underwood ).
As of September 2013 [update] , CBS Daytime airs two daytime soap operas each weekday: the hour-long series The Young and the Restless and half-hour series The Bold and the Beautiful . CBS has aired the most soap operas out of the Big Three networks, carrying 3½ hours of soaps on its daytime lineup from 1982 to 2009. After Guiding Light ended in September 2009, ABC overtook CBS as the network with the most daily hours dedicated to soap operas; however, CBS reclaimed this distinction in January 2012, following the conclusion of two of ABC's three remaining soap operas, All My Children and One Life to Live , which were cancelled the year before. Other than Guiding Light , notable daytime soap operas that once aired on CBS include As the World Turns , Love of Life , Search for Tomorrow , The Secret Storm , The Edge of Night and Capitol .

Children's programming
CBS broadcast the live-action series Captain Kangaroo on weekday mornings from 1955 to 1982, and on Saturdays through 1984. From 1971 to 1986, CBS News produced a series of one-minute segments titled In the News , which aired between other Saturday morning programs. Otherwise, in regards to children's programming, CBS has aired mostly animated series for children, such as reruns of Mighty Mouse , Bugs Bunny and Tom and Jerry cartoons, as well as the original version of Scooby-Doo , Fat Albert and the Cosby Kids , Jim Henson's Muppet Babies , Garfield and Friends , and the 1987 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles . In 1997, CBS premiered Wheel 2000 (a children's version of the syndicated game show Wheel of Fortune ), which aired simultaneously on the Game Show Network .
In September 1998, CBS began contracting the time period out to other companies to provide programming and material for its Saturday morning schedule. The first of these outsourced blocks was the CBS Kidshow , which ran until 2000 and featured programming from Canadian studio Nelvana [130] (such as Anatole , Mythic Warriors , Rescue Heroes and Flying Rhino Junior High ). [131]
After its agreement with Nelvana ended, the network then entered into a deal with Nickelodeon (which by the time of the deal was a corporate sister to CBS, through the latter's then parent company Viacom, as a result of its 2000 merger with CBS Corporation) to air programming from its Nick Jr. block beginning in September 2000, under the banner Nick Jr. on CBS . [130] From 2002 to 2005, live-action and animated Nickelodeon series aimed at older children also aired as part of the block, under the sub-brand Nick on CBS .
Following the Viacom-CBS split that resulted in the network deciding to discontinue the Nickelodeon content deal, in March 2006, CBS entered into a three-year agreement with DIC Entertainment (which was acquired later that year by the Cookie Jar Group , which assumed the rights to the deal) to program the Saturday morning time slot, [132] [133] as part of a deal which included distribution of select tape delayed Formula One auto races. [134] [135] The KOL Secret Slumber Party on CBS replaced Nick Jr. on CBS that September, with the inaugural lineup featuring two new first-run live-action programs, one animated series that originally aired in syndication in 2005 and three shows produced prior to 2006. In mid-2007, KOL (the children's service of AOL ) withdrew sponsorship from CBS's Saturday morning block, which was subsequently renamed KEWLopolis . Complimenting CBS's 2007 lineup was Care Bears , Strawberry Shortcake and Sushi Pack . On February 24, 2009, it was announced that CBS renewed its contract with Cookie Jar for another three seasons, running through 2012. [136] [137] On September 19, 2009, KEWLopolis was renamed Cookie Jar TV . [138]
On July 24, 2013, CBS entered into an agreement with Litton Entertainment (which already programmed a syndicated Saturday morning block exclusive to ABC stations and would later produce a block for CBS sister network The CW that debuted the following year) to launch a new Saturday morning block featuring live-action reality-based lifestyle, wildlife and sports series. The Litton-produced "CBS Dream Team" block, which is aimed at teenagers 13 to 16 years old, debuted on September 28, 2013, replacing Cookie Jar TV . [139]

Specials

Animated primetime holiday specials
CBS was the original broadcast network home of the animated primetime holiday specials based on the Peanuts comic strip, beginning with A Charlie Brown Christmas in 1965. Over 30 holiday Peanuts specials (each for a specific holiday such as Halloween ) were broadcast on CBS from that time until 2000, when the broadcast rights were acquired by ABC. CBS also aired several primetime animated specials based on the works of Dr. Seuss (Theodor Geisel), beginning with How the Grinch Stole Christmas in 1966, as well as several specials based on the Garfield comic strip during the 1980s (which led to Garfield getting his own Saturday morning cartoon on the network, Garfield and Friends , which ran from 1988 to 1995). Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer , produced in stop motion by the Rankin/Bass studio, has been another annual holiday staple of CBS since 1972; however, that special originated on NBC in 1964. As of 2011, Rudolph and Frosty the Snowman are the only two pre-1990 animated specials remaining on CBS; the broadcast rights to the Charlie Brown specials and The Grinch are now held by ABC, while that network's cable sister ABC Family owns the rights to the Garfield specials.
All of these animated specials, from 1973 to 1990, began with a fondly remembered seven-second animated opening sequence, in which the words "A CBS Special Presentation" were displayed in colorful lettering (the ITC Avant Garde typeface, widely used in the 1970s, was used for the title logo). The word "SPECIAL", in all caps and repeated multiple times in multiple colors, slowly zoomed out from the frame in a spinning counterclockwise motion against a black background, and rapidly zoomed back into frame as a single word, in white, at the end; the sequence was accompanied by a jazzy though majestic up-tempo fanfare with dramatic horns and percussion (which was edited incidental music from the CBS crime drama Hawaii Five-O , titled "Call to Danger" on the Capitol Records soundtrack LP). This opening sequence appeared immediately before all CBS specials of the period (such as the Miss USA pageants and the annual presentation of the Kennedy Center Honors ), in addition to animated specials (this opening was presumably designed by, or under the supervision of, longtime CBS creative director Lou Dorfsman , who oversaw print and on-air graphics for CBS for nearly 30 years, replacing William Golden , who died in 1959).

Classical music specials
CBS was also responsible for airing the series of Young People's Concerts conducted by Leonard Bernstein . Telecast every few months between 1958 and 1972, first in black-and-white and then broadcast in color beginning in 1966, these programs introduced millions of children to classical music through the eloquent commentaries by Maestro Bernstein. The specials were nominated for several Emmy Awards , and were among the first programs ever broadcast from Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts .
Over the years, CBS has broadcast three different productions of Tchaikovsky's famous ballet The Nutcracker – two live telecasts of the George Balanchine New York City Ballet production in 1957 and 1958 respectively, a little-known German-American filmed production in 1965 (which was subsequently repeated three times and starred Edward Villella , Patricia McBride and Melissa Hayden ), and beginning in 1977, the Mikhail Baryshnikov staging of the ballet, starring the Russian dancer along with Gelsey Kirkland – a version that would become a television classic, and remains so today (the broadcast of this production later moved to PBS).
In April 1986, CBS presented a slightly abbreviated version of Horowitz in Moscow , a live piano recital by legendary pianist Vladimir Horowitz , which marked Horowitz's return to Russia after more than 60 years. The recital was televised as an episode of CBS News Sunday Morning (televised at 9:00 a.m. Eastern Time in the U.S., as the recital was performed simultaneously at 4:00 p.m. in Russia ). It was so successful that CBS repeated it a mere two months later by popular demand, this time on videotape, rather than live. In later years, the program was shown as a standalone special on PBS; the current DVD of the telecast omits the commentary by Charles Kuralt , but includes additional selections not heard on the CBS telecast.
In 1986, CBS telecast Carnegie Hall: The Grand Reopening in primetime, in what was now a rare move for a commercial broadcast network, since most primetime classical music specials were relegated to PBS and A&E by this time. The program was a concert commemorating the re-opening of Carnegie Hall after its complete renovation. It featured, along with luminaries such as Leonard Bernstein, popular music artists such as Frank Sinatra .

Cinderella
In order to compete with NBC, which produced the now-legendary televised version of the Mary Martin Broadway production of Peter Pan , CBS responded with a musical production of Cinderella , with music composed by Richard Rodgers and a book and lyrics by Oscar Hammerstein II . Based upon the classic French fairy tale of the same title , it is the only Rodgers and Hammerstein musical ever to have been written for television. It was originally broadcast live in color on CBS on March 31, 1957 as a vehicle for Julie Andrews, who played the title role; that broadcast was seen by over 100 million people. It was subsequently remade by CBS in 1965, with Lesley Ann Warren, Stuart Damon, Ginger Rogers and Walter Pidgeon among its stars; the remake also included a new song, "Loneliness of Evening", which was originally composed in 1949 for South Pacific , but was not performed in that musical. [140] [141] This version was rebroadcast several times on CBS into the early 1970s, and is occasionally broadcast on various cable networks to this day; both versions are available on DVD.

National Geographic
CBS was also the original broadcast home for the primetime specials produced by the National Geographic Society . The Geographic series in the U.S. started on CBS in 1964, before moving to ABC in 1973 (the specials subsequently moved to PBS – under the production of Pittsburgh member station WQED – in 1975 and NBC in 1995, before returning to PBS in 2000). The specials have featured stories on many scientific figures such as Louis Leakey , Jacques Cousteau and Jane Goodall , that not only featured their work but helped make them internationally known and accessible to millions. A majority of the specials were narrated by various actors, notably Alexander Scourby during the CBS run. The success of the specials led in part to the creation of the National Geographic Channel , a cable channel launched in January 2001 as a joint venture between the National Geographic Society and Fox Cable Networks . The specials' distinctive theme music, by Elmer Bernstein , was also adopted by the National Geographic Channel.

Other notable specials
From 1949 to 2002, the Pillsbury Bake-Off , an annual national cooking contest, was broadcast on CBS as a special. Hosts for the broadcast included Arthur Godfrey , Art Linkletter , Bob Barker , Gary Collins , Willard Scott (although under contract with CBS's rival NBC ) and Alex Trebek .
The Miss USA beauty pageant aired on CBS from 1963 to 2002; during a large portion of that period, the telecast was often emceed by the host of one of the network's game shows. John Charles Daly hosted the show from 1963 to 1966, succeeded by Bob Barker from 1967 to 1987 (at which point Barker, an animal rights activist who eventually convinced producers of The Price Is Right to cease offering fur coats as prizes on the program, quit in a dispute over their use), Alan Thicke in 1988, Dick Clark from 1989 to 1993, and Bob Goen from 1994 to 1996. The pageant's highest viewership was recorded in the early 1980s, when it regularly topped the Nielsen ratings on the week of its broadcast. [142] [143] [144] Viewership dropped sharply throughout the 1990s and 2000s, from an estimated viewership of 20 million to an average of 7 million from 2000 to 2001. [145] In 2002, Donald Trump (owner of the Miss USA pageant's governing body, the Miss Universe Organization ) brokered a new deal with NBC, giving it half-ownership of the Miss USA, Miss Universe and Miss Teen USA pageants and moving them to that network as part of an initial five-year contract, [146] which began in 2003 and ended in 2015 after 12 years amid Trump's controversial remarks about Mexican immigrants during the launch of his 2016 campaign for the Republican Presidential nomination . [147]
On June 1, 1977, it was announced that Elvis Presley had signed a deal with CBS to appear in a new television special. Under the agreement, CBS would videotape Presley's concerts during the summer of 1977; the special was filmed during Presley's final tour at stops in Omaha, Nebraska (on June 19) and Rapid City, South Dakota (on June 21 of that year). CBS aired the special, Elvis in Concert , on October 3, 1977, [148] nearly two months after Presley's death in his Graceland mansion on August 16.

Stations
As of March 2015 [update] , CBS has 16 owned-and-operated stations, and current and pending affiliation agreements with 222 additional television stations encompassing 49 states, the District of Columbia, two U.S. possessions, Bermuda and St. Vincent and the Grenadines . [149] [150] The network has a national reach of 96.37% of all households in the United States (or 301,123,135 Americans with at least one television set). Currently, New Jersey , New Hampshire and Delaware are the only U.S. states where CBS does not have a locally licensed affiliate (New Jersey is served by New York City O&O WCBS-TV and Philadelphia O&O KYW-TV; Delaware is served by KYW and Salisbury, Maryland affiliate WBOC-TV ; and New Hampshire is served by Boston O&O WBZ-TV and Burlington, Vermont affiliate WCAX-TV ).
As a newer broadcast network, CBS maintains affiliations with low-power stations (broadcasting either in analog or digital) in a few markets, such as Harrisonburg, Virginia ( WSVF-CD ), Palm Springs, California ( KPSP-CD ) and Parkersburg, West Virginia ( WIYE-LD ). In some markets, including both of those mentioned, these stations also maintain digital simulcasts on a subchannel of a co-owned/co-managed full-power television station. CBS also maintains a sizeable number of subchannel-only affiliations, the majority of which are with stations in cities located outside of the 50 largest Nielsen-designated markets; the largest CBS subchannel affiliate by market size is KOGG in Wailuku, Hawaii , which serves as a repeater of Honolulu affiliate KGMB (the sister station of KOGG parent KHNL).
Nexstar Media Group is the largest operator of CBS stations by numerical total, owning 44 CBS affiliates (counting satellites); Tegna Media is the largest operator of CBS stations in terms of overall market reach, owning 11 CBS-affiliated stations (including affiliates in the larger markets in Houston , Tampa and Washington, D.C. ) that reach 8.9% of the country.

Related services

Video-on-demand services
CBS provides video on demand access for delayed viewing of the network's programming through various means, including via its website at CBS.com; the network's apps for iOS , Android and newer version Windows devices; a traditional VOD service called CBS on Demand available on most traditional cable and IPTV providers; and through content deals with Amazon Video (which holds exclusive streaming rights to two CBS drama series, Extant and Under the Dome ) and Netflix . [151] [152] [153] [154] Notably, however, CBS is the only major broadcast network that does not provide recent episodes of its programming on Hulu (sister network The CW does offer its programming on the streaming service, albeit on a one-week delay after becoming available on the network's website on Hulu's free service, with users of its subscription service being granted access to newer episodes of CW series eight hours after their initial broadcast), due to concerns over cannibalizing viewership of some of the network's most prominent programs; however, episode back catalogs of certain past and present CBS series are available on the service through an agreement with CBS Television Distribution. [155] [156] [157]
Upon the release of the app in March 2013, CBS restricted streaming of the most recent episode of any of the network's program on its streaming app for Apple iOS devices until eight days after their initial broadcast, in order to encourage live or same-week (via both DVR and cable on demand) viewing; programming selections on the app were limited until the release of its Google Play and Windows 8 apps in October 2013, expanded the selections to include full episodes of all CBS series to which the network does not license the streaming rights to other services. [158]

CBS All Access
On October 28, 2014, CBS launched CBS All Access, an over-the-top subscription streaming service – priced at $5.99 per month ($9.99 with the no commercials option) – which allows users to view past and present episodes of CBS shows. [159] [160] [161] Announced on October 16, 2014 (one day after HBO announced the launch of its over-the-top service HBO Now ) as the first OTT offering by an USA broadcast television network, the service initially encompassed the network's existing streaming portal at CBS.com and its mobile app for smartphones and tablet computers ; CBS All Access became available on Roku on April 7, 2015, and on Chromecast on May 14, 2015. [162] [163] In addition to providing full-length episodes of CBS programs, the service allows live programming streams of local CBS affiliates in 124 markets reaching 75% of the United States. [164] [165] [166] [167] [168]
CBS All Access offers the most recent episodes of the network's shows the day after their original broadcast, as well as complete back catalogs of most of its current series and a wide selection of episodes of classic series from the CBS Television Distribution program library, to subscribers of the service. CBS All Access also carries behind-the-scenes features from CBS programs and special events. [159]
Original programs expected to air on CBS All Access include a new new Star Trek series , a spin-off of The Good Wife , and an online version of Big Brother . [169] [170] [171]

CBS HD
CBS's master feed is transmitted in 1080i high definition , the native resolution format for CBS Corporation's television properties. However, seven of its affiliates transmit the network's programming in 720p HD, while seven others carry the network feed in 480i standard definition [149] either due to technical considerations for affiliates of other major networks that carry CBS programming on a digital subchannel or because a primary feed CBS affiliate has not yet upgraded their transmission equipment to allow content to be presented in HD.
CBS began its conversion to high definition with the launch of its simulcast feed, CBS HD, on September 1998 at the start of the 1998–99 season . That year, the network aired the first NFL game ever broadcast in high-definition, with the telecast of the New York Jets – Buffalo Bills game on November 8. The network gradually converted much of its existing programming from standard-definition to high definition beginning with the 2000–01 season , with select shows among that season's slate of freshmen scripted series being broadcast in HD from their debuts. The Young and the Restless became the first daytime soap opera to broadcast in HD on June 27, 2001. [172]
CBS's 14-year conversion to an entirely high definition schedule ended in 2014, with Big Brother and Let's Make a Deal becoming the final two network series to convert from 4:3 standard definition to HD (in contrast, NBC, Fox and The CW were already airing their entire programming schedules – outside of Saturday mornings – in high definition by the 2010–11 season, while ABC was broadcasting its entire schedule in HD by the 2011–12 midseason). All of the network's programming has been presented in full HD since then (with the exception of certain holiday specials produced prior to 2005 – such as the Rankin-Bass specials – which continue to be presented in 4:3 SD, although some have been remastered for HD broadcast).
As of September 1, 2016 when ABC converted to a 16:9 widescreen presentation, CBS and The CW are currently the only remaining networks which frame their promotions and on-screen graphical elements for a 4:3 presentation, though with CBS Sports 's de facto 16:9 conversion with Super Bowl 50 and their new graphical presentation designed for 16:9 framing, in practice most CBS affiliates ask pay-TV providers to pass down a 16:9 widescreen presentation by default over their standard definition channels.

Brand identity 

Logos
The CBS television network's initial logo, used from the 1940s to 1951, consisted of an oval spotlight which shone on the block letters "C-B-S". [173] The present-day Eye device was conceived by William Golden, based on a Pennsylvania Dutch hex sign as well as a Shaker drawing (while commonly attributed to Golden, there is speculation that at least some design work on the symbol may have been done by another CBS staff designer, Georg Olden , one of the first African-Americans to attract some attention in the postwar graphic design field). [174] The Eye device made its broadcast debut on October 20, 1951. The following season, as Golden prepared a new "ident", CBS President Frank Stanton insisted on keeping the Eye device and using it as much as possible (Golden died unexpectedly in 1959, and was replaced by one of his top assistants, Lou Dorfsman , who would go on to oversee all print and on-air graphics for CBS for the next 30 years).
The CBS eye has since become an American icon. While the symbol's settings have changed, the Eye device itself has not been redesigned in its entire history. [175] As part of a new graphical identity created by Trollbäck + Company that was introduced by the television network in 2006, the eye was placed in a "trademark" position on show titles, days of the week and descriptive words, an approach highly respecting the value of the design. The logo is alternately known as the Eyemark , which was also the name of CBS's domestic and international syndication divisions in the mid-to-late 1990s before the King World acquisition and Viacom merger.
The eye logo has frequently been copied or borrowed by television networks around the world. Notable examples include the Austrian Broadcasting System ( ORF ), which formerly used a red version of the eye logo; Associated Television (ATV) in the United Kingdom; Frecuencia Latina in Peru; Fuji Television in Japan; Rede Bandeirantes and Rede Globo in Brazil; and Saeta TV Channel 10 in Uruguay.
The network celebrated the 60th anniversary of the introduction of the Eye logo in October 2011, featuring special IDs shown during the network's prime time lineup of logo versions from previous CBS image campaigns. [176]
The standard corporate typeface used by CBS since the 1950s is Didot , a close relative to Bodoni . Several of the typefaces used by CBS over the years were designed by Herb Lubalin of International Typeface Corporation , an associate of CBS art director Lou Dorfsman. These typefaces include Avant Garde , Lubalin Graph , and Serif Gothic .

Image campaigns

1980s
Through the years, CBS has developed several notable image campaigns, and several of the network's most well-known slogans were introduced in the 1980s. The "Reach for the Stars" campaign used during the 1981–82 season feature a space theme used to capitalize on both CBS's stellar improvement in the ratings and the historic launch of the space shuttle Columbia . 1982's "Great Moments" juxtaposed scenes from classic CBS programs such as I Love Lucy with scenes from the network's then-current classics such as Dallas and M*A*S*H . From 1983 to 1986, CBS (by now firmly atop the ratings) featured a campaign based on the slogan "We've Got the Touch". Vocals for the campaign's jingle were contributed by Richie Havens (1983–84; one occasion in 1984–85) and Kenny Rogers (1985–86).
The 1986–87 season ushered in the "Share the Spirit of CBS" campaign, the network's first to completely use computer graphics and DVE effects. Unlike most network campaign promos, the full-length version of "Share the Spirit" not only showed a brief clip preview of each new fall series, but also utilized CGI effects to map out the entire fall schedule by night. The success of that campaign led to the 1987–88 "CBS Spirit" (or "CBSPIRIT") campaign. Like with its predecessor campaign, most "CBSpirit" promos utilized a procession of clips from the network's programs. However, the new graphic motif was a swirling (or "swishing") blue line, that was used to represent "the spirit." The full length promo, like the previous year, had a special portion that identified new fall shows, but the mapped-out fall schedule shot was abandoned.
For the 1988–89 season , CBS unveiled a new image campaign, officially known as "Television You Can Feel", but more commonly identified as "You Can Feel It On CBS". The goal was to convey a more sensual, new-age image through distinguished, advanced-looking computer graphics and soothing music, backgrounding images and clips of emotionally powerful scenes and characters. However, it was this season in which CBS began its ratings freefall, the deepest in the network's history. CBS ended the decade with "Get Ready for CBS," introduced with the 1989–90 season . The initial version was a very ambitious campaign that attempted to elevate CBS out of last place (among the major networks); the motif centered around network stars interacting with each other in a remote studio set, getting ready for photo and television shoots, as well as for the new season on CBS. The high-energy promo song and the campaign's practices saw many customized variations by all of CBS's owned-and-operated stations and affiliates, which participated in the campaign per a network mandate. In addition, for the first time in history, CBS became the first broadcast network to partner with a national retailer (in this case, Kmart ) to encourage viewership, with the "CBS/Kmart Get Ready Giveaway".

1990s
For the 1990–91 season , the campaign featured a new jingle performed by The Temptations , which offered an altered version of their hit " Get Ready ". The early 1990s featured less-than-memorable campaigns, with simplified taglines such as "This is CBS" (1992) and "You're On CBS" (1995). Eventually, the promotions department gained momentum again late in the decade with "Welcome Home to a CBS Night" (1996–1997), simplified to Welcome Home (1997–1999) and succeeded by the spin-off campaign "The Address is CBS" (1999–2000). During the 1992 season for the end-of-show network identification sequence, a three-note sound mark was introduced, which was eventually adapted into the network's IDs and production company vanity cards following the closing credits of most of its programs during the "Welcome Home" era.

2000s
Throughout the first decade of the 21st century, CBS's ratings resurgence was backed by the network's "It's All Here" campaign (which introduced updated versions of the 1992 sound mark used during certain promotions and production company vanity cards during the closing credits of programs); in 2005, the network's strategy led to the proclamation that it was "America's Most Watched Network". The network's 2006 campaign introduced the slogan "We Are CBS", with Don LaFontaine providing the voiceover for the IDs (as well as certain network promos) during this period. In 2009, the network introduced a campaign entitled "Only CBS," in which network promotions proclaim several unique qualities it has (the slogan was also used in program promotions following the announcement of the timeslot of a particular program). The "America's Most Watched Network" was re-introduced by CBS in 2011, used alongside the "Only CBS" slogan. [177]

Promos
Especially during the 1960s, CBS as well as its two major network competitors, NBC, and ABC, utilized elaborate promos during the summer months to promote their upcoming fall schedules. In 1961, CBS took the unusual step of airing a program titled CBS Fall Preview Special: Seven Wonderful Nights , [178] using stars of several CBS shows – such as Ed Sullivan ( The Ed Sullivan Show ), Rod Serling ( The Twilight Zone ), and Raymond Burr and Barbara Hale ( Perry Mason ) – to promote the upcoming fall lineup, instead the network's continuity announcers, showing previews of the entire lineup for one specific day of the week. [179] Fall preview specials hosted by network stars would become commonplace among the broadcast networks in subsequent years.

International broadcasts
CBS programs are shown outside the United States, through various branded international networks and content agreements, and in two North American countries, through U.S.-based CBS stations.

Canada
In Canada , CBS network programming is carried on cable, satellite and IPTV providers in Canada through affiliates and owned-and-operated stations of the network that are located within proximity to the Canada–United States border (such as KIRO-TV / Seattle , KDLH / Duluth, Minnesota , WWJ-TV / Detroit and WIVB-TV / Buffalo, New York and WCAX-TV / Burlington, Vermont ), some of which may also be receivable over-the-air in parts of southern Canada depending on the signal coverage of the station. Most programming is generally the same as it airs in the United States; however, some CBS programming on U.S.-based affiliates permitted for carriage by the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission by Canadian cable and satellite providers are subject to simultaneous substitutions , a practice in which a pay television provider supplants an American station's signal with a feed from a Canadian station/network airing a particular program in the same time slot to protect domestic advertising revenue.

Bermuda
In Bermuda , CBS maintains an affiliation with Hamilton -based ZBM-TV , locally owned by Bermuda Broadcasting Company .

Mexico
CBS programming is available in Mexico through affiliates in markets located within proximity to the Mexico–United States border (such as KSWT / Yuma, Arizona ; KVTV / Laredo, Texas ; KDBC-TV / El Paso, Texas ; KGBT-TV / Harlingen, Texas ; and KFMB-TV / San Diego ), whose signals are readily receivable over-the-air in border areas of northern Mexico.

Europe
Sky News broadcasts the CBS Evening News on its channels serving the United Kingdom , Ireland , Australia , New Zealand and Italy .

United Kingdom
On September 14, 2009, the international arm of CBS, CBS Studios International , reached a joint venture deal with Chellomedia to launch six CBS-branded channels in the United Kingdom – which would respectively replace Zone Romantica , Zone Thriller , Zone Horror and Zone Reality , as well as timeshift services Zone Horror +1 and Zone Reality +1 – during the fourth quarter of that year. [180] [181] On October 1, 2009, it was announced that the first four channels, CBS Reality , CBS Reality +1, CBS Drama and CBS Action , would launch on November 16 – respectively replacing Zone Reality, Zone Reality +1, Zone Romantica and Zone Thriller. [182] On April 5, 2010, Zone Horror and Zone Horror +1 were rebranded as Horror Channel and Horror Channel +1. [183] [184]

Australia
In Australia , Network Ten (which CBS owns 33% of its shares) maintains a distribution agreement with CBS Television Distribution that gives the network rights to carry programs such as Entertainment Tonight , Dr. Phil , Late Show with Stephen Colbert , the NCIS franchise and Scorpion . Nine Network maintains the rights to story content sourced from 60 Minutes , used on the domestic program of the same title , while reports provided by Network Ten are used in the United States by CBS for supplementary coverage of Australian topics. Network Ten's sister digital channels One and Eleven also carry CBS programming.

Asia

Guam
In the U.S. territory of Guam , the network is affiliated with low-power station KUAM-LP in Hagåtña . Entertainment and non-breaking news programming is shown day and date on a one-day tape delay , as Guam is located on the west side of the International Date Line (for example, NCIS , which airs on Tuesday nights, is carried Wednesdays on KUAM-LP, and is advertised by the station as airing on the latter night in on-air promotions), with live programming and breaking news coverage airing as scheduled, meaning live sports coverage often airs early in the morning.

Hong Kong
In Hong Kong , the CBS Evening News was broadcast live during the early morning hours on ATV; networks in that country maintains agreement to rebroadcast portions of the program 12 hours after the initial broadcast to provide additional content in the event that their affiliates have insufficient news content to fill time during their local news programs.

Philippines
In the Philippines , the CBS Evening News is broadcast on satellite network Q-TV (a sister channel of GMA Network ), while CBS This Morning is shown in that country on the Lifestyle Network. The Late Show with David Letterman is broadcast by Studio 23 and Maxx, which are both owned by ABS-CBN . 60 Minutes is currently broadcast on CNN Philippines (formerly Talktv , Solar News Channel and 9TV ) as a part of their Stories block, which includes documentaries and is broadcast on Wednesday at 8:00 p.m. before CNN Philippines Nightly News with replays in a capacity as a stand-alone program on Saturdays at 8:00 a.m. & 5:00 pm and Sundays at 6:00 a.m, all in local time (UTC + 8). And with the merger of RTL it's known as RTL CBS Entertainment.

India
In India , CBS maintained a brand licensing agreement with Reliance Broadcast Network Ltd. for three CBS-branded channels: Big CBS Prime , Big CBS Spark and Big CBS Love . These channels were shut down in late November 2013.

Controversies

Brown & Williamson interview
In 1995, CBS refused to air a 60 Minutes segment that featured an interview with a former president of research and development for Brown & Williamson , the U.S.'s third largest tobacco company. The controversy raised questions about the legal roles in decision-making and whether journalistic standards should be compromised despite legal pressures and threats. The decision nevertheless sent shockwaves throughout the television industry, the journalism community, and the country. [185] This incident was the basis for the 1999 Michael Mann -directed drama film, The Insider .

Bernard Goldberg
In 2001, Bernard Goldberg , who served as a correspondent for CBS News for 28 years, authored Bias: A CBS Insider Exposes How the Media Distort the News . The book heavily criticized the media, and some CBS anchors and correspondents in particular (such as Dan Rather ). Goldberg accused CBS of having a liberal bias in most of their news coverage; [186] Goldberg now works as a commentator for Fox News .

Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show incident
In 2004, the Federal Communications Commission imposed a record $550,000 fine, the largest fine ever for a violation of federal decency laws, against CBS for an incident during its broadcast of Super Bowl XXXVIII in which singer Janet Jackson 's right breast (which was partially covered by a piece of nipple jewelry) was briefly and accidentally exposed by guest performer Justin Timberlake at the end of a duet performance of Timberlake's 2003 single " Rock Your Body " during the halftime show (produced by then sister cable network MTV ). [187] Following the incident, CBS apologized to its viewers and denied foreknowledge of the incident, which was televised live. The incident resulted in a period of increased regulation of broadcast television and radio outlets (including self-imposed content regulation by networks and syndicators), which raised concerns surrounding censorship and freedom of speech , [188] and resulted in the FCC voting to increase its maximum fine for indecency violations from US$27,500 to US$325,000. [189] In 2008, a Philadelphia federal court annulled the fine imposed on CBS, labelling it "arbitrary and capricious". [190]

Killan documents controversy
On September 8, 2004, less than two months before the Presidential election in which he defeated Democratic candidate John Kerry , CBS aired a controversial episode of 60 Minutes Wednesday , which questioned then-President George W. Bush 's service in the Air National Guard in 1972 and 1973. [191] Following allegations of forgery, CBS News admitted that four of the documents used in the story had not been properly authenticated and admitted that their source, Bill Burkett, had admitted to having "deliberately misled" a CBS News producer who worked on the report, about the documents' origins out of a confidentiality promise to the actual source. [192] [193] The following January, CBS fired four people connected to the preparation of the segment. [194] Former CBS news anchor Dan Rather filed a $70 million lawsuit against CBS and former corporate parent Viacom in September 2007, contending the story, and his termination (he resigned as CBS News chief anchor in 2005), were mishandled. [195] [196] Parts of the suit were dismissed in 2008; [197] subsequently in 2010, the entire suit was dismissed and Rather's motion to appeal was denied. [198]

John Batiste firing
In 2007, retired Army Major Gen. and CBS News consultant John Batiste appeared in a political ad for VoteVets.org that was critical of President George W. Bush and the war in Iraq . Two days later, CBS stated that appearing in the ad violated Batiste's contract with the network, which was terminated as a result. [199]

Hopper controversy
In January 2013, CNET named Dish Network 's "Hopper with Sling " digital video recorder as a nominee for the CES "Best in Show" award (which is decided by CNET on behalf of its organizers, the Consumer Electronics Association ), and named it the winner in a vote by the site's staff. However, CBS division CBS Interactive disqualified the Hopper, and vetoed the results as CBS was in active litigation with Dish Network over its AutoHop technology (which allows users to skip commercial advertisements during recorded programs). [200] CNET announced that it would no longer review any product or service provided by companies that CBS Corporation was in litigation with. The "Best in Show" award was instead given to the Razer Edge tablet. [201] [202] [203] On January 14, 2013, CNET editor-in-chief Lindsey Turrentine said in a statement that its staff was in an "impossible" situation due to the conflict of interest posed by the lawsuit, and promised to prevent a similar incident from occurring again. The conflict also prompted the resignation of CNET senior writer Greg Sandoval. [202] As a result of the controversy, the CEA announced on January 31, 2013 that CNET will no longer decide the CES Best in Show award winner due to the interference of CBS (with the position being offered to other technology publications), and the "Best in Show" award was jointly awarded to both the Hopper with Sling and Razer Edge. [203] [204]

Presidents of CBS Entertainment

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00036
Tragedy of the commons
The tragedy of the commons is an economic theory of a situation within a shared-resource system where individual users acting independently according to their own self-interest behave contrary to the common good of all users by depleting or spoiling that resource through their collective action. The concept and name originate in an essay written in 1833 by the Victorian economist William Forster Lloyd , who used a hypothetical example of the effects of unregulated grazing on common land (then colloquially called "the commons") in the British Isles. [1] The concept became widely known over a century later due to an article written by the ecologist Garrett Hardin in 1968. [2] In this context, commons is taken to mean any shared and unregulated resource such as atmosphere , oceans , rivers, fish stocks , or even an office refrigerator.
It has been argued that the very term 'tragedy of the commons' is a misnomer per se , since 'the commons' originally referred to a resource owned by a community, and no individual outside the community had any access to the resource. However, the term is presently used when describing a problem where all individuals have equal and open access to a resource. Hence, 'tragedy of open access regimes' or simply 'the open access problem' are more apt terms. [3] :171
The tragedy of the commons is often cited in connection with sustainable development , meshing economic growth and environmental protection, as well as in the debate over global warming . It has also been used in analyzing behavior in the fields of economics , evolutionary psychology , anthropology , game theory , politics , taxation and sociology .
Although commons have been known to collapse due to overuse (such as in over-fishing), abundant examples exist where communities cooperate or regulate to exploit common resources prudently without collapse. According to the political economist Elinor Ostrom , although it is often claimed that only private ownership or government regulation can prevent the "tragedy of the commons", prudent users of a commons have a natural incentive to voluntarily cooperate in self-regulation, and history exhibits many examples of complex social schemes to sustain common resources efficiently. [4] [5]

Expositions

Lloyd's pamphlet
In 1833, the English economist William Forster Lloyd published a pamphlet which included a hypothetical example of over-use of a common resource. This was the situation of cattle herders sharing a common parcel of land on which they are each entitled to let their cows graze, as was the custom in English villages. He postulated that if a herder put more than his allotted number of cattle on the common, overgrazing could result. For each additional animal, a herder could receive additional benefits, but the whole group shared damage to the commons. If all herders made this individually rational economic decision, the common could be depleted or even destroyed, to the detriment of all. [6]

Garrett Hardin's article
In 1968, ecologist Garrett Hardin explored this social dilemma in his article "The Tragedy of the Commons", published in the journal Science . [2] [7] The essay derived its title from the pamphlet by Lloyd, which he cites, on the over-grazing of common land.
Hardin discussed problems that cannot be solved by technical means, as distinct from those with solutions that require "a change only in the techniques of the natural sciences , demanding little or nothing in the way of change in human values or ideas of morality ". Hardin focused on human population growth, the use of the Earth's natural resources , and the welfare state. [8] Hardin argued that if individuals relied on themselves alone, and not on the relationship of society and man, then the number of children had by each family would not be of public concern. Parents breeding excessively would leave fewer descendants because they would be unable to provide for each child adequately. Such negative feedback is found in the animal kingdom. [8] Hardin said that if the children of improvident parents starved to death, if overbreeding was its own punishment, then there would be no public interest in controlling the breeding of families. [8] Hardin blamed the welfare state for allowing the tragedy of the commons; where the state provides for children and supports overbreeding as a fundamental human right, Malthusian catastrophe is inevitable. Consequently, in his article, Hardin lamented the following proposal from the United Nations :
In addition, Hardin also pointed out the problem of individuals acting in rational self-interest by claiming that if all members in a group used common resources for their own gain and with no regard for others, all resources would still eventually be depleted. Overall, Hardin argued against relying on conscience as a means of policing commons, suggesting that this favors selfish individuals – often known as free riders – over those who are more altruistic.
In the context of avoiding over-exploitation of common resources , Hardin concluded by restating Hegel 's maxim (which was quoted by Engels ), "freedom is the recognition of necessity". He suggested that "freedom" completes the tragedy of the commons. By recognizing resources as commons in the first place, and by recognizing that, as such, they require management, Hardin believed that humans "can preserve and nurture other and more precious freedoms".

The "Commons" as a modern resource concept
Hardin's article was the start of the modern use of "Commons" as a term connoting a shared resource. As Frank van Laerhoven & Elinor Ostrom have stated: "Prior to the publication of Hardin’s article on the tragedy of the commons (1968), titles containing the words 'the commons', 'common pool resources,' or 'common property' were very rare in the academic literature." They go on to say: "In 2002, Barrett and Mabry conducted a major survey of biologists to determine which publications in the twentieth century had become classic books or benchmark publications in biology. They report that Hardin’s 1968 article was the one having the greatest career impact on biologists and is the most frequently cited". [11]

Application

Metaphoric meaning
Like Lloyd and Thomas Malthus before him, Hardin was primarily interested in the problem of human population growth . But in his essay, he also focused on the use of larger (though finite) resources such as the Earth's atmosphere and oceans, as well as pointing out the "negative commons" of pollution (i.e., instead of dealing with the deliberate privatization of a positive resource, a "negative commons" deals with the deliberate commonization of a negative cost, pollution).
As a metaphor , the tragedy of the commons should not be taken too literally. The "tragedy" is not in the word's conventional or theatric sense, nor a condemnation of the processes that lead to it. Similarly, Hardin's use of "commons" has frequently been misunderstood, leading him to later remark that he should have titled his work "The Tragedy of the Unregulated Commons". [12] [13]
The metaphor illustrates the argument that free access and unrestricted demand for a finite resource ultimately reduces the resource through over-exploitation , temporarily or permanently. This occurs because the benefits of exploitation accrue to individuals or groups, each of whom is motivated to maximize use of the resource to the point in which they become reliant on it, while the costs of the exploitation are borne by all those to whom the resource is available (which may be a wider class of individuals than those who are exploiting it). This, in turn, causes demand for the resource to increase, which causes the problem to snowball until the resource collapses (even if it retains a capacity to recover). The rate at which depletion of the resource is realized depends primarily on three factors: the number of users wanting to consume the common in question, the consumptiveness of their uses, and the relative robustness of the common. [14]
The same concept is sometimes called the "tragedy of the fishers", because fishing too many fish before or during breeding could cause stocks to plummet. [15]

Modern commons
The tragedy of the commons can be considered in relation to environmental issues such as sustainability . The commons dilemma stands as a model for a great variety of resource problems in society today, such as water, forests, [16] fish, and non-renewable energy sources such as oil and coal.
Situations exemplifying the "tragedy of the commons" include the overfishing and destruction of the Grand Banks , the destruction of salmon runs on rivers that have been dammed – most prominently in modern times on the Columbia River in the Northwest United States , and historically in North Atlantic rivers – the devastation of the sturgeon fishery – in modern Russia, but historically in the United States as well – and, in terms of water supply, the limited water available in arid regions (e.g., the area of the Aral Sea ) and the Los Angeles water system supply, especially at Mono Lake and Owens Lake .
In economics, an externality is a cost or benefit that affects a party who did not choose to incur that cost or benefit. Negative externalities are a well-known feature of the "tragedy of the commons". For example, driving cars has many negative externalities; these include pollution , carbon emissions , and traffic accidents. Every time 'Person A' gets in a car, it becomes more likely that 'Person Z' –  and millions of others –  will suffer in each of those areas. [17] Economists often urge the government to adopt policies that "internalize" an externality. [18]

Examples
More general examples (some alluded to by Hardin) of potential and actual tragedies include:

Application to evolutionary biology
A parallel was drawn recently between the tragedy of the commons and the competing behaviour of parasites that through acting selfishly eventually diminish or destroy their common host. [26] The idea has also been applied to areas such as the evolution of virulence or sexual conflict , where males may fatally harm females when competing for matings. [27] It is also raised as a question in studies of social insects, where scientists wish to understand why insect workers do not undermine the "common good" by laying eggs of their own and causing a breakdown of the society.
The idea of evolutionary suicide , where adaptation at the level of the individual causes the whole species or population to be driven extinct , can be seen as an extreme form of an evolutionary tragedy of the commons. [28] [29] From an evolutionary point of view, the creation of the tragedy of the commons in pathogenic microbes may provide us with advanced therapeutic methods. [30]

Commons dilemma
The commons dilemma is a specific class of social dilemma in which people's short-term selfish interests are at odds with long-term group interests and the common good . [31] In academia, a range of related terminology has also been used as shorthand for the theory or aspects of it, including resource dilemma , take-some dilemma , and common pool resource .
Commons dilemma researchers have studied conditions under which groups and communities are likely to under- or over-harvest common resources in both the laboratory and field. Research programs have concentrated on a number of motivational, strategic, and structural factors that might be conducive to management of commons.
In game theory , which constructs mathematical models for individuals' behavior in strategic situations, the corresponding "game", developed by Hardin, is known as the Commonize Costs – Privatize Profits Game ( CC–PP game ).

Psychological factors
Kopelman, Weber, & Messick (2002), in a review of the experimental research on cooperation in commons dilemmas, identify nine classes of independent variables that influence cooperation in commons dilemmas: social motives, gender, payoff structure, uncertainty, power and status, group size, communication, causes, and frames. They organize these classes and distinguish between psychological individual differences (stable personality traits) and situational factors (the environment). Situational factors include both the task (social and decision structure) and the perception of the task. [32]
Empirical findings support the theoretical argument that the cultural group is a critical factor that needs to be studied in the context of situational variables. [33] Rather than behaving in line with economic incentives, people are likely to approach the decision to cooperate with an appropriateness framework. [34] An expanded, four factor model of the Logic of Appropriateness, [35] [36] suggests that the cooperation is better explained by the question: "What does a person like me (identity) do (rules) in a situation like this (recognition) given this culture (group)?"

Strategic factors
Strategic factors also matter in commons dilemmas. One often-studied strategic factor is the order in which people take harvests from the resource. In simultaneous play, all people harvest at the same time, whereas in sequential play people harvest from the pool according to a predetermined sequence – first, second, third, etc. There is a clear order effect in the latter games: the harvests of those who come first – the leaders – are higher than the harvest of those coming later – the followers. The interpretation of this effect is that the first players feel entitled to take more. With sequential play, individuals adopt a first come-first served rule, whereas with simultaneous play people may adopt an equality rule. Another strategic factor is the ability to build up reputations. Research [ by whom? ] found that people take less from the common pool in public situations than in anonymous private situations. Moreover, those who harvest less gain greater prestige and influence within their group.

Structural factors
Much research has focused on when and why people would like to structurally rearrange the commons to prevent a tragedy. Hardin stated in his analysis of the tragedy of the commons that "Freedom in a commons brings ruin to all." [37] One of the proposed solutions is to appoint a leader to regulate access to the common. Groups are more likely to endorse a leader when a common resource is being depleted and when managing a common resource is perceived as a difficult task. Groups prefer leaders who are elected, democratic, and prototypical of the group, and these leader types are more successful in enforcing cooperation. A general aversion to autocratic leadership exists, although it may be an effective solution, possibly because of the fear of power abuse and corruption.
The provision of rewards and punishments may also be effective in preserving common resources. Selective punishments for overuse can be effective in promoting domestic water and energy conservation – for example, through installing water and electricity meters in houses. Selective rewards work, provided that they are open to everyone. An experimental carpool lane in the Netherlands failed because car commuters did not feel they were able to organize a carpool. [38] The rewards do not have to be tangible. In Canada, utilities considered putting "smiley faces" on electricity bills of customers below the average consumption of that customer`s neighborhood. [39]

Solutions
Articulating solutions to the tragedy of the commons is one of the main problems of political philosophy . In many situations, locals implement (often complex) social schemes that work well. The best governmental solution may be to do nothing. When these fail, there are many possible governmental solutions such as privatization, internalizing the externalities, and regulation.

Non-governmental solution
Sometimes the best governmental solution may be to do nothing. Robert Axelrod contends that even self-interested individuals will often find ways to cooperate, because collective restraint serves both the collective and individual interests. [40] Anthropologist G. N. Appell criticized those who cited Hardin to "impos[e] their own economic and environmental rationality on other social systems of which they have incomplete understanding and knowledge." [41]
Political scientist Elinor Ostrom , who was awarded 2009's Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences for her work on the issue, and others revisited Hardin's work in 1999. [42] They found the tragedy of the commons not as prevalent or as difficult to solve as Hardin maintained, since locals have often come up with solutions to the commons problem themselves. [43] For example, it was found that a commons in the Swiss Alps has been run by a collective of farmers there to their mutual and individual benefit since 1517, in spite of the farmers also having access to their own farmland. In general, it is in the users of a commons interests to keep the common running and complex social schemes are often invented by the users for maintaining them at optimum efficiency. [4] [5]
Similarly, Geographer Douglas L. Johnson remarks that many nomadic pastoralist societies of Africa and the Middle East in fact "balanced local stocking ratios against seasonal rangeland conditions in ways that were ecologically sound", reflecting a desire for lower risk rather than higher profit; in spite of this, it was often the case that "the nomad was blamed for problems that were not of his own making and were a product of alien forces." [44] Independently finding precedent in the opinions of previous scholars such as Ibn Khaldun as well as common currency in antagonistic cultural attitudes towards non-sedentary peoples, [44] governments and international organizations have made use of Hardin's work to help justify restrictions on land access and the eventual sedentarization of pastoral nomads despite its weak empirical basis. Examining relations between historically nomadic Bedouin Arabs and the Syrian state in the 20th century, Dawn Chatty notes that "Hardin's argument [...] was curiously accepted as the fundamental explanation for the degradation of the steppe land" in development schemes for the arid interior of the country, downplaying the larger role of agricultural overexploitation in desertification as it melded with prevailing nationalist ideology which viewed nomads as socially backward and economically harmful. [45]
Elinor Ostrom , and her colleagues looked at how real-world communities manage communal resources, such as fisheries, land irrigation systems, and farmlands, and they identified a number of factors conducive to successful resource management. One factor is the resource itself; resources with definable boundaries (e.g., land) can be preserved much more easily. A second factor is resource dependence; there must be a perceptible threat of resource depletion, and it must be difficult to find substitutes. The third is the presence of a community; small and stable populations with a thick social network and social norms promoting conservation do better. [4] A final condition is that there be appropriate community-based rules and procedures in place with built-in incentives for responsible use and punishments for overuse. When the commons is taken over by non-locals, those solutions can no longer be used. [43]

Governmental solutions
Governmental solutions may be necessary when the above conditions are not met (such as a community being too big or too unstable to provide a thick social network). Examples of government regulation include privatization, regulation, and internalizing the externalities.

Privatization
One solution for some resources is to convert common good into private property, giving the new owner an incentive to enforce its sustainability. Libertarians and classical liberals cite the tragedy of the commons as an example of what happens when Lockean property rights to homestead resources are prohibited by a government. [46] They argue that the solution to the tragedy of the commons is to allow individuals to take over the property rights of a resource, that is, to privatize it. [47]

Regulation
In a typical example, governmental regulations can limit the amount of a common good that is available for use by any individual. Permit systems for extractive economic activities including mining, fishing, hunting, livestock raising and timber extraction are examples of this approach. Similarly, limits to pollution are examples of governmental intervention on behalf of the commons. This idea is used by the United Nations Moon Treaty , Outer Space Treaty and Law of the Sea Treaty as well as the UNESCO World Heritage Convention which involves the international law principle that designates some areas or resources the Common Heritage of Mankind . [48]
In Hardin's essay, he proposed that the solution to the problem of overpopulation must be based on "mutual coercion, mutually agreed upon" and result in "relinquishing the freedom to breed". Hardin discussed this topic further in a 1979 book, Managing the Commons, co-written with John A. Baden . [49] He framed this prescription in terms of needing to restrict the " reproductive right ", to safeguard all other rights . Several countries have a variety of population control laws in place.
German historian Joachim Radkau thought Hardin advocates strict management of common goods via increased government involvement or international regulation bodies. [50] An asserted impending "tragedy of the commons" is frequently warned of as a consequence of the adoption of policies which restrict private property and espouse expansion of public property. [51] [52]

Internalizing externalities
Privatization works when the person who owns the property (or rights of access to that property) pays the full price of its exploitation. As discussed above negative externalities (negative results, such as air or water pollution, that do not proportionately affect the user of the resource) is often a feature driving the tragedy of the commons. Internalizing the externalities , in other words ensuring that the users of resource pay for all of the consequences of its use, can provide an alternate solution between privatization and regulation. One example is gasoline taxes which include both the cost of road maintenance and of air pollution. This solution can provide the flexibility of privatization while minimizing the amount of government oversight and overhead that is needed.

Comedy of the Commons
In certain cases, exploiting a resource more may be a good thing. Carol M. Rose, in an 1986 article, discussed the concept of the "comedy of the commons", where the public property in question exhibits "increasing returns to scale" in usage ("the more the merrier", hence the term), in that the more people use the resource, the higher the benefit to each one. Rose cites as examples commerce and group recreational activities. According to Rose, public resources with the "comedic" characteristic may suffer from under-investment rather than over usage. [53]

Criticism
The environmentalist Derrick Jensen claims the tragedy of the commons is used as propaganda for private ownership . [54] He says it has been used by the political right wing to hasten the final enclosure of the "common resources" of third world and indigenous people worldwide, as a part of the Washington Consensus . He argues that in true situations, those who abuse the commons would have been warned to desist and if they failed would have punitive sanctions against them. He says that rather than being called "The Tragedy of the Commons", it should be called "the Tragedy of the Failure of the Commons".
Hardin's work was also criticised [55] as historically inaccurate in failing to account for the demographic transition , and for failing to distinguish between common property and open access resources. [56] In a similar vein, Carl Dahlman argues that commons were effectively managed to prevent overgrazing. [57] Likewise, Susan Jane Buck Cox argues that the common land example used to argue this economic concept is on very weak historical ground, and misrepresents what she terms was actually the "triumph of the commons": the successful common usage of land for many centuries. She argues that social changes and agricultural innovation, and not the behaviour of the commoners, led to the demise of the commons. [58]
Some authors, like Yochai Benkler , say that with the rise of the Internet and digitalisation, an economics system based on commons becomes possible again. He wrote in his book The Wealth of Networks in 2006 that cheap computing power plus networks enable people to produce valuable products through non-commercial processes of interaction: "as human beings and as social beings, rather than as market actors through the price system". He uses the term 'networked information economy ' to describe a "system of production, distribution, and consumption of information goods characterized by decentralized individual action carried out through widely distributed, nonmarket means that do not depend on market strategies." [59] He also coined the term ' commons-based peer production ' to describe collaborative efforts based on sharing information. [60] Examples of commons-based peer production are free and open source software and open-source hardware .

See also
WebPage index: 00037
Wikimania
Wikimania is the official annual conference of the Wikimedia Foundation . Topics of presentations and discussions include Wikimedia projects such as Wikipedia , other wikis, open-source software , free knowledge and free content, and social and technical aspects related to these topics.
Since 2011, the winner of the Wikipedian of the Year award has been announced at Wikimania.

Overview

Conferences

2005
Wikimania 2005 , the first Wikimania conference, was held from 4 to 8 August 2005 at the Haus der Jugend in Frankfurt , Germany, attracting about 380 attendees. [1]
The week of the conference included four "Hacking Days", from 1 to 4 August, when some 25 developers gathered to work on code and discuss the technical aspects of MediaWiki and of running the Wikimedia projects. The main days of the conference, despite its billing as being "August 4–8", were Friday to Sunday of that week, from 5 to 7 August. Presentation sessions were scheduled all day during those three days.
Keynote speakers included Jimmy Wales , Ross Mayfield , Ward Cunningham , and Richard Stallman (who spoke on "Copyright and community in the age of computer networks"). The majority of sessions and conversations were in English, although a few were in German.
Sponsors of the event included Answers.com , SocialText , Sun Microsystems , DocCheck ( de ) , [13] and Logos Group .

2006
Wikimania 2006 , the second Wikimania conference, was held from 6 to 8 August 2006 at Harvard Law School 's Berkman Center for Internet & Society in Cambridge in Massachusetts, United States, with about 400 [2] –500 [14] attendees.
Speakers included Jimmy Wales , Lawrence Lessig , Brewster Kahle , Yochai Benkler , Mitch Kapor , Ward Cunningham , and David Weinberger . Dan Gillmor held a citizen journalism unconference the day after.
Wales' plenary speech was covered by the Associated Press , and printed in numerous worldwide newspapers. He chronicled how the Foundation evolved from him "sitting in his pajamas" to the maturing corporate structure that it is now; the frequent push for quality over quantity; Wikipedia will be included on computers distributed through One Laptop per Child ; both Wikiversity and the creation of an advisory board were approved by the Foundation board; and that Wiki-WYG is in development thanks to private investment by Wikia, Inc. and Socialtext . [15]
Answers.com was the Wikimania 2006 patron sponsor, while Amazon.com , the Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard Law School , Nokia , WikiHow were Benefactors-level sponsors, Wetpaint , Ask.com , Yahoo! , and Socialtext were Friends-level sponsors, and IBM , FAQ Farm , Elevation Partners , One Laptop per Child , and the Sunlight Foundation were Supporter-level sponsors of the conference. [16]
Three other teams submitted hosting bids, for the cities of London, Milan , Boston, and Toronto ; only Toronto and Boston were passed to the second round of consideration by Wikimania organizers. In Toronto's case the event would have been hosted in the University of Toronto 's Bahen Centre .

2007
As announced on September 25, 2006, Wikimania 2007 , [17] the third Wikimania conference, was held from 3 to 5 August 2007 in Taipei , Taiwan . It was the first Wikimania event to hold a volunteer training course. [18]
Three other teams submitted hosting bids, for the cities of London, Alexandria , and Turin . Bids for Hong Kong, Singapore, Istanbul , and Orlando failed to make the shortlist. [19] The winner was announced on 25 September 2006. [17]
On August 3, 2007, New York Times reporter Noam Cohen reported: "The conference has attracted about 440 attendees, a little more than half from Taiwan , who want to immerse themselves for three days in the ideas and issues that come up making an entirely volunteer-written encyclopedia. [3] The workshops cover practical topics like how to collaborate peacefully; what importance to give 'expertise' in a project that is celebrated for allowing anyone to contribute, including anonymous editors". [3]

2008
Wikimania 2008 , the fourth Wikimania conference, was held from 17 to 19 July 2008 at the Bibliotheca Alexandrina in Alexandria , Egypt , with 650 attendees from 45 countries. [4] Alexandria was the location of the ancient Library of Alexandria . [20]
Three proposed cities were in the running at the end, the other two being Atlanta and Cape Town . Proposals for Karlsruhe , London and Toronto were also submitted, but later withdrew. There was a controversy about the conference, and even a call to boycott Wikimania 2008 because of Egypt's alleged censorship and imprisoning of bloggers during Mubarak's era. [21] [22] Mohamed Ibrahim, a graduate of Alexandria University who worked to bring the conference to Alexandria, told the BBC "I think we have the right to develop and to make freedom of expression on a larger scale." [23] One of his goals was to help grow Arabic Wikipedia which he contributes to since early 2005. An Egyptian cabinet minister spoke at the opening ceremonies on Mubarak's behalf. [20]

2009
Wikimania 2009 , the fifth Wikimania conference, was held from 26 to 28 August 2009 in Buenos Aires , Argentina, with 559 attendees. [24] The final selection was made between Buenos Aires, Toronto , Brisbane and Karlsruhe , with the final selection coming down to Buenos Aires and Toronto.

2010
Wikimania 2010 , [25] the sixth Wikimania conference, was held from 9 to 11 July at the Polish Baltic Philharmonic in Gdańsk , Poland. The starting day on July 9 overlapped with the end of the WikiSym academic conference. Bids for Amsterdam and Oxford for Wikimania 2010 lost by a small margin. [6]
It was the first conference which included a big focus on the cultural aspects of the hosting nation, particularly a concert of a philharmonic orchestra, celebrating the tenth anniversary of the death of the most important contemporary Polish composer Władysław Szpilman and the premiere of the film Truth in Numbers? . At the conference, Sue Gardner , executive director of the Wikimedia Foundation, said that the foundation's aim was to grow the number of visitors to Wikimedia sites from 371 million to 680 million a month, over the next five years.

2011
Wikimania 2011 , the seventh Wikimania conference, was held from 4 to 7 August 2011 in Haifa , Israel. [26] The conference venue was the Haifa Auditorium and adjoining Beit Hecht cultural center on Mount Carmel . Keynote speakers at the conference included Yochai Benkler , a fellow at the Berkman Center for Internet and Society at Harvard University and Joseph M. Reagle Jr. of MIT , author of Good Faith Collaboration: The Culture of Wikipedia . [27] Head of the Science and Technology Committee at the Knesset , Meir Sheetrit , also spoke at the conference, as did Yonah Yahav , the Mayor of Haifa . [28] One of the sponsors of the event was Haifa University . [29] The conference featured 125 sessions in five simultaneous tracks and was attended by 720 Wikimedians [7] from 56 different countries, [28] including some that have no diplomatic relations with Israel. [30]
In an interview with Haaretz , Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales noted that there had been boycott calls against the conference in Israel, as there had been against having it in Egypt in 2008. He said that despite conflicts among editors on the Israel-Palestinian conflict , and efforts by a pro-Israel group to recruit more Wikipedia editors, he believes Wikipedia articles largely remained neutral on the topic; he stated " NPOV is non-negotiable." [31]
Wikimedia Foundation executive director Sue Gardner spoke to the conference about the Western, male-dominated mind-set characterizing Wikipedia. [32] At the end of the August 7 closing ceremony, Jimmy Wales was presented with the first day cover of a special stamp edition issued by the Israeli postal service in honor of Wikipedia's 10th anniversary. [33] Among new projects discussed was collaboration with cultural institutions such as galleries, libraries, archives and museums. [34] After the conference, participants were offered a free tour of Haifa, Jerusalem , Nazareth or Acre . Shay Yakir, outgoing chairman of Wikimedia Israel, said that for Israel, holding the conference in Haifa was like hosting the Olympic Games. [35]

2012
Wikimania 2012 , the eighth Wikimania conference, was held from 12 to 15 July 2012 at The George Washington University in Washington, DC , United States, with over 1400 attendees from 87 countries. [36] In addition, the U.S. Department of State , in conjunction with Wikimania 2012, hosted a conference labeled Tech@State :Wiki.Gov which focused on "Collaborative knowledge and the use of wikis in the public sector". [37]
Prominent conference themes were the need to update the old and "dowdy" interface [38] with new Wikimedia tools in order to attract and retain more editors and to make Wikimedia sites more inviting and friendly to users, including especially women. [39] The Atlantic featured charts displayed at the conference which showed how the number of new administrators has dropped precipitously over the last few years. [40]
During the opening plenary founder Jimmy Wales commented on Wikipedia Blackout of January 2012, stating "When I go and visit government officials now, they’re a little bit afraid." However he reiterated Wikimedia’s commitment to political neutrality except regarding "the most serious things that directly impact our work." [41] [42] Wales agreed with keynote speaker Mary Gardiner , co-founder of the Ada Initiative , that Wikimedia had to do more to increase the number of women editors. She stated: "As a project of social change, even if it's not an activist project, the Wikipedia community has a responsibility both to its mission and to the people out there in the world to always be on a journey toward diversity — to increase the size of the umbrella of the world." [43] [44]

2013
Wikimania 2013 , the ninth Wikimania conference, was held from 7 to 11 August 2013 at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University , with 700 attendees from 88 countries. Candidate cities were London (UK), Bristol (UK), Naples (Italy) and Surakarta ( Indonesia ).
One of the parties for the event was held at the tallest building in Hong Kong, the International Commerce Centre . A closing party was held at Shek O Beach . Topics discussed included Wikipedia's gender disparity [45] and Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales ' proposal for Wikipedia to begin using Secure Socket Layer to encrypt its pages. [46]

2014
Wikimania 2014 , the tenth Wikimania conference, was held from 8 to 10 August 2014 [47] at the Barbican Centre in London , England, United Kingdom. Bidding officially opened in December 2012. London was chosen in May 2013 as the host city [48] with the only other bid coming from Arusha (Tanzania). The conference was held from 8–10 August 2014 at the Barbican Centre . [49] [50] The keynote address was given by Salil Shetty , Secretary General of Amnesty International . [51] The event was also the first Wikimania addressed by the Wikimedia Foundation's new Executive Director, Lila Tretikov . [51] The event was preceded by a two-day hackathon , and a series of fringe events. [51]
The conference had five tracks, alongside the annual 'State of the Wiki' round up. These were: Social Machines, The future of Education, Democratic Media, Open Scholarship, and Open Data. [ citation needed ] The conference was documented by the television program 60 Minutes in a program titled 'Wikimania'. [52]

2015
Wikimania 2015 , the eleventh Wikimania conference, was held from 15 to 19 July 2015 [53] at the Hotel Hilton Mexico City Reforma in Mexico City , Mexico . Bidding officially opened in December 2013.
Other candidate cities were: Arusha , northern Tanzania ; Bali , a province in Indonesia ; Cape Town , in South Africa ; Dar es Salaam , in Tanzania ; Esino Lario , province of Lecco , Lombardy , Italy , and Monastir , in Tunisia . [54] [55] Shortlisted were Mexico City, Cape Town and Monastir. [56] Mexico City was selected in April 2014. [54] [55]
The main venue was the Hilton Mexico City Reforma hotel. [57] [55] The organising entity was Wikimedia México, A.C., the Mexican local chapter representing the interests and goals of the Wikimedia Foundation . [58]

2016
Wikimania 2016 , the twelfth Wikimania conference, took place from 24 to 26 June 2016, with peripheral events from 21-28 June, in the mountain village of Esino Lario , Italy . [59] Esino Lario had bid unsuccessfully for the 2015 Wikimania. The venue is the first that is not a major city. During the event, it was announced that the Wikimedia Foundation's interim Executive Director, Katherine Maher , was appointed permanently.

2017
Wikimania 2017 , the thirteenth Wikimania conference, is scheduled to be held in Montreal , Canada , from 9 to 13 August 2017. [60]

See also
WebPage index: 00038
Cult
The term cult usually refers to a social group defined by its religious , spiritual , or philosophical beliefs, or its common interest in a particular personality, object or goal . The term itself is controversial and it has divergent definitions in both popular culture and academia and it also has been an ongoing source of contention among scholars across several fields of study. [1] [2] In the sociological classifications of religious movements , a cult is a social group with socially deviant or novel beliefs and practices, [3] although this is often unclear. [4] [5] [6] Other researchers present a less-organized picture of cults on the basis that cults arise spontaneously around novel beliefs and practices. [7] The word "cult" has always been controversial because it is (in a pejorative sense) considered a subjective term, used as an ad hominem attack against groups with differing doctrines or practices. [8] [9] Groups said to be cults range in size from local groups with a few members to international organizations with millions. [10]
Beginning in the 1930s, cults became the object of sociological study in the context of the study of religious behavior. [11] From the 1940s the Christian countercult movement has opposed some sects and new religious movements , and it labelled them as cults for their "un-Christian" unorthodox beliefs . The secular anti-cult movement began in the 1970s and it opposed certain groups, often charging them with mind control and partly motivated in reaction to acts of violence committed by some of their members. Some of the claims and actions of the anti-cult movements have been disputed by scholars and by the news media, leading to further public controversy.
The term "new religious movement" refers to religions which have appeared since the mid-1800s. Many, but not all of them, have been considered cults. Sub-categories of cults include: Doomsday cults , political cults, destructive cults, racist cults, polygamist cults, and terrorist cults. Governmental reactions to cult-related issues have also been a source of controversy.

Terminological history
English-speakers originally used the word "cult" not to describe a group of religionists, but to refer to the act of worship or to a religious ceremony. The English term originated in the early 17th century, borrowed via the French culte, from Latin cultus (worship). The French word, in turn, derived from the Latin adjective cultus (inhabited, cultivated, worshiped), based on the verb colere (to care, to cultivate). [12] The word "culture" also derives from the Latin words cultura and cultus ; "culture" in general terms refers to the customary beliefs, social forms and material traits of a religious or social group. [13]
While the literal original sense of the word in English remains in use, a derived sense of "excessive devotion" arose in the 19th century. The terms cult and cultist came into use in medical literature in the United States in the 1930s for what would now be termed " faith healing ", especially as practised in the US Holiness movement . This usage experienced a surge of popularity at the time, and extended to other forms of alternative medicine as well. [14] In the English-speaking world the word "cult" often carries derogatory connotations. [15]
Most sociologists and scholars of religion began to reject the word "cult" altogether because of its negative connotations in mass culture. [16] Some began to advocate the use of new terms like "new religious movement", "alternative religion" or "novel religion" to describe most of the groups that had come to be referred to as "cults", [17] yet none of these terms have had much success in popular culture or in the media. Other scholars have pushed to redeem the word "cult" as one fit for neutral academic discourse. [18]

New religious movements
A new religious movement (NRM) is a religious community or spiritual group of modern origins (since the mid-1800s), which has a peripheral place within its society's dominant religious culture. NRMs can be novel in origin or part of a wider religion, in which case they are distinct from pre-existing denominations . [19] [20] Scholars have estimated that NRMs, of which some but not all have been labelled as cults, number in the tens of thousands worldwide, most of which originated in Asia or Africa. The great majority have only a few members, some have thousands and only very few have more than a million. [10] In 2007, religious scholar Elijah Siegler commented that, although no NRM had become the dominant faith in any country, many of the concepts which they had first introduced (often referred to as " New Age " ideas) have become part of worldwide mainstream culture. [21]

Scholarly studies
Sociologist Max Weber (1864–1920) found that cults based on charismatic leadership often follow the routinization of charisma . [22]
The concept of a "cult" as a sociological classification was introduced in 1932 by American sociologist Howard P. Becker as an expansion of German theologian Ernst Troeltsch 's church-sect typology . Troeltsch's aim was to distinguish between three main types of religious behavior: churchly, sectarian and mystical . Becker created four categories out of Troeltsch's first two by splitting church into " ecclesia " and " denomination ", and sect into " sect " and "cult". [23] Like Troeltsch's "mystical religion", Becker's cults were small religious groups lacking in organization and emphasizing the private nature of personal beliefs. [24] Later sociological formulations built on these characteristics, placing an additional emphasis on cults as deviant religious groups "deriving their inspiration from outside of the predominant religious culture". [25] This is often thought to lead to a high degree of tension between the group and the more mainstream culture surrounding it, a characteristic shared with religious sects. [26] In this sociological terminology, sects are products of religious schism and therefore maintain a continuity with traditional beliefs and practices, while cults arise spontaneously around novel beliefs and practices. [27]
In the early 1960s, sociologist John Lofland lived with South Korean missionary Young Oon Kim and some of the first American Unification Church members in California , during which he studied their activities in trying to promote their beliefs and win new members. [28] Lofland noted that most of their efforts were ineffective and that most of the people who joined did so because of personal relationships with other members, often family relationships. [29] Lofland published his findings in 1964 as a doctoral thesis entitled: "The World Savers: A Field Study of Cult Processes", and in 1966 in book form by Prentice-Hall as Doomsday Cult: A Study of Conversion, Proselytization and Maintenance of Faith . It is considered to be one of the most important and widely cited studies of the process of religious conversion. [30] [31]
Sociologist Roy Wallis (1945–1990) argued that a cult is characterized by " epistemological individualism", meaning that "the cult has no clear locus of final authority beyond the individual member". Cults, according to Wallis, are generally described as "oriented towards the problems of individuals, loosely structured, tolerant [and] non-exclusive", making "few demands on members", without possessing a "clear distinction between members and non-members", having "a rapid turnover of membership" and as being transient collectives with vague boundaries and fluctuating belief systems. Wallis asserts that cults emerge from the "cultic milieu". [32]
In 1978 Bruce Campbell noted that cults are associated with beliefs in a divine element in the individual . It is either Soul , Self , or True Self . Cults are inherently ephemeral and loosely organized. There is a major theme in many of the recent works that show the relationship between cults and mysticism . Campbell brings two major types of cults to attention. One is mystical and the other is instrumental. This can divide the cults into being either occult or metaphysical assemblies. On the basis that Campbell proposes about cults, they are non-traditional religious groups based on belief in a divine element in the individual. There is also a third type. This is service-oriented. Campbell states that "the kinds of stable forms which evolve in the development of religious organization will bear a significant relationship to the content of the religious experience of the founder or founders." [33]
Dick Anthony , a forensic psychologist known for his criticism of brainwashing theory of conversion, [34] [35] [36] has defended some so-called cults, and in 1988 argued that involvement in such movements may often have beneficial, rather than harmful effects, saying "There's a large research literature published in mainstream journals on the mental health effects of new religions. For the most part the effects seem to be positive in any way that's measurable." [37]
In their 1996 book Theory of Religion , American sociologists Rodney Stark and William Sims Bainbridge propose that the formation of cults can be explained through the rational choice theory . [38] In The Future of Religion they comment "...in the beginning, all religions are obscure, tiny, deviant cult movements". [39] According to Marc Galanter , Professor of Psychiatry at NYU , [40] typical reasons why people join cults include a search for community and a spiritual quest . Stark and Bainbridge, in discussing the process by which individuals join new religious groups, have even questioned the utility of the concept of conversion , suggesting that affiliation is a more useful concept. [41]

Popular culture
Beginning in the 1700s authors in the English-speaking world began introducing members of cults as antagonists . Satanists , sects of the Mormon movement , and Thuggees were popular choices. In the Twentieth century concern for the rights and feelings of religious minorities led authors to most often invent fictional cults for their villains to be members of. [42] Fictional cults continue to be popular in film, television, and gaming in the same way; while some popular works treat real cults and new religious movements in a serious manner.

Anti-cult movements

Christian countercult movement
In the 1940s, the long held opposition by some established Christian denominations to non-Christian religions and/or supposedly heretical , or counterfeit, Christian sects crystallized into a more organized Christian countercult movement in the United States. For those belonging to the movement, all religious groups claiming to be Christian, but deemed outside of Christian orthodoxy , were considered cults. [43] Christian cults are new religious movements which have a Christian background but are considered to be theologically deviant by members of other Christian churches. [44] In his influential book The Kingdom of the Cults (first published in the United States in 1965), Christian scholar Walter Martin defines Christian cults as groups that follow the personal interpretation of an individual, rather than the understanding of the Bible accepted by mainstream Christianity . He mentions The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , Christian Science , Jehovah's Witnesses , Unitarian Universalism , and Unity as examples. [45]
The Christian countercult movement asserts that Christian sects whose beliefs are partially or wholly not in accordance with the Bible are erroneous. It also states that a religious sect can be considered a cult if its beliefs involve a denial of what they view as any of the essential Christian teachings such as salvation , the Trinity , Jesus himself as a person, the ministry of Jesus , the miracles of Jesus , the Crucifixion , the Resurrection of Christ , the Second Coming of Christ , and the Rapture . [46] [47] [48]
Countercult literature usually expresses doctrinal or theological concerns and a missionary or apologetic purpose. [49] It presents a rebuttal by emphasizing the teachings of the Bible against the beliefs of non-fundamental Christian sects. Christian countercult activist writers also emphasize the need for Christians to evangelize to followers of cults. [50] [51] [52]

Secular anti-cult movement
In the early 1970s, a secular opposition movement to groups considered cults had taken shape. The organizations that formed the secular " anti-cult movement " (ACM) often acted on behalf of relatives of "cult" converts who did not believe their loved ones could have altered their lives so drastically by their own free will. A few psychologists and sociologists working in this field suggested that brainwashing techniques were used to maintain the loyalty of cult members. [53] The belief that cults brainwashed their members became a unifying theme among cult critics and in the more extreme corners of the anti-cult movement techniques like the sometimes forceful " deprogramming " of cult members was practiced. [54]
Secular cult opponents belonging to the anti-cult movement usually define a "cult" as a group that tends to manipulate, exploit, and control its members. Specific factors in cult behavior are said to include manipulative and authoritarian mind control over members, communal and totalistic organization, aggressive proselytizing , systematic programs of indoctrination , and perpetuation in middle-class communities. [55] [56] [57] [58] [59] [60] In the mass media, and among average citizens, "cult" gained an increasingly negative connotation, becoming associated with things like kidnapping , brainwashing , psychological abuse , sexual abuse and other criminal activity , and mass suicide . While most of these negative qualities usually have real documented precedents in the activities of a very small minority of new religious groups, mass culture often extends them to any religious group viewed as culturally deviant, however peaceful or law abiding it may be. [61] [62] [2] [63]
While some psychologists were receptive to these theories, sociologists were for the most part sceptical of their ability to explain conversion to NRMs . [64] In the late 1980s, psychologists and sociologists started to abandon theories like brainwashing and mind-control . While scholars may believe that various less dramatic coercive psychological mechanisms could influence group members, they came to see conversion to new religious movements principally as an act of a rational choice . [65] [66]

Reactions to the anti-cult movements
Because of the increasingly pejorative use of the words "cult" and "cult leader" since the cult debate of the 1970s, some academics, in addition to groups referred to as cults, argue that these are words to be avoided. [67] [68] Catherine Wessinger ( Loyola University New Orleans ) has stated that the word "cult" represents just as much prejudice and antagonism as racial slurs or derogatory words for women and homosexuals. [69] She has argued that it is important for people to become aware of the bigotry conveyed by the word, drawing attention to the way it dehumanises the group's members and their children. [69] Labeling a group as subhuman, she says, becomes a justification for violence against it. [69] She also says that labeling a group a "cult" makes people feel safe, because the "violence associated with religion is split off from conventional religions, projected onto others, and imagined to involve only aberrant groups". [69] This fails to take into account that child abuse, sexual abuse, financial extortion and warfare have also been committed by believers of mainstream religions, but the pejorative "cult" stereotype makes it easier to avoid confronting this uncomfortable fact. [69]
Sociologist Amy Ryan has argued for the need to differentiate those groups that may be dangerous from groups that are more benign. [70] Ryan notes the sharp differences between definition from cult opponents, who tend to focus on negative characteristics, and those of sociologists, who aim to create definitions that are value-free. The movements themselves may have different definitions of religion as well. George Chryssides also cites a need to develop better definitions to allow for common ground in the debate. In Defining Religion in American Law , Bruce J. Casino presents the issue as crucial to international human rights laws. Limiting the definition of religion may interfere with freedom of religion, while too broad a definition may give some dangerous or abusive groups "a limitless excuse for avoiding all unwanted legal obligations". [71]

American Psychological Association report
In 1983, Margaret Singer , a leading anti-cultist who also had studied the political brainwashing of Korean prisoners of war, [72] [73] was asked by the American Psychological Association (APA) to chair a taskforce called the APA Task Force on Deceptive and Indirect Techniques of Persuasion and Control (DIMPAC) to investigate whether brainwashing or "coercive persuasion" did indeed play a role in recruitment by cults. [74] It came to the following conclusion: [75]
On 11 May 1987, the APA's Board of Social and Ethical Responsibility for Psychology (BSERP) rejected the DIMPAC report because the report "lacks the scientific rigor and evenhanded critical approach necessary for APA imprimatur", and concluded that "after much consideration, BSERP does not believe that we have sufficient information available to guide us in taking a position on this issue." [76]

Subcategories

Destructive cults
"Destructive cult" has generally referred to groups whose members have, through deliberate action, physically injured or killed other members of their own group or other people. The Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance limit use of the term to specifically refer to religious groups that "have caused or are liable to cause loss of life among their membership or the general public". [77] Psychologist Michael Langone , executive director of the anti-cult group International Cultic Studies Association , defines a destructive cult as "a highly manipulative group which exploits and sometimes physically and/or psychologically damages members and recruits". [78]
John Gordon Clark cited totalitarian systems of governance and an emphasis on money making as characteristics of a destructive cult. [79] In Cults and the Family the authors cite Shapiro, who defines a "destructive cultism" as a sociopathic syndrome , whose distinctive qualities include: "behavioral and personality changes, loss of personal identity, cessation of scholastic activities, estrangement from family, disinterest in society and pronounced mental control and enslavement by cult leaders". [80]
In the opinion of Benjamin Zablocki , a Professor of Sociology at Rutgers University , destructive cults are at high risk of becoming abusive to members. He states that this is in part due to members' adulation of charismatic leaders contributing to the leaders becoming corrupted by power. [81] According to Barrett, the most common accusation made against destructive cults is sexual abuse . According to Kranenborg , some groups are risky when they advise their members not to use regular medical care. [82]
Some researchers have criticized the usage of the term "destructive cult", writing that it is used to describe groups which are not necessarily harmful in nature to themselves or others. In his book Understanding New Religious Movements , John A. Saliba writes that the term is overgeneralized. Saliba sees the Peoples Temple as the "paradigm of a destructive cult", where those that use the term are implying that other groups will also commit mass suicide . [83]
Writing in the book Misunderstanding Cults: Searching for Objectivity in a Controversial Field , contributor Julius H. Rubin complains that the term has been used to discredit certain groups in the court of public opinion . [1] In his work Cults in Context author Lorne L. Dawson writes that although the Unification Church "has not been shown to be violent or volatile", it has been described as a destructive cult by "anticult crusaders". [84] In 2002, the German government was held by Germany's Federal Constitutional Court to have defamed the Osho movement by referring to it, among other things, as a "destructive cult" with no factual basis. [85] [86]

Doomsday cults
"Doomsday cult" is an expression used to describe groups who believe in Apocalypticism and Millenarianism , and can refer both to groups that predict disaster , and to those that attempt to bring it about. [87] A 1997 psychological study by Festinger, Riecken, and Schachter found that people turned to a cataclysmic world view after they had repeatedly failed to find meaning in mainstream movements. [88] Leon Festinger and his colleagues had observed members of a small UFO religion called the Seekers for several months, and recorded their conversations both prior to and after a failed prophecy from their charismatic leader. [89] [90] [91] Their work was later published in the book When Prophecy Fails: A Social and Psychological Study of a Modern Group that Predicted the Destruction of the World . [92] In the late 1980s doomsday cults were a major topic of news reports, with some reporters and commentators considering them to be a serious threat to society. [93]

Political cults
A political cult is a cult with a primary interest in political action and ideology . [94] [95] Groups that some writers have termed as "political cults", mostly advocating far-left or far-right agendas, have received some attention from journalists and scholars. In their 2000 book On the Edge: Political Cults Right and Left , Dennis Tourish and Tim Wohlforth discuss about a dozen organizations in the United States and Great Britain that they characterize as cults. [96] In a separate article Tourish says that in his usage:
The LaRouche Movement [98] and Gino Parente 's National Labor Federation (NATLFED) [99] are examples of political groups that have been described as "cults", based in the United States; another is Marlene Dixon's now-defunct Democratic Workers Party (a critical history of the DWP is given in Bounded Choice by Janja A. Lalich, a sociologist and former DWP member). [100]
The followers of Ayn Rand were characterized as a "cult" by economist Murray N. Rothbard during her lifetime, and later by Michael Shermer . [101] [102] The core group around Rand was called the "Collective" and is now defunct (the chief group disseminating Rand's ideas today is the Ayn Rand Institute ). Although the Collective advocated an individualist philosophy, Rothbard claimed they were organized in the manner of a "Leninist" organization. [101]
In Britain , the Workers Revolutionary Party , a Trotskyist group led by the late Gerry Healy and strongly supported by actress Vanessa Redgrave , has been described by others, who have been involved in the Trotskyist movement, as having been a cult or as displaying cult-like characteristics in the 1970s and 1980s. [103] It is also described as such by Tourish and Wohlforth in their writings. [104] In his review of Tourish and Wohlforth's book, Bob Pitt, a former member of the WRP concedes that it had a "cult-like character" but argues that rather than being typical of the far left, this feature actually made the WRP atypical and "led to its being treated as a pariah within the revolutionary left itself". [105] Workers' Struggle (LO, Lutte ouvrière ) in France, publicly headed by Arlette Laguiller but revealed in the 1990s to be directed by Robert Barcia , has often been criticized as a cult, for example by Daniel Cohn-Bendit and his older brother Gabriel Cohn-Bendit, as well as L'Humanité and Libération . [106]
In his book Les Sectes Politiques: 1965–1995 (translation: Political cults: 1965–1995 ), French writer Cyril Le Tallec considered some religious groups as cults involved in politics, including the League for Catholic Counter-Reformation , the Cultural Office of Cluny , New Acropolis , Sōka Gakkai , the Divine Light Mission , Tradition Family Property (TFP) , Longo-Mai, the Supermen Club and the Association for Promotion of the Industrial Arts (Solazaref). [107]
In 1990 Lucy Patrick commented: "Although we live in a democracy, cult behavior manifests itself in our unwillingness to question the judgment of our leaders, our tendency to devalue outsiders and to avoid dissent. We can overcome cult behavior, he says, by recognizing that we have dependency needs that are inappropriate for mature people, by increasing anti-authoritarian education, and by encouraging personal autonomy and the free exchange of ideas." [108]

Polygamist cults
Cults that teach and practice polygamy , marriage between more than two people, most often polygyny , one man having multiple wives, have long been noted, although they are a minority. It has been estimated that there are around 50,000 members of polygamist cults in North America . [109] Often polygamist cults are viewed negatively by legal authorities and by society, sometimes including related mainstream denominations, because of perceived links to possible domestic violence and child abuse . [110]
In 1890, the president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints , Wilford Woodruff , issued a public declaration (the Manifesto ) announcing that the LDS Church had ceased performing new plural marriages. Anti-Mormon sentiment waned, as did opposition to statehood for Utah . The Smoot Hearings in 1904, which documented that the LDS Church was still practicing polygamy spurred the church to issue a Second Manifesto again claiming that it had ceased performing new plural marriages. By 1910 the LDS Church excommunicated those who entered into or performed new plural marriages. [111] Enforcement of the 1890 Manifesto caused various splinter groups to leave the LDS Church in order to continue the practice of plural marriage. [112] The Church of Jesus Christ Restored is a small sect in the Latter Day Saint movement based in Chatsworth, Ontario , Canada. It has been labeled a polygamous cult by the news media and has been the subject of criminal investigation by local authorities. [113] [114] [115]

Racist cults
Sociologist and historian Orlando Patterson has described the Ku Klux Klan , which arose in the American South after the Civil War , as a heretical Christian cult, and he has described its persecution of African Americans and others as a form of human sacrifice . [116] Secret Aryan cults in Germany and Austria in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries had a strong influence on the rise of Nazism . [117] Modern Skinhead groups in the United States tend to use the same recruitment techniques as destructive cults. [118]

Terrorist cults
In the book Jihad and Sacred Vengeance: Psychological Undercurrents of History , psychiatrist Peter A. Olsson compares Osama bin Laden to certain cult leaders including Jim Jones , David Koresh , Shoko Asahara , Marshall Applewhite , Luc Jouret and Joseph Di Mambro , and he says that each of these individuals fit at least eight of the nine criteria for people with narcissistic personality disorders . [119] In the book Seeking the Compassionate Life: The Moral Crisis for Psychotherapy and Society authors Goldberg and Crespo also refer to Osama bin Laden as a "destructive cult leader". [120]
At a 2002 meeting of the American Psychological Association (APA), anti-cultist Steven Hassan said that Al-Qaida fulfills the characteristics of a destructive cult. He added: "We need to apply what we know about destructive mind-control cults, and this should be a priority with the war on terrorism. We need to understand the psychological aspects of how people are recruited and indoctrinated so we can slow down recruitment. We need to help counsel former cult members and possibly use some of them in the war against terrorism." [121]
In an article on Al-Qaida published in The Times , journalist Mary Ann Sieghart wrote that al-Qaida resembles a "classic cult", commenting: "Al-Qaida fits all the official definitions of a cult. It indoctrinates its members; it forms a closed, totalitarian society; it has a self-appointed, messianic and charismatic leader; and it believes that the ends justify the means." [122]
The Shining Path guerrilla movement active in Peru in the 1980s and 1990s has variously been described as a "cult" [123] and as an intense "cult of personality". [124] The Tamil Tigers have also been qualified as such by French magazine L'Express ' [125]
The People's Mujahedin of Iran , a leftist guerrilla movement based in Iraq , has controversially been described as a political cult and as a movement that is abusive towards its own members. [126] [127] [128] [129] Former Mujaheddin member and now author and academic Dr. Masoud Banisadr stated in a May 2005 speech in Spain: "If you ask me: are all cults a terrorist organisation? My answer is no, as there are many peaceful cults at present around the world and in the history of mankind. But if you ask me are all terrorist organisations some sort of cult, my answer is yes. Even if they start as [an] ordinary modern political party or organisation, to prepare and force their members to act without asking any moral questions and act selflessly for the cause of the group and ignore all the ethical, cultural, moral or religious codes of the society and humanity, those organisations have to change into a cult. Therefore to understand an extremist or a terrorist organisation one has to learn about a cult." [130] In 2003, the group ordered some of its members to set themselves on fire , two of whom died. [131]

Regional developments
The application of the labels "cult" or "sect" to religious movements in government documents signifies the popular and negative use of the term "cult" in English and a functionally similar use of words translated as "sect" in several European languages. [132] Sociologists critical to this negative politicized use of the word "cult" argue that it may adversely impact the religious freedoms of group members. [133] At the height of the counter-cult movement and ritual abuse scare of the 1990s, some governments published lists of cults . [134] While these documents utilize similar terminology they do not necessarily include the same groups nor is their assessment of these groups based on agreed criteria. [132] Other governments and world bodies also report on new religious movements but do not use these terms to describe the groups. [132] Since the 2000s, some governments have again distanced themselves from such classifications of religious movements. [135] While the official response to new religious groups has been mixed across the globe, some governments aligned more with the critics of these groups to the extent of distinguishing between "legitimate" religion and "dangerous", "unwanted" cults in public policy . [53] [136]

China
For centuries, governments in China have categorized certain religions as xiejiao ( Chinese : 邪教 ; pinyin : xiéjiào ) – sometimes translated as "evil cult" or as "heterodox teaching". [137] In imperial China, the classification of a religion as xiejiao did not necessarily mean that a religion’s teachings were believed to be false or inauthentic, but rather, the label was applied to religious groups that were not authorized by the state, or that were seen as challenging the legitimacy of the state. [137] In modern China, the term xiejiao continues to be used to denote teachings that the government disapproves of, and these groups face suppression and punishment by authorities. Fourteen different groups in China have been listed by the ministry of public security as xiejiao . [138] In addition, in 1999, Chinese authorities denounced the Falun Gong spiritual practice as a heretical teaching, and they launched a campaign to eliminate it. According to Amnesty International , the persecution of Falun Gong includes a multifaceted propaganda campaign, [139] a program of enforced ideological conversion and re-education, as well as a variety of extralegal coercive measures, such as arbitrary arrests, forced labour , and physical torture , sometimes resulting in death. [140]

Russia
In 2008 the Russian Interior Ministry prepared a list of "extremist groups." At the top of the list were Islamic groups outside of "traditional Islam," which is supervised by the Russian government. Next listed were "Pagan cults" . [141] In 2009 the Russian Ministry of Justice created a council which it named "Council of Experts Conducting State Religious Studies Expert Analysis." The new council listed 80 large sects which it considered potentially dangerous to Russian society, and mentioned that there were thousands of smaller ones. Large sects listed included: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , Jehovah's Witnesses , and what were called "neo-Pentecostals." [142]

United States
In the 1970s, the scientific status of the " brainwashing theory " became a central topic in U.S. court cases where the theory was used to try to justify the use of the forceful deprogramming of cult members. [143] [133] Meanwhile, sociologists critical of these theories assisted advocates of religious freedom in defending the legitimacy of new religious movements in court. [53] [136] In the United States religious activities of cults are protected under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution , which prohibits governmental establishment of religion and protects freedom of religion , freedom of speech , freedom of the press , and freedom of assembly . However, no religious or cult members are granted any special immunity from criminal charges. [144]

Western Europe
France and Belgium have taken policy positions which accept "brainwashing" theories uncritically, while other European nations, like Sweden and Italy, are cautious about brainwashing and have adopted more neutral responses to new religions. [145] Scholars have suggested that outrage following the mass murder/suicides perpetuated by the Solar Temple [53] [146] as well as the more latent xenophobic and anti-American attitudes have contributed significantly to European anti-cult positions. [147] In the 1980s clergymen and officials of the French government expressed concern that some orders and other groups within the Roman Catholic Church would be adversely affected by anti-cult laws then being considered. [148]

See also

Footnotes
WebPage index: 00039
Dartmouth College
WebPage index: 00040
Edit-a-thon
An edit-a-thon (sometimes written editathon ) is an organized event where editors of online communities such as Wikipedia , OpenStreetMap , and LocalWiki edit and improve a specific topic or type of content, typically including basic editing training for new editors. They often involve meetups, but can be distributed as well. The word is a portmanteau of "edit" and " marathon ".
Wikipedia edit-a-thons have taken place at Wikimedia chapter headquarters, accredited educational institutions including Sonoma State University , Arizona State University , The University of Victoria in Canada; as well as cultural institutions such as museums or archives . The events have included topics such as cultural heritage sites, museum collections, women's history , art, feminism, narrowing Wikipedia's gender gap , social justice issues, and other topics. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] Women and African Americans and the LGBT community are using edit-a-thons as a way of bridging the gap in Wikipedia's sexual and racial makeup. [7] Some have been organised by Wikipedians in residence . The longest editathon took place at the Museo Soumaya in Mexico City from June 9 to 12, 2016, where Wikimedia Mexico volunteers and museum's staff edited during 72 continuous hours. This editathon was also recognized by Guinness World Records as the longest. [8] [9]
The OpenStreetMap community has also hosted a number of edit-a-thons. [10] [11]

See also
WebPage index: 00041
Dutch Wikipedia
The Dutch Wikipedia ( Dutch : Nederlandstalige Wikipedia ) is the Dutch-language edition of the free online encyclopedia , Wikipedia . It was started in June 2001. As of May 2017, the Dutch Wikipedia is the third-largest Wikipedia edition, with 1,902,409 articles. It was the fourth Wikipedia edition to exceed 1 million articles, after the English , German and French editions. In April 2016, 1154 active editors made at least five edits in that month.

History
The Dutch Wikipedia was started on 19 June 2001, and reached 100,000 articles on 14 October 2005. It briefly surpassed the Polish Wikipedia as the sixth-largest edition of Wikipedia, but then fell back to the eighth position. On 1 March 2006, it overtook the Swedish and Italian editions in one day to rise back to the sixth position. The edition's 500,000th article was created on 30 November 2008. [1] In a 2006 Multiscope research study, the Dutch Wikipedia was rated the third-best Dutch-language website, after Google and Gmail , with a score of 8.1. [2]
The Dutch language Wikipedia has the largest ratio of Wikipedia pages per native speaker of all of the top 10 largest Wikipedia editions. Its rate of daily article creations spiked in March 2006, rapidly growing to an average of 1,000 a day in early May 2006. After this number was reached, growth dropped to an average of only about 250 a day, comparable to the averages around December 2005. Since then, there have been more article-creation surges, one of the largest peaking at 2,000 new articles per day in September 2007, but the growth rate has always returned to the lowest average of around 250.

Internet bots
The majority of articles in Dutch Wikipedia (59%) were created by internet bots . [3] In October 2011, several bots created 80,000 articles (then equivalent to 10% of the entire edition's article count) in only 11 days. [4] [5]
The Dutch Wikipedia's one-millionth article was created in December 2011, after another surge of bot activity saw 100,000 added articles in only 10 days. In late March 2013, the Dutch Wikipedia surpassed the French Wikipedia to become the third-largest edition of Wikipedia. In June 2013, it overtook the German Wikipedia to become the second-largest Wikipedia edition.

Article growth

Quality

Article depth
The depth or editing depth of Wikipedia is a rough indicator of the encyclopedia's collaborative quality, showing how frequently its articles are updated. [7] The depth is measured by taking the average number of edits per article multiplied by the extent in which articles are supported by discussion (among other things, talk pages). Among the nine language editions with one million articles, the Dutch, Swedish, and Polish Wikipedias in that order have depth parameters much lower than the other six. [8] As of March 2012, for the English version the article depth is 666, for the German 88, for the French 153, for the Spanish 160, for the Dutch only 18. [9]

Bytes per article
Compared to most other Wikipedia editions with a similar number of articles, articles on the Dutch Wikipedia have less content with an average of 1,598 bytes per article (as of February 2014). This is roughly 40% of that of the French, German, Italian, Russian and Spanish editions (3,986-4,277 bytes/article as of February 2014). [10]

Bibliography
WebPage index: 00042
Waray Wikipedia
The Waray Wikipedia is the Waray language edition of Wikipedia . It is hosted on servers run by the Wikimedia Foundation since 25 September 2005. [1] As of May 18, 2017, this edition has 1,262,508 articles [2] and is the 10th largest Wikipedia edition. [3] Despite having very few active users (78), the Waray Wikipedia has a high number of automatically generated articles created by bots , most of them by Swedish Wikipedian Sverker Johansson's Lsjbot . [4] [5] [6]
Waray (or Waray-Waray) is spoken by approximately 2.6 million [7] people in the Eastern Visayas region of the Philippines .

History
The Waray Wikipedia was first organized in Tacloban on 25 September 2005 by Harvey Fiji. The wiki had a small number of contributors, with fewer than ten editors per month until April 2009. The first meet-up of editors took place in January 2013 in Tacloban . [8] [9]
By early 2011 the Waray Wikipedia had attracted notice for including more than twice as many articles as the Tagalog Wikipedia , which is based on the principal language of The Philippines . This discrepancy was explained by the very large number of articles added automatically by bots, with no direct human input. [10] [11] By early June 2014 the Waray Wikipedia had attained a very high article count of 1 million, but a very low article depth of less than 3. Article depth is an attempt to measure the collaborative quality of articles, based on the number of edits per article.
According to automatically updated Wikimedia data, as of May 18, 2017, the Waray Wikipedia has 2,873,592 pages (including user pages, help pages, etc.), 78 active users, and 6,295,818 total edits. The article depth of Waray Wikipedia is 3.57—a rough indicator of the article's collaborative quality—compared to 33.66 for the Tagalog Wikipedia. (Waray and Tagalog are related languages belonging to the Malayo-Polynesian branch of the Austronesian language family .)

Milestones

See also
WebPage index: 00043
Chinese Wikipedia
The Chinese Wikipedia ( traditional Chinese : 中 文 維 基 百 科 ; simplified Chinese : 中 文 维 基 百 科 ; pinyin : Zhōngwén Wéijī Bǎikē ) is the (Standard) Chinese language edition of Wikipedia , run by the Wikimedia Foundation . Started on 11 May 2001, [1] the Chinese Wikipedia currently has about 943,000 articles and about 2,378,000 registered users, of which 81 have administrative privileges.
The Chinese Wikipedia is the fourth largest online Chinese encyclopedia after Hudong Baike (互动百科), Baidu Baike (百度百科) and Soso Baike (搜搜百科). [ citation needed ]

History
The Chinese Wikipedia was established along with 12 other Wikipedias in May 2001. At the beginning, however, the Chinese Wikipedia did not support Chinese characters , and had no encyclopedic content.
In October 2002, the first Chinese-language page was written, the Main Page . A software update on 27 October 2002 allowed Chinese language input. The domain was set to be zh.wikipedia.org , with zh based on the ISO code for the Chinese language. On 17 November 2002, the user Mountain translated the Computer science article into zh:计算机科学 , thus creating its first real encyclopedic article.
In order to accommodate the orthographic differences between simplified Chinese characters and traditional Chinese characters (or Orthodox Chinese), from 2002 to 2003, the Chinese Wikipedia community gradually decided to combine the two originally separate versions of the Chinese Wikipedia. The first running automatic conversion between the two orthographic representations started on 23 December 2004, with the MediaWiki 1.4 release. The needs from Hong Kong and Singapore were taken into account in the MediaWiki 1.4.2 release, which made the conversion table for zh-sg default to zh-cn, and zh-hk default to zh-tw. [2]
In its early days, most articles on the Chinese Wikipedia were translated from the English version. The first five sysops, or administrators , were promoted on 14 June 2003.
Wikipedia was first introduced by the mainland Chinese media [ citation needed ] in the newspaper China Computer Education (中国电脑教育报) on October 20, 2003, in the article, "I join to write an encyclopedia" (我也来写百科全书). [3] On May 16, 2004, Wikipedia was first reported by Taiwanese media in the newspaper China Times . Since then, many newspapers have published articles about the Chinese Wikipedia , and several sysops have been interviewed by journalists.
Ivan Zhai of the South China Morning Post wrote that the blocks from the Mainland authorities in the 2000s stifled the growth of the Chinese Wikipedia, and that by 2013 there was a new generation of users originating from the Mainland who were taking efforts to make the Chinese Wikipedia grow. In 2013, there were 1.4 million registered users on the Chinese Wikipedia, and in July 2013 7,500 of these users were active, with most of them originating from Hong Kong and Taiwan. 715,000 entries for the Chinese Wikipedia, making it the 12th largest Wikipedia. [4]

Naming
The Chinese name of Wikipedia was decided on 21 October 2003, following a vote. The name ( simplified Chinese : 维基百科 ; traditional Chinese : 維基百科 ; pinyin : Wéijī Bǎikē ) means "Wiki Encyclopedia". The Chinese transcription of "Wiki" is composed of two characters: 維/维, whose ancient sense refers to 'ropes or webs connecting objects', and alludes to the 'Internet'; and 基, meaning the 'foundations of a building', or 'fundamental aspects of things in general'. The name can be interpreted as 'the encyclopedia that connects the fundamental knowledge of humanity'.
The most common Chinese translation for wiki technology is 維基/维基; however, it can be 維客/维客 (literally "dimension visitor" or similar) or 圍紀/围纪 (literally "circle/enclose period/record" or similar), which are also transcriptions of the word "wiki". As a result, the term 維基/维基 has become associated exclusively with Wikimedia projects. [5]
The Chinese Wikipedia also has a subtitle: 海納百川，有容乃大/海纳百川，有容乃大. It means, "The sea encompasses a hundred rivers; it has capacity i.e. is willing to accept all and is thus great." The subtitle is the first half of a couplet composed by the Qing Dynasty official Lin Zexu .

Community
In April 2016, the project had 2127 active editors who made at least five edits in that month.
Chinese Wikipedia contributors come from a variety of backgrounds. Just as English Wikipedia tends to be more detailed in western -related topics, the Chinese Wikipedia has very detailed descriptions of China -related topics. Within that region, the Chinese Wikipedia tends to be more detailed in topics about Hong Kong, Taiwan, and the wealthy east coast provinces of mainland China. [ citation needed ]
Also due to the geographical origin of its participants, the most discussed and debated topics on the Chinese Wikipedia are political issues about Chinese modern period history. For example, the six most edited articles as of August 2007 were Taiwan , Chinese culture , China , Mao Zedong , Chiang Kai-shek , and Hong Kong , in that order. In contrast, issues such as the Israel-Palestinian conflict are much less contentious. [ citation needed ]
Due to the audience base, Wikipedians from Mainland, Taiwan, and other areas had engaged in editing conflicts over political topics related to Cross-Straits relations . [6]

Administrators
As of August 2014, there are 83 administrators, or sysops. They are all elected by Chinese Wikipedians. Most of them come from Mainland China, Hong Kong and Taiwan. There are also a few who come from the United States, Singapore, and Japan.

Meetings
The first Chinese Wikipedian meeting was held in Beijing on July 25, 2004. Since then, Chinese Wikipedians from different regions have held many gatherings in Beijing , Shanghai , Dalian , Shenyang , Guangdong , Hong Kong , and Taiwan . Currently, a regular meetup is held once every two weeks in Shanghai , Taipei and Hong Kong , and once every month in Tainan City , Taiwan . In July 2006, Taiwanese Wikipedians also held a "travelling meetup", travelling by train through four Taiwanese cities over a period of two days. In August 2006, Hong Kong hosted the first annual Chinese Wikimedia Conference .
Chinese Wikipedians advertise Wikipedia in different ways. Many of them use weibo , a Chinese socializing website similar to Twitter. Several Chinese Wikipedians created the Wikipedia monthly magazine, or journal, called " The Wikipedians " in December 2012, which is currently published once a month.

Systemic bias
In order to avoid systemic bias , editors are advised to avoid writing from the point of view of China or any other country/region; to avoid using terms such as 我国/我國 ("our country"; referring to the People's Republic of China or the Republic of China , depending on viewpoint), 本港 ("this port"; referring to Hong Kong), or 本澳 ("this Macau", referring to Macau); and instead, to refer to locations in the Chinese-speaking sphere or periods in Chinese history by explicitly stating China (e.g. " Yunnan province, China", instead of just " Yunnan province").

Automatic conversion between traditional and simplified Chinese characters

Original situation
Originally, there were virtually two Chinese Wikipedias under the names of "zh" (or "zh-cn") and "zh-tw". Generally, users from regions that used Traditional Chinese characters (such as Taiwan , Hong Kong , and Macau ) wrote and edited articles using Traditional Chinese characters whereas those from regions that used Simplified Chinese characters (such as mainland China , Singapore , and Malaysia ) wrote using Simplified Chinese characters. Many articles had two uncoordinated versions; for example, there was both a Traditional ( 法國 ) and Simplified ( 法国 ) article on France . Further exacerbating the problem were differences in vocabulary (particularly nouns) and writing systems, between mainland China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore that developed through their relative lack of communications during much of the 20th century [ citation needed ] . For example, a computer printer is called 打印机 in mainland China, but 印表機 in Taiwan.

Solution
To avoid this near- forking of the project, starting around January 2005, the Chinese Wikipedia began providing a server -side mechanism to automatically convert different characters and vocabulary items into the user's local ones, according to the user's preference settings, which may be set to one of two settings that convert the script only, or one of five settings that also take into account regional vocabulary differences:
Conversion is done through a set of character conversion tables that may be edited by administrators. To provide an alternative means to harmonize the characters when the server-side converters fail to work properly, a special template was created to manually convert characters and article titles in one specific page.
Furthermore, page title conversion is used for automatic page redirection. Those articles previously named in different characters or different translations have been merged, and can be reached by means of both Traditional and Simplified Chinese titles.

Differences with other versions of Wikipedia
According to a survey conducted between April 2010 and March 2011, edits to the Chinese Wikipedia were 37.8% from Taiwan , 26.2% from Hong Kong , 17.7% from Mainland China , 6.1% from United States and 2.3% from Canada . [7]
Many editing controversies arise from current and historical political events in Chinese-speaking regions, such as the political status of Taiwan , North Korea's nuclear weapons , and the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 . [ citation needed ]

Wikipedias in other varieties of Chinese
The Chinese Wikipedia is based on written vernacular Chinese , the official Chinese written language in all Chinese-speaking regions, including mainland China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Macau, and Singapore. This register is largely associated with the grammar and vocabulary of Standard Chinese , the official spoken language of mainland China, Taiwan, and Singapore (but not exclusively of Hong Kong and Macau, which largely use Cantonese ).
The varieties of Chinese are a diverse group encompassing many regional varieties, most of which are mutually unintelligible and often divided up into several larger dialect groups, such as Wu (including Shanghainese and Suzhounese ), Min Nan (of which Taiwanese is a notable dialect), and Cantonese . In regions that speak non-Mandarin languages or regional Mandarin dialects, the Vernacular Chinese standard largely corresponding to Standard Chinese is nevertheless used exclusively as the Chinese written standard; this written standard differs sharply from the local dialects in vocabulary and grammar , and is often read in local pronunciation but preserving the vocabulary and grammar of Standard Chinese . After the founding of Wikipedia, many users of non-Mandarin Chinese varieties began to ask for the right to have Wikipedia editions in non-Mandarin varieties as well. However, they also met with significant opposition, based on the fact that Mandarin-based Vernacular Chinese is the only form used in scholarly or academic contexts. Some also proposed the implementation of an automatic conversion program similar to that between Simplified and Traditional Chinese; however, others pointed out that although conversion between Simplified and Traditional Chinese consists mainly of glyph and sometimes vocabulary substitutions, different regional varieties of Chinese differ so sharply in grammar, syntax , and semantics that it was unrealistic to implement an automatic conversion program.
Objections notwithstanding, it was determined that these Chinese varieties were sufficiently different from Standard Chinese and had a sufficiently large number of followers to justify the creation of six Wikipedias for different varieties.
Finally, requests were also made, and granted, to create a Classical Chinese Wikipedia ( zh-classical: ), based on Classical Chinese , an archaic register of Chinese with grammar and vocabulary drawn from classical works , and used in all official contexts until the early 20th century, when it was displaced by the Vernacular Chinese standard.
All of the above Wikipedias have sidestepped the Traditional/Simplified Chinese issue. The Wu Wikipedia uses Simplified Chinese exclusively, and the Classical Chinese Wikipedia uses Traditional Chinese exclusively (The Gan and Cantonese Wikipedias default to Traditional, but have a conversion function similar to the Chinese Wikipedia). The Min Nan Wikipedia uses Pe̍h-ōe-jī . The Mindong Wikipedia and Hakka Wikipedias currently use Bàng-uâ-cê and Pha̍k-fa-sṳ respectively, which can be converted to Traditional Chinese characters , thus avoiding the issue completely.

Blocking of Wikipedia
The People's Republic of China and internet service providers in Mainland China have adopted a practice of blocking contentious Internet sites in mainland China , and Wikimedia sites have been blocked at least three times in its history. [11]
On May 19, 2015 Chinese Wikipedia was blocked again within mainland China. [12]

First block
The first block lasted from June 2-June 21, 2004. It began when access to the Chinese Wikipedia from Beijing was blocked on the 15th anniversary of the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 .
Possibly related to this, on May 31 an article from the IDG News Service was published, [13] discussing the Chinese Wikipedia's treatment of the protests. The Chinese Wikipedia also has articles related to Taiwan independence , written by contributors from Taiwan and elsewhere. A few days after the initial block of the Chinese Wikipedia, all Wikimedia sites were blocked in mainland China. In response to the blocks, two moderators prepared an appeal to lift the block and asked their regional internet service provider to submit it. All Wikimedia sites were unblocked between June 17 and June 21, 2004. One month later, the first Chinese Wikipedian moderators' meeting was held in Beijing on July 25, 2004.
The first block had an effect on the vitality of the Chinese Wikipedia, which suffered sharp dips in various indicators, such as the number of new users, the number of new articles, and the number of edits. In some cases, it took anywhere from 6 to 12 months in order to regain the stats from May 2004. On the other hand, on today's site, some of the articles are put under protection which may last for a month or more without any actions.

Second block
The second and less serious outage lasted between September 23 and September 27, 2004. During this 4-day period, access to Wikipedia was erratic or unavailable to some users in mainland China — this block was not comprehensive and some users in mainland China were never affected. The exact reason for the block is a mystery. Chinese Wikipedians once again prepared a written appeal to regional ISPs, but the block was lifted before the appeal was actually sent, for an unknown reason.

Third block and temporary unblocks
The third block began on October 19, 2005, and there was no indication as to whether this block was temporary or permanent, or what the reasons or causes for this block were. According to the status page currently maintained on the Chinese Wikipedia, the Florida and Korea servers were blocked, whereas the Paris and Amsterdam servers were not. Dozens of editors from across mainland China reported that they could only access Wikipedia using proxy servers, although there were isolated reports that some users could access Wikipedia without using a proxy. Most Chinese people were not able to connect to the site at all.
During October and November 2006, it first appeared that the site was unblocked again. Many conflicting reports came from news outlets, bloggers, and Wikipedians, reporting a possible partial or full unblocking of Wikipedia. Some reports indicated a complete unblock; others suggested that some sensitive topics remained blocked, and yet others suggested that the Chinese Wikipedia was blocked whereas other-language versions were not. From November 17 onwards, the complete block was once again in place.
On June 15, 2007, China lifted the block for several articles, only to then block an increasing number of articles. On 30 August 2007, all blocks were lifted, but then a block was placed on Wikipedia for all languages on 31 August 2007. [11] As of 26 January 2008, all languages of Wikipedia were blocked, [11] and as of 2 April 2008, the block was lifted. [14]
By 5 April 2008, the Chinese Wikipedia became difficult to access from the Sun Yat-Sen University in Guangzhou . Connections to the Chinese Wikipedia were completely blocked as of April 6, 2008. Any attempt to access the Chinese Wikipedia resulted in a 60-second ban on all Wikimedia websites. However, users were able to log on to the Chinese Wikipedia using https. All other languages were accessible, but politically sensitive searches such as Tibet were still blocked.
On 3 July 2008, the government lifted the ban on accessing the Chinese Wikipedia. However, some parts were still inaccessible. On July 31, 2008, BBC reported that the Chinese Wikipedia had been unblocked that day in China; it had still been blocked the previous day. This came within the context of foreign journalists arriving in Beijing to report on the upcoming Olympic Games , and websites like the Chinese edition of the BBC were being unblocked following talks between the International Olympic Committee and the Games' Chinese organizers. [15]

Self-censorship allegations
In December 2006, the International Herald Tribune Asia-Pacific [16] published an article saying that sensitive topics got subdued treatment on the Chinese Wikipedia.
On December 1, 2006, The New York Times published another report by Howard W. French, titled "Wikipedia lays bare two versions of China's past."
The report was subsequently repeated by CBS [17] and by Chinese-language media outlets such as the Apple Daily in Taiwan.
Since then Chinese Wikipedians have tried to clarify the situation. One Chinese Wikipedian sent a comment that was subsequently published in the Apple Daily Taiwan. The comment stated that:
In another email addressed to the Wikimedia Foundation mailing list, a Chinese Wikipedian stated:
Previous proposals to self-censor the Chinese Wikipedia in light of the P. R. Chinese government's censorship policies have been made before, but were overwhelmingly rejected by the community.
In April 2010, Hong Kong newspaper Ming Pao reported the large-scale censorship of contents about Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 and other Hong Kong related contents in which an administrator named "Shizhao" ("百無一用是書生" a.k.a. "時昭") was involved. [19] The report also mentioned the failed recall of administrator. [19]
A follow-up also by Ming Pao interviewed Shizhao and he made a statement that he is not a member of 50 Cent Party . [20] He added that for controversial topics such as June 4 , he should be a little more cautious. [20] In the interview he denied the attempt of deleting an article about Concert For Democracy In China , he just questioned the notability of the concert by adding a template to the article. [20]
However, he started a vote for deleting an article about a song criticizing Hong Kong government in 2007, enraging many Hong Kong netizens . [20] Shizhao added that, at the time, he had already edited more than 50,000 times, deleting several articles including Manual for Librarians . He joked about the incident saying, "some may consider that is a kind of hate to libraries and hence is not suitable for monitoring Wikipedia." [20]

Competitors
On April 20, 2006, the online Chinese search engine company Baidu created Baidu Baike , an online encyclopedia that registered users can edit, pending administrator reviews. The content of the encyclopedia is self-censored in accordance with the regulations of the People's Republic of China government . Within weeks, the number of articles in Baidu Baike had surpassed that of the Chinese Wikipedia.
As of October, 2009, Hudong Wiki surpassed Baidu Baike as China's largest online encyclopedia.
Baidu Baike and Hudong are both commercial products. Whereas the Chinese Wikipedia is released under the GNU Free Documentation License , Baidu Baike and Hudong are fully copyrighted by their ownership; contributors forfeit all rights upon submission. However, Baidu Baike has been accused of "widespread copyright infringement" by mass-copying Wikipedia pages and incorporating them into Baidu Baike pages since 2007 (see Wikipedia:Mirrors and forks/Baidu Baike for details). [21] [22]

See also
WebPage index: 00044
Arabic Wikipedia
The Arabic Wikipedia ( Arabic : ويكيبيديا العربية ‎‎ Wīkībīdyā al-ʿArabiyya or ويكيبيديا، الموسوعة الحرة Wīkībīdyā, al-Mawsūʿa al-Ḥurra ) is the Arabic language version of Wikipedia . It started on 9 July 2003. As of March 2017, it has over 500,000 articles, 1,200,000 registered users and over 29,000 images and it is the 19th largest edition of Wikipedia by article count; it was the first Semitic language to exceed 100,000 articles. [2]
The design of the Arabic Wikipedia differs somewhat from other Wikipedias. Most notably, since Arabic is written right-to-left , the location of links is a mirror image of those Wikipedias in languages written left-to-right. Prior to Wikipedia's update to MediaWiki 1.16 , Arabic Wikipedia had a default page background of the site inspired by Arabic/Islamic tiling or ornament styles . Switching from MediaWiki's new default Vector layout to the original MonoBook layout may restore this page background.

History
At the emergence of the Wikipedia project in 2001, there were calls to create an Arabic domain raised by Arab engineers. [3] The domain was created as "ar.wikipedia.org" but no serious activity took place except with anonymous users who experimented with the idea. [4] Until 7 February 2003, all contributors to the Arabic Wikipedia were non-Arab volunteers from the International Project Wikipedia [5] that handled the technical aspects. Elizabeth Bauer, who used the user name Elian in the Arabic Wikipedia, approached many potential Arabs who might be interested in volunteering to spearhead the Arabic project. The only group who responded were the ArabEyes team who were involved in Arabizing the Open Source initiatives. Elian's request were conservatively received and ArabEyes team were ready to participate but not take a leadership role [6] and then declined participating on the second of February 2003. During this negotiation time, volunteer users from the German Wikipedia project continued to develop the technical infrastructure of the Arabic Wikipedia backbone. [7] [8]
In 2003 Rami Tarawneh ( Arabic : رامي عوض الطراونة ‎‎), a Jordanian PhD student in Germany who originated from Zarqa , encountered the English Wikipedia and began to edit content. Contributors encouraged him to start an Arabic Wikipedia. [9] The Arabic Wikipedia opened in July 2003. [10] By that year a significant group of contributors included Tarawneh and four other Jordanians studying in Germany. [9]
On 7 February 2004, [11] one member from the ArabEyes, Isam Bayazidi ( Arabic : عصام بايزيدي ‎‎), volunteered with 4 other friends to be involved with the Arabic Wikipedia and assumed some leadership roles. In 2004, Bayazid was assigned the SysOp responsibilities and he, with another 5 volunteers, namely Ayman, Abo Suleiman, Mustapha Ahmad and Bassem Jarkas [12] are considered to be the first Arabs to lead the Wikipedia project and they are attributed for working on translating and enforcing the English policies to Arabic. The Arabic Wikipedia faced many challenges at its inception. In February 2004, it was considered to be the worst Wikipedia project among all other languages. However, in 2005, it showed phenomenal progress by which in December 2005, the total number of articles reached 8,285. [13] By that time, there were fewer than 20 contributors and the administrators and contributors made efforts to recruit new users. [9]
In 2007 the secret police in an unspecified country detained Tarawneh and demanded that he reveal the IP address of a contributor. To protect the Wikipedian, the administrators forged a dispute that was the presumed reason for Tarawneh losing his administrator access, so the secret police was unable to obtain the IP. In response to the incident, the rules now state that no one user may have access to all information about the Wikipedia's users. [9]
In 2008 the Wikipedia had had fewer than 65,000 articles and was ranked #29 out of the Wikipedias, behind the Esperanto Wikipedia and the Slovenian Wikipedia . Noam Cohen of The New York Times reported that, to many of the attendees of the 2008 Wikimania conference in Alexandria , Egypt , the "woeful shape of the Arabic Wikipedia has been the cause of chagrin." [14] Cohen stated that out of Egyptians, fewer than 10% "are thought to have internet access" and of those with internet access many tend to be knowledgeable in English and have a preference of communicating in that language. [14] The Arabic Wikipedia had 118,870 articles as of 15 January 2010.
As of July 2012 there are around 630 active Arabic Wikipedia editors around the world. Ikram Al-Yacoub of Al Arabiya says that this is "a relatively low figure." [15] At the time there were hundreds of thousands of Wikipedia articles on the Arabic Wikipedia. [9] The Wikimedia Foundation and the nonprofit group Taghreedat established the "Arabic Wikipedia Editors Program" intended to train users to edit the Arabic Wikipedia. [15] By the end of June 2014, the number of articles has reached 384,000 [16]

Blocking
The Arabic Wikipedia has been blocked in Syria with no official reasons given by the Syrian government . [17] The block began on 30 April 2008 while all other language versions of Wikipedia remain unblocked and freely accessible. And it is still blocked in the country so far. [ when? ] Wikimedia.org [ when? ] continues to be blocked, which causes all images on Wikipedia (in all languages) to be unavailable. [ citation needed ] Tarawneh stated that wasta was used to unblock Wikipedia in Syria. [9]
In Saudi Arabia , a few articles on the Arabic Wikipedia are known to be censored; Tarawneh stated that articles about body parts are among the censored articles. [9]

Evaluation and criticism
In June 2016, Arabic Wikipedia scored 233 in terms of depth (a very rough indicator of the encyclopedia's quality). This is better than the German version (102), the French version (207) or the Japanese version (74), making it the fifth highest +100,000 articles Wikipedia in the terms of depth, after English Wikipedia (930), Serbo-Croatian Wikipedia (561), Thai Wikipedia (253) and Hebrew Wikipedia (251). [19]
At Wikimania 2008, Jimmy Wales argued that high-profile arrests like those of Egyptian blogger Kareem Amer could be hampering the development of the Arabic Wikipedia by making editors afraid to contribute. [20]
In 2010, Tarek Al Kaziri, from Radio Netherlands Worldwide , believed that Arabic Wikipedia reflected the Arabic reality in general. Low participation lowers the probability that the articles are reviewed, developed and updated, and political polarisation of participants is likely to lead to biases in the articles. [21]
In 2008, an article from The Jerusalem Post , an Israeli newspaper, accused the Arabic Wikipedia of being biased against Israel and on many other issues. The article was written by a journalist who says that he doesn't "read or speak Arabic" and used Google Translations to understand the content of the Arabic Wikipedia. [22]
According to Alexa Internet , on 26 November 2014, the Arabic Wikipedia is the 10th most visited language version of Wikipedia in terms of percentage of visitors on all of the Wikipedias over a month, with the "ar.wikipedia.org" subdomain attracting approximately 1.8% of the total visitors of the "wikipedia.org" website, [23] despite being ranked no. 22 in term of the article count. In terms of page views, it is ranked 12th with the same 10 Wikipedias above it plus the Polish and Dutch ones. [24]

Usage and page views by country
Florence Devouard , the former president of the Wikimedia Foundation , stated in 2010 that the largest number of articles on the Arabic Wikipedia were written by Egyptians and that the Egyptians were more likely to participate in the Arabic Wikipedia compared to other groups. [25]

Percentage of Arabic Wikipedia 

Arabic Wikipedia views as a percent of total Wikipedia views for countries in the Arab world

Milestones

Gallery
Logos in different fonts for Arabic Wikipedia:

See also
WebPage index: 00045
Fair use
Fair use is a doctrine originating in the law of the United States that permits limited use of copyrighted material without having to first acquire permission from the copyright holder. Fair use is one of the limitations to copyright intended to balance the interests of copyright holders with the public interest in the wider distribution and use of creative works by allowing certain limited uses that might otherwise be considered infringement. Examples of fair use in United States copyright law include commentary, search engines, criticism, parody , news reporting, research, and scholarship. Fair use provides for the legal, unlicensed citation or incorporation of copyrighted material in another author's work under a four-factor test .
The term "fair use" originated in the United States. [1] Although related, the limitations and exceptions to copyright for teaching and library archiving in the U.S. are located in a different section of the statute. A similar-sounding principle, fair dealing , exists in some other common law jurisdictions but in fact it is more similar in principle to the enumerated exceptions found under civil law systems. Civil law jurisdictions have other limitations and exceptions to copyright.
The Supreme Court has traditionally characterized fair use as an affirmative defense , but in Lenz v. Universal Music Corp. (2015) [2] (the "dancing baby" case), the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit concluded that fair use was not merely a defense to an infringement claim, but was an expressly authorized right, and an exception to the exclusive rights granted to the author of a creative work by copyright law: "Fair use is therefore distinct from affirmative defenses where a use infringes a copyright, but there is no liability due to a valid excuse, e.g., misuse of a copyright."

History
The 1709 Statute of Anne , an act of the Parliament of Great Britain , created copyright law to replace a system of private ordering enforced by the Stationers' Company . The Statute of Anne did not provide for legal unauthorized use of material protected by copyright. In Gyles v Wilcox , [3] the Court of Chancery established the doctrine of "fair abridgement," which permitted unauthorized abridgement of copyrighted works under certain circumstances. Over time, this doctrine evolved into the modern concepts of fair use and fair dealing . Fair use was a common-law doctrine in the U.S. until it was incorporated into the Copyright Act of 1976 , 17 U.S.C. § 107 .
In response to perceived over-expansion of copyrights, several electronic civil liberties and free expression organizations began in the 1990s to add fair use cases to their dockets and concerns. These include the Electronic Frontier Foundation ("EFF"), the American Civil Liberties Union , the National Coalition Against Censorship , the American Library Association , numerous clinical programs at law schools, and others. The " Chilling Effects " archive was established in 2002 as a coalition of several law school clinics and the EFF to document the use of cease and desist letters. Most recently, in 2006, Stanford University began an initiative called "The Fair Use Project " (FUP) to help artists, particularly filmmakers, fight lawsuits brought against them by large corporations.

U.S. fair use factors
The four factors of analysis for fair use set forth above derive from the opinion of Joseph Story in Folsom v. Marsh , [1] in which the defendant had copied 353 pages from the plaintiff's 12-volume biography of George Washington in order to produce a separate two-volume work of his own. [5] The court rejected the defendant's fair use defense with the following explanation:
The statutory fair use factors quoted above come from the Copyright Act of 1976, which is codified at 17 U.S.C. § 107 . They were intended by Congress to restate, but not replace, the prior judge-made law. As Judge Pierre N. Leval has written, the statute does not "define or explain [fair use's] contours or objectives." While it "leav[es] open the possibility that other factors may bear on the question, the statute identifies none." [6] That is, courts are entitled to consider other factors in addition to the four statutory factors.

1. Purpose and character of the use
The first factor is "the purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes." To justify the use as fair, one must demonstrate how it either advances knowledge or the progress of the arts through the addition of something new.
A key consideration in recent fair use cases is the extent to which the use is transformative . In the 1994 decision Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music Inc , [7] the U.S. Supreme Court held that when the purpose of the use is transformative, this makes the first factor more likely to favor fair use. [8] Before the Campbell decision, federal Judge Pierre Leval argued that transformativeness is central to the fair use analysis in his 1990 article, Toward a Fair Use Standard . [6] Blanch v. Koons is another example of a fair use case that focused on transformativeness. In 2006, Jeff Koons used a photograph taken by commercial photographer Andrea Blanch in a collage painting. [9] He appropriated a central portion of an advertisement she had been commissioned to shoot for a magazine. Koons prevailed in part because his use was found transformative under the first fair use factor.
The Campbell case also addressed the subfactor mentioned in the quotation above, "whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes." In an earlier case, Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc. , the Supreme Court had stated that "every commercial use of copyrighted material is presumptively . . . unfair." In Campbell , the court clarified that this is not a "hard evidentiary presumption" and that even the tendency that commercial purpose will "weigh against a finding of fair use . . . will vary with the context." The Campbell court held that hip-hop group 2 Live Crew 's parody of the song " Oh, Pretty Woman " was fair use, even though the parody was sold for profit. Thus, having a commercial purpose does not preclude a use from being found fair, even though it makes it less likely. [10]
Likewise, the noncommercial purpose of a use makes it more likely to be found a fair use, but it does not make it a fair use automatically. [10] For instance, in L.A. Times v. Free Republic , the court found that the noncommercial use of Los Angeles Times content by the Free Republic Web site was not fair use, since it allowed the public to obtain material at no cost that they would otherwise pay for. Richard Story similarly ruled in Code Revision Commission and State of Georgia v. Public.Resource.Org , Inc. that despite the fact that it is a non-profit and didn't sell the work, the service profited from its unauthorized publication of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated because of "the attention, recognition, and contributions" it received in association with the work. [11]
Another factor is whether the use fulfills any of the "preamble purposes" also mentioned in the legislation above, as these have been interpreted as paradigmatically "transformative". [ citation needed ]
It is arguable, given the dominance of a rhetoric of the "transformative" in recent fair use determinations, that the first factor and transformativeness in general have become the most important parts of fair use.

2. Nature of the copyrighted work
Although the Supreme Court has ruled that the availability of copyright protection should not depend on the artistic quality or merit of a work, fair use analyses consider certain aspects of the work to be relevant, such as whether it is fictional or non-fictional. [12]
To prevent the private ownership of work that rightfully belongs in the public domain, facts and ideas are not protected by copyright —only their particular expression or fixation merits such protection. On the other hand, the social usefulness of freely available information can weigh against the appropriateness of copyright for certain fixations. The Zapruder film of the assassination of President Kennedy , for example, was purchased and copyrighted by Time magazine. Yet its copyright was not upheld, in the name of the public interest, when Time tried to enjoin the reproduction of stills from the film in a history book on the subject in Time Inc v. Bernard Geis Associates . [13]
In the decisions of the Second Circuit in Salinger v. Random House [14] and in New Era Publications Int'l v. Henry Holt & Co , [15] the aspect of whether the copied work has been previously published was considered crucial, assuming the right of the original author to control the circumstances of the publication of his work or preference not to publish at all. However, Judge Pierre N. Leval views this importation of certain aspects of France's droit moral d'artiste ( moral rights of the artist) into American copyright law as "bizarre and contradictory" because it sometimes grants greater protection to works that were created for private purposes that have little to do with the public goals of copyright law, than to those works that copyright was initially conceived to protect. [6] This is not to claim that unpublished works, or, more specifically, works not intended for publication, do not deserve legal protection, but that any such protection should come from laws about privacy, rather than laws about copyright. The statutory fair use provision was amended in response to these concerns by adding a final sentence: "The fact that a work is unpublished shall not itself bar a finding of fair use if such finding is made upon consideration of all the above factors."

3. Amount and substantiality
The third factor assesses the amount and substantiality of the copyrighted work that has been used. In general, the less that is used in relation to the whole, the more likely the use will be considered fair.
Using most or all of a work does not bar a finding of fair use. It simply makes the third factor less favorable to the defendant. For instance, in Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc. copying entire television programs for private viewing was upheld as fair use, at least when the copying is done for the purposes of time-shifting . In Kelly v. Arriba Soft Corporation, the Ninth Circuit held that copying an entire photo to use as a thumbnail in online search results did not even weigh against fair use, "if the secondary user only copies as much as is necessary for his or her intended use".
However, even the use of a small percentage of a work can make the third factor unfavorable to the defendant, because the "substantiality" of the portion used is considered in addition to the amount used. For instance, in Harper & Row v. Nation Enterprises , , [16] the U.S. Supreme Court held that a news article's quotation of fewer than 400 words from President Ford 's 200,000-word memoir was sufficient to make the third fair use factor weigh against the defendants, because the portion taken was the "heart of the work." This use was ultimately found not to be fair. [16]

4. Effect upon work's value
The fourth factor measures the effect that the allegedly infringing use has had on the copyright owner's ability to exploit his or her original work. The court not only investigates whether the defendant's specific use of the work has significantly harmed the copyright owner's market, but also whether such uses in general, if widespread, would harm the potential market of the original. The burden of proof here rests on the copyright owner, who must demonstrate the impact of the infringement on commercial use of the work.
For example, in Sony Corp v. Universal City Studios , [17] the copyright owner, Universal , failed to provide any empirical evidence that the use of Betamax had either reduced their viewership or negatively impacted their business. In Harper & Row, the case regarding President Ford's memoirs, the Supreme Court labeled the fourth factor "the single most important element of fair use" and it has enjoyed some level of primacy in fair use analyses ever since. Yet the Supreme Court's more recent announcement in Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music Inc [7] that "all [four factors] are to be explored, and the results weighed together, in light of the purposes of copyright" has helped modulate this emphasis in interpretation.
In evaluating the fourth factor, courts often consider two kinds of harm to the potential market for the original work. First, courts consider whether the use in question acts as a direct market substitute for the original work. In Campbell , the Supreme Court stated that "when a commercial use amounts to mere duplication of the entirety of the original, it clearly supersedes the object of the original and serves as a market replacement for it, making it likely that cognizable market harm to the original will occur". In one instance, a court ruled that this factor weighed against a defendant who had made unauthorized movie trailers for video retailers, since his trailers acted as direct substitutes for the copyright owner's official trailers. [18]
Second, courts also consider whether potential market harm might exist beyond that of direct substitution, such as in the potential existence of a licensing market. This consideration has weighed against commercial copy shops that make copies of articles in course-packs for college students, when a market already existed for the licensing of course-pack copies. [19]
Courts recognize that certain kinds of market harm do not negate fair use, such as when a parody or negative review impairs the market of the original work. Copyright considerations may not shield a work against adverse criticism.

Other factors
As explained by Judge Leval, courts are permitted to include additional factors in their analysis. [6]
One such factor is acknowledgement of the copyrighted source. Giving the name of the photographer or author may help, but it does not automatically make a use fair. While plagiarism and copyright infringement are related matters, they are not identical. Plagiarism (using someone's words, ideas, images, etc. without acknowledgment) is a matter of professional ethics. Copyright is a matter of law, and protects exact expression, not ideas. One can plagiarize even a work that is not protected by copyright, for example by passing off a line from Shakespeare as one's own. Conversely, attribution prevents accusations of plagiarism, but it does not prevent infringement of copyright. For example, reprinting a copyrighted book without permission, while citing the original author, would be copyright infringement but not plagiarism.

U.S. fair use procedure and practice
The U.S. Supreme Court described fair use as an affirmative defense in Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc. [7] This means that in litigation on copyright infringement, the defendant bears the burden of raising and proving that the use was fair and not an infringement. Thus, fair use need not even be raised as a defense unless the plaintiff first shows (or the defendant concedes) a " prima facie " case of copyright infringement. If the work was not copyrightable, the term had expired, or the defendant's work borrowed only a small amount , for instance, then the plaintiff cannot make out a prima facie case of infringement, and the defendant need not even raise the fair use defense. In addition, fair use is only one of many limitations, exceptions, and defenses to copyright infringement. Thus, a prima facie case can be defeated without relying on fair use. For instance, the Audio Home Recording Act establishes that it is legal, using certain technologies, to make copies of audio recordings for non-commercial personal use. [20]
Some copyright owners claim infringement even in circumstances where the fair use defense would likely succeed, in hopes that the user will refrain from the use rather than spending resources in their defense. Strategic lawsuit against public participation (SLAPP) cases such as these—alleging copyright infringement, patent infringement, defamation, or libel—often come into conflict with the defendant's right to freedom of speech , and has prompted some jurisdictions to pass anti-SLAPP legislation which raises the plaintiff's burdens and risk.
Although fair use ostensibly permits certain uses without liability, many content creators and publishers try to avoid a potential court battle by seeking a legally unnecessary license from copyright owners for any use of non-public domain material, even in situations where a fair use defense would likely succeed. The simple reason is that the license terms negotiated with the copyright owner may be much less expensive than defending against a copyright suit, or having the mere possibility of a lawsuit threaten the publication of a work in which a publisher has invested significant resources.
Fair use rights take precedence over the author's interest. Thus the copyright holder cannot use a non-binding disclaimer, or notification, to revoke the right of fair use on works. However, binding agreements such as contracts or licence agreements may take precedence over fair use rights. [21]
The practical effect of the fair use doctrine is that a number of conventional uses of copyrighted works are not considered infringing. For instance, quoting from a copyrighted work in order to criticize or comment upon it or teach students about it, is considered a fair use. Certain well-established uses cause few problems. A teacher who prints a few copies of a poem to illustrate a technique will have no problem on all four of the above factors (except possibly on amount and substantiality), but some cases are not so clear. All the factors are considered and balanced in each case: a book reviewer who quotes a paragraph as an example of the author's style will probably fall under fair use even though they may sell their review commercially; but a non-profit educational website that reproduces whole articles from technical magazines will probably be found to infringe if the publisher can demonstrate that the website affects the market for the magazine, even though the website itself is non-commercial.
Fair use is decided on a case by case basis, on the entirety of circumstances. The same act done by different means or for a different purpose can gain or lose fair use status. Even repeating an identical act at a different time can make a difference due to changing social, technological, or other surrounding circumstances. [8] [22]

Fair use in particular areas

Fair use and text and data mining
The transformative nature of computer based analytical processes such as text mining , web mining and data mining has led many to form the view that such uses would be protected under fair use. This view was substantiated by the rulings of Judge Denny Chin in Authors Guild, Inc. v. Google, Inc. , a case involving mass digitisation of millions of books from research library collections. As part of the ruling that found the book digitisation project was fair use, the judge stated "Google Books is also transformative in the sense that it has transformed book text into data for purposes of substantive research, including data mining and text mining in new areas". [23] [24]
Text and data mining was subject to further review in Authors Guild v. HathiTrust , a case derived from the same digitization project mentioned above. Judge Harold Baer , in finding that the defendant's uses were transformative, stated that 'the search capabilities of the [HathiTrust Digital Library] have already given rise to new methods of academic inquiry such as text mining." [25] [26]

Fair use and parody
Producers or creators of parodies of a copyrighted work have been sued for infringement by the targets of their ridicule, even though such use may be protected as fair use. These fair use cases distinguish between parodies, which use a work in order to poke fun at or comment on the work itself and satire , or comment on something else. Courts have been more willing to grant fair use protections to parodies than to satires, but the ultimate outcome in either circumstance will turn on the application of the four fair use factors.
For example, when Tom Forsythe appropriated Barbie dolls for his photography project "Food Chain Barbie" (depicting several copies of the doll naked and disheveled and about to be baked in an oven, blended in a food mixer, and the like), Mattel lost its copyright infringement lawsuit against him because his work effectively parodies Barbie and the values she represents. [27] In Rogers v. Koons , Jeff Koons tried to justify his appropriation of Art Rogers' photograph "Puppies" in his sculpture "String of Puppies" with the same parody defense. He lost because his work was not presented as a parody of Rogers' photograph in particular, but as a satire of society at large. This was insufficient to render the use fair. [28]
In Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music Inc [7] the U.S. Supreme Court recognized parody as a potential fair use, even when done for profit. Roy Orbison 's publisher, Acuff-Rose Music , had sued 2 Live Crew in 1989 for their use of Orbison's " Oh, Pretty Woman " in a mocking rap version with altered lyrics. The Supreme Court viewed 2 Live Crew's version as a ridiculing commentary on the earlier work, and ruled that when the parody was itself the product rather than mere advertising, commercial nature did not bar the defense. The Campbell court also distinguished parodies from satire , which they described as a broader social critique not intrinsically tied to ridicule of a specific work and so not deserving of the same use exceptions as parody because the satirist's ideas are capable of expression without the use of the other particular work.
A number of appellate decisions have recognized that a parody may be a protected fair use, including the Second ( Leibovitz v. Paramount Pictures Corp. ); the Ninth ( Mattel v. Walking Mountain Productions ); and the Eleventh Circuits ( Suntrust Bank v. Houghton Mifflin Co. ). In the 2001 Suntrust Bank case, Suntrust Bank and the Margaret Mitchell estate unsuccessfully brought suit to halt the publication of The Wind Done Gone , which reused many of the characters and situations from Gone with the Wind but told the events from the point of view of the enslaved people rather than the slaveholders. The Eleventh Circuit , applying Campbell , found that The Wind Done Gone was fair use and vacated the district court's injunction against its publication.
Cases in which a satirical use was found to be fair include Blanch v. Koons and Williams v. Columbia Broadcasting Systems . [8]

Fair use on the Internet
A U.S. court case from 2003, Kelly v. Arriba Soft Corp. , provides and develops the relationship between thumbnails , inline linking and fair use. In the lower District Court case on a motion for summary judgment , Arriba Soft's use of thumbnail pictures and inline linking from Kelly's website in Arriba Soft's image search engine was found not to be fair use. That decision was appealed and contested by Internet rights activists such as the Electronic Frontier Foundation , who argued that it was fair use.
On appeal, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals found in favour of the defendant, Arriba Soft. In reaching its decision, the court utilized the statutory four-factor analysis. First, it found the purpose of creating the thumbnail images as previews to be sufficiently transformative, noting that they were not meant to be viewed at high resolution as the original artwork was. Second, the photographs had already been published, diminishing the significance of their nature as creative works. Third, although normally making a "full" replication of a copyrighted work may appear to violate copyright, here it was found to be reasonable and necessary in light of the intended use. Lastly, the court found that the market for the original photographs would not be substantially diminished by the creation of the thumbnails. To the contrary, the thumbnail searches could increase the exposure of the originals. In looking at all these factors as a whole, the court found that the thumbnails were fair use and remanded the case to the lower court for trial after issuing a revised opinion on July 7, 2003. The remaining issues were resolved with a default judgment after Arriba Soft had experienced significant financial problems and failed to reach a negotiated settlement.
In August 2008, Judge Jeremy Fogel of the Northern District of California ruled in Lenz v. Universal Music Corp. that copyright holders cannot order a deletion of an online file without determining whether that posting reflected "fair use" of the copyrighted material. The case involved Stephanie Lenz, a writer and editor from Gallitzin, Pennsylvania , who made a home video of her thirteen-month-old son dancing to Prince's song Let's Go Crazy and posted the video on YouTube . Four months later, Universal Music , the owner of the copyright to the song, ordered YouTube to remove the video under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act . Lenz notified YouTube immediately that her video was within the scope of fair use, and she demanded that it be restored. YouTube complied after six weeks, rather than the two weeks required by the Digital Millennium Copyright Act . Lenz then sued Universal Music in California for her legal costs, claiming the music company had acted in bad faith by ordering removal of a video that represented fair use of the song. [29] On appeal, the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled that a copyright owner must affirmatively consider whether the complained of conduct constituted fair use before sending a takedown notice under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act , rather than waiting for the alleged infringer to assert fair use. 801 F.3d 1126 (9th Cir. 2015). "Even if, as Universal urges, fair use is classified as an 'affirmative defense,' we hold—for the purposes of the DMCA—fair use is uniquely situated in copyright law so as to be treated differently than traditional affirmative defenses. We conclude that because 17 U.S.C. § 107 created a type of non-infringing use, fair use is “authorized by the law” and a copyright holder must consider the existence of fair use before sending a takedown notification under § 512(c)."
In June 2011, Judge Philip Pro of the District of Nevada ruled in Righthaven v. Hoehn that the posting of an entire editorial article from the Las Vegas Review Journal in a comment as part of an online discussion was unarguably fair use. Judge Pro noted that "Noncommercial, nonprofit use is presumptively fair. ... Hoehn posted the Work as part of an online discussion. ... This purpose is consistent with comment, for which 17 U.S.C. § 107 provides fair use protection. ... It is undisputed that Hoehn posted the entire work in his comment on the Website. … wholesale copying does not preclude a finding of fair use. ... there is no genuine issue of material fact that Hoehn’s use of the Work was fair and summary judgment is appropriate." [30] On appeal, the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled that Righthaven did not even have the standing needed to sue Hoehn for copyright infringement in the first place. [31]

Fair use and reverse engineering
There is a substantial body of fair use law regarding reverse engineering of computer software , hardware , network protocols , encryption and access control systems. [32] [33]

Fair use and file sharing
In 2009, fair use appeared as a defense in lawsuits against filesharing . Charles Nesson argued that file-sharing qualifies as fair use in his defense of alleged filesharer Joel Tenenbaum . [34] Kiwi Camara , defending alleged filesharer Jammie Thomas , announced a similar defense. [35] However, the Court in the case at bar rejected the idea that file-sharing is fair use. [36]

Fair use and professional communities
In addition to considering the four fair use factors, courts deciding fair use cases also look to the standards and practices of the professional community where the case comes from. [37] Among the communities are documentarians, [38] librarians, [39] makers of Open Courseware, visual art educators, [40] and communications professors. [41]
Such codes of best practices have permitted communities of practice to make more informed risk assessments in employing fair use in their daily practice. [42] For instance, broadcasters, cablecasters, and distributors typically require filmmakers to obtain errors and omissions insurance before the distributor will take on the film. Such insurance protects against errors and omissions made during the copyright clearance of material in the film. Before the Documentary Filmmakers' Statement of Best Practices in Fair Use was created in 2005, it was nearly impossible to obtain errors and omissions insurance for copyright clearance work that relied in part on fair use. This meant documentarians had either to obtain a license for the material or to cut it from their films. In many cases, it was impossible to license the material because the filmmaker sought to use it in a critical way. Soon after the best practices statement was released, all errors and omissions insurers in the U.S. shifted to begin offering routine fair use coverage. [43]

Fair use and music sampling
Before 1991, sampling in certain genres of music was accepted practice and the copyright considerations were viewed as largely irrelevant. The strict decision against rapper Biz Markie 's appropriation of a Gilbert O'Sullivan song in the case Grand Upright Music, Ltd. v. Warner Bros. Records Inc. [22] changed practices and opinions overnight. Samples now had to be licensed, as long as they rose "to a level of legally cognizable appropriation." [44] This left the door open for the de minimis doctrine, for short or unrecognizable samples; such uses would not rise to the level of copyright infringement, because under the de minimis doctrine, "the law does not care about trifles." However, 3 years later, the Sixth Circuit effectively eliminated the de minimis doctrine in the Bridgeport Music, Inc. v. Dimension Films case, holding that artists must "get a license or do not sample". [45] The Court later clarified that its opinion did not apply to fair use, but between Grand Upright and Bridgeport , practice had effectively shifted to eliminate unlicensed sampling.

Fair use and social media
In May 2015, Richard Prince displayed his art gallery at the Frieze Art Fair. His gallery consisted of screenshots of Instagram users’ pictures with Prince’s commentary photoshopped below in the comments section. Not one Instagram user authorized Prince to use their pictures, but because Prince added his own commentary, the pictures were considered original artwork. One of the pieces sold for $90,000. Further, the Gagosian Gallery , where the pictures were showcased stated that "All images are subject to copyright." [46]

Influence internationally
While U.S. fair use law has been influential in some countries, some countries have fair use criteria drastically different from those in the U.S., and some countries do not have a fair use framework at all. Some countries have the concept of fair dealing instead of fair use, while others use different systems of limitations and exceptions to copyright . Many countries have some reference to an exemption for educational use, though the extent of this exemption varies widely. [47]
Sources differ on whether fair use is fully recognized by countries other than the United States. American University 's infojustice.org published a compilation of portions of over 40 nations' laws that explicitly mention fair use or fair dealing, and asserts that some of the fair dealing laws, such as Canada's, have evolved (such as through judicial precedents) to be quite close to those of the United States. This compilation includes fair use provisions from Bangladesh, Israel, South Korea, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Uganda, and the United States. [48] However, Paul Geller's 1999 International Copyright Law and Practice says that while some other countries recognize similar exceptions to copyright, only the United States and Israel fully recognize the concept of fair use. [49]

Fair use

Israel
In November 2007, the Israeli Knesset passed a new Copyright Law that included a U.S.-style fair use exception. The law, which took effect in May 2008, permits the fair use of copyrighted works for purposes such as private study, research, criticism, review, news reporting, quotation, or instruction or testing by an educational institution. The law sets up four factors, similar to the U.S. fair use factors (see above), for determining whether a use is fair. [50]
On September 2, 2009, the Tel Aviv District court ruled in The Football Association Premier League Ltd. v. Ploni [51] that fair use is a user right. The court also ruled that streaming of live soccer games on the Internet is fair use. In doing so, the court analyzed the four fair use factors adopted in 2007 and cited U.S. case law, including Kelly v. Arriba Soft Corp. and Perfect 10, Inc. v. Amazon.com, Inc. . [52]

Poland
Fair use exists in Polish law and is covered by the Polish copyright law articles 23 to 35. [53]
Compared to the United States, Polish fair use distinguishes between private and public use. In Poland, when the use is public, its use risks fines. The defendant must also prove that his use was private when accused that it was not, or that other mitigating circumstances apply. Finally, Polish law treats all cases in which private material was made public as a potential copyright infringement, where fair use can apply, but has to be proven by reasonable circumstances. [54] [55]

South Korea
The Korean Copyright Act was amended to include a fair use provision, Article 35-3, in 2012. The law now states that, "the copyrighted work may be used, among other things, for reporting, criticism, education, and research." [56] Then, the law outlines a four-factor test similar to that used under U.S. law:

Fair dealing
Fair dealing allows specific exceptions to copyright protections. The open-ended concept of fair use is generally not observed in jurisdictions where fair dealing is in place, although this does vary. [48] Fair dealing is established in legislation in Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Singapore, India, South Africa and the United Kingdom, among others. [48]

Australia
While Australian copyright exceptions are based on the Fair Dealing system, Since 1998 a series of Australian government inquiries have examined, and in most cases recommended, the introduction of a "flexible and open" Fair Use system into Australian copyright law. From 1998 to 2017 there have been eight Australian government inquiries which have considered the question of whether fair use should be adopted in Australia. Six reviews have recommended Australia adopt a "Fair Use" model of copyright exceptions: [57] [58] two enquiries specifically into the Copyright Act (1998, 2014); and four broader reviews (both 2004, 2013, 2016). One review (2000) recommended against the introduction of fair use and another (2005) issued no final report. [59] Two of the recommendations were specifically in response to the stricter copyright rules introduced as part of the Australia–United States Free Trade Agreement (AUSFTA), while the most recent two, by the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) and the Productivity Commission (PC) were with reference to strengthening Australia's "digital economy".

Canada
The Copyright Act of Canada establishes fair dealing in Canada, which allows specific exceptions to copyright protection. In 1985, the Sub-Committee on the Revision of Copyright rejected replacing fair dealing with an open-ended system, and in 1986 the Canadian government agreed that "the present fair dealing provisions should not be replaced by the substantially wider 'fair use' concept". [60] Since then, the Canadian fair dealing exception has broadened. It is now similar in effect to U.S. fair use, even though the frameworks are different. [61]
CCH Canadian Ltd v. Law Society of Upper Canada [2004] 1 S.C.R. 339, 2004 SCC 13 is a landmark Supreme Court of Canada case that establishes the bounds of fair dealing in Canadian copyright law . The Law Society of Upper Canada was sued for copyright infringement for providing photocopy services to researchers. The Court unanimously held that the Law Society's practice fell within the bounds of fair dealing.

United Kingdom

Policy arguments about fair use

The economic benefit of fair use
A balanced copyright law provides an economic benefit to many high-tech businesses such as search engines and software developers. Fair use is also crucial to non-technology industries such as insurance, legal services, and newspaper publishers. [62] On September 12, 2007, the Computer and Communications Industry Association (CCIA), [62] a group representing companies including Google Inc., Microsoft Inc., [63] Oracle Corporation , Sun Microsystems , Yahoo! [64] and other high-tech companies, released a study that found that fair use exceptions to US copyright laws were responsible for more than $4.5 trillion in annual revenue for the United States economy representing one-sixth of the total US GDP . [62] The study was conducted using a methodology developed by the World Intellectual Property Organization . [62] The study found that fair use dependent industries are directly responsible for more than eighteen percent of US economic growth and nearly eleven million American jobs. [62] "As the United States economy becomes increasingly knowledge-based, the concept of fair use can no longer be discussed and legislated in the abstract. It is the very foundation of the digital age and a cornerstone of our economy," said Ed Black, President and CEO of CCIA. [62] "Much of the unprecedented economic growth of the past ten years can actually be credited to the doctrine of fair use, as the Internet itself depends on the ability to use content in a limited and unlicensed manner." [62]

Fair Use Week
Fair Use Week is an international event that celebrates fair use and fair dealing. [65] Fair Use Week was first proposed on a Fair Use Allies listserv, which was an outgrowth of the Library Code of Best Practices Capstone Event, celebrating the development and promulgation of ARL ’s Code of Best Practices in Fair Use for Academic and Research Libraries . While the idea was not taken up nationally, Kyle K. Courtney , Copyright Advisor at Harvard University , launched the first ever Fair Use Week at Harvard University in February 2014, with a full week of activities celebrating fair use. The first Fair Use Week included blog posts from national and international fair use experts, live fair use panels, fair use workshops, and a Fair Use Stories Tumblr blog, [66] where people from the world of art, music, film, and academia shared stories about the importance of fair use to their community. [67] The first Fair Use Week was so successful that in 2015 ARL teamed up with Courtney and helped organize the Second Annual Fair Use Week, with participation from many more institutions. [68] ARL also launched an official Fair Use Week website, which was transferred from Pia Hunter , who attended the Library Code of Best Practices Capstone Event and had originally purchased the domain name fairuseweek.org. [65]

See also
WebPage index: 00046
Academic studies about Wikipedia
Ever since Wikipedia was a few years old, there have been numerous academic studies about Wikipedia in peer-reviewed publications. This research can be grouped into two categories. The first analyzed the production and reliability of the encyclopedia content, while the second investigated social aspects, such as usage and administration. Such studies are greatly facilitated by the fact that Wikipedia 's database can be downloaded without help from the site owner. [1]

Content

Production

A minority of editors produce the majority of persistent content
In a landmark peer-reviewed paper, [2] also mentioned in The Guardian , [3] a team of six researchers from the University of Minnesota measured the relationship between editors' edit count and the editors' ability to convey their writings to Wikipedia readers, measured in terms of persistent word views (PWV)—the number of times a word introduced by an edit is viewed. The accounting method is best described using the author's own words: "each time an article is viewed, each of its words is also viewed. When a word written by editor X is viewed, he or she is credited with one PWV." The number of times an article was viewed was estimated from the web server logs.
The researchers analyzed 25 trillion PWVs attributable to registered users in the interval September 1, 2002 − October 31, 2006. At the end of this period, the top 10% of editors (by edit count) were credited with 86% of PWVs, the top 1% about 70%, and the top 0.1% (4200 users) were attributed 44% of PWVs, i.e. nearly half of Wikipedia's "value" as measured in this study. The top 10 editors (by PWV) contributed only 2.6% of PWVs, and only three of them were in top 50 by edit count. From the data, the study authors derived the following relationship:
The study also analyzed the impact of bots on content. By edit count, bots dominate Wikipedia; 9 of the top 10 and 20 of the top 50 are bots. In contrast, in the PWV ranking only two bots appear in the top 50, and none in the top 10.
Based on the steady growth of the influence on those top 0.1% editors by PWV, the study concluded unequivocally:

Work distribution and social strata
A peer-reviewed paper noted the " social stratification in the Wikipedia society" due to the "admins class". The paper suggested that such stratification could be beneficial in some respects but recognized a "clear subsequent shift in power among levels of stratification" due to the "status and power differentials" between administrators and other editors. [4]
Analyzing the entire edit history of Wikipedia up to July 2006, the same study determined that the influence of administrator edits on contents has steadily diminished since 2003, when administrators performed roughly 50% of total edits, to 2006 when only 10% of the edits were performed by administrators. This happened despite the fact that the average number of edits per administrator had increased more than fivefold during the same period. This phenomenon was labeled the "rise of the crowd" by the authors of the paper. An analysis that used as metric the number of words edited instead of the number of edit actions showed a similar pattern. Because the admin class is somewhat arbitrary with respect to the number of edits, the study also considered a breakdown of users in categories based on the number of edits performed. The results for "elite users", i.e. users with more than 10,000 edits, were somewhat in line with those obtained for administrators, except that "the number of words changed by elite users has kept up with the changes made by novice users, even though the number of edits made by novice users has grown proportionally faster". The elite users were attributed about 30% of the changes for 2006. The study concludes:

Reliability
Jean Goodwin has assessed whether trust in Wikipedia is based on epistemic or pragmatic merits. While readers may not assess the actual knowledge and expertise of the authors of a given article, they may assess the contributors' passion for the project, and communicative design through which that passion is made manifest, and provide a reason for trust. [5]

Geography
Wikipedia articles cover about half a million places on Earth. However, research conducted by the Oxford Internet Institute has shown that the geographic distribution of articles is highly uneven. Most articles are written about North America, Europe, and East Asia, with very little coverage of large parts of the developing world, including most of Africa. [6]

Natural language processing
The textual content and the structured hierarchy of Wikipedia has become an important knowledge source for researchers in natural language processing and artificial intelligence . In 2007 researchers at Technion – Israel Institute of Technology developed a technique called Explicit Semantic Analysis [7] which uses the world knowledge contained in Wikipedia articles. Conceptual representations of words and texts are created automatically and used to compute the similarity between words and texts.
Researchers at Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing Lab use the linguistic and world knowledge encoded in Wikipedia and Wiktionary to automatically create linguistic knowledge bases which are similar to expert-built resources like WordNet . [8] Strube and Ponzetto created an algorithm to identify relationships among words by traversing Wikipedia via its categorization scheme, and concluded that Wikipedia had created "a taxonomy able to compete with WordNet on linguistic processing tasks." [9]

Critiques of content fields

Health information
Health information on Wikipedia is popularly accessed as results from search engines and Search engine result page , which frequently deliver links to Wikipedia articles. [10] Independent assessments of the quality of health information provided on Wikipedia and of who is accessing the information have been undertaken. The number and demographics of people who seek health information on Wikipedia, the scope of health information on Wikipedia, and the quality of the information on Wikipedia have been studied. [11] There are drawbacks to using Wikipedia as a source of health information.

Social aspects

Demographics
A 2007 study by Hitwise , reproduced in Time magazine, [12] found that visitors to Wikipedia are almost equally split 50/50 male/female, but that 60% of edits are made by male editors.
WikiWarMonitor which is part of the European Commission , CORDIS FP7 FET-Open supported project called ICTeCollective, have published:
in 2011 in IEEE Xplore "Edit wars in Wikipedia" for IEEE Third International Conference on Social Computing (SocialCom). [13]
In 2012 in PLoS ONE , it reported that based on circadian activity pattern analysis, the shares of contributions to English Wikipedia, from North America and Europe are almost equal, whereas this increases to 75% of European contributions for the Simple English Wikipedia . The research also covers some other demographic analysis on the other editions in different languages. [14]
In 2013 in Physical Review Letters "Opinions, Conflicts, and Consensus: Modeling Social Dynamics in a Collaborative Environment". [15]
In 2014 published as a book "The Most Controversial Topics in Wikipedia: A Multilingual and Geographical Analysis"; analysed the volume of editing of articles in various language versions of Wikipedia in order to establish the most controversial topics in different languages and groups of languages. For the English version, the top three most controversial articles were George W. Bush , Anarchism and Muhammad . Topics in other languages causing most controversy were Croatia (German), Ségolène Royal (French), Chile (Spanish) and Homosexuality (Czech). [16]

Policies and guidelines
A descriptive study [17] that analyzed English language Wikipedia's policies and guidelines up to September 2007 identified a number of key statistics:
Even a short policy like "ignore all rules" was found to have generated a lot of discussion and clarifications:
The study sampled the expansion of some key policies since their inception:
The number for "deletion" was considered inconclusive however because the policy was split in several sub-policies.

Power plays
A 2007 joint peer-reviewed study [18] conducted by researchers from the University of Washington and HP Labs examined how policies are employed and how contributors work towards consensus by quantitatively analyzing a sample of active talk pages. Using a November 2006 database dump, the study focused on 250 talk pages in the tail of the distribution: 0.3% of all talk pages, but containing 28.4% of all talk page revisions, and more significantly, containing 51.1% of all links to policies. From the sampled pages' histories, the study examined only the months with high activity, called critical sections—sets of consecutive months where both article and talk page revisions were significant in number.
The study defined and calculated a measure of policy prevalence. A critical section was considered policy-laden if its policy factor was at least twice the average. Articles were tagged with 3 indicator variables :
All possible levels of these three factors yielded 8 sampling categories. The study intended to analyze 9 critical sections from each sampling category, but only 69 critical sections could be selected because only 6 articles (histories) were simultaneously featured, controversial, and policy laden.
The study found that policies were by no means consistently applied. Illustrative of its broader findings, the report presented the following two extracts from Wikipedia talk pages in obvious contrast:
Claiming that such ambiguities easily give rise to power plays, the study identified, using the methods of grounded theory (Strauss) , 7 types of power plays:
Due to lack of space, the study detailed only the first 4 types of power plays that were exercised by merely interpreting policy. A fifth power play category was analyzed; it consisted of blatant violations of policy that were forgiven because the contributor was valued for his contributions despite his lack of respect for rules.

Article scope
The study considers that Wikipedia's policies are ambiguous on scoping issues. The following vignette is used to illustrate the claim:
The study gives the following interpretation for the heated debate:

Prior consensus
The study remarks that in Wikipedia consensus is never final, and what constitutes consensus can change at any time. The study finds that this temporal ambiguity is fertile ground for power plays, and places the generational struggle over consensus in larger picture of the struggle for article ownership:
The study uses the following discussion snippet to illustrate this continuous struggle:

Power of interpretation
A vignette illustrated how administrators overrode consensus and deleted personal accounts of user/patients suffering from an anonimized illness (named Frupism in the study). The administrator's intervention happened as the article was being nominated to become as a featured article.

Legitimacy of contributor
This type of power play is illustrated by a contributor (U24) that draws on his past contributions to argue against another contributor who is accusing U24 of being unproductive and disruptive:

Explicit vie for ownership
The study finds that there are contributors who consistently and successfully violate policy without sanction:

Obtaining administratorship
Researchers from Carnegie Mellon University devised [19] a probit model of editors who have successfully passed the peer review process to become admins . Using only Wikipedia metadata, including the text of edit summaries, their model is 74.8% accurate in predicting successful candidates.
The paper observed that despite protestations to the contrary, "in many ways election to admin is a promotion, distinguishing an elite core group from the large mass of editors." Consequently, the paper used policy capture [20] —a method that compares nominally important attributes to those that actually lead to promotion in a work environment.
The overall success rate for promotion was 53%, dropping from 75% in 2005 to 42% in 2006 and 2007. This sudden increase in failure rate was attributed to a higher standard that recently promoted administrators had to meet, and supported by anecdotal evidence from another recent study [21] quoting some early admins who have expressed doubt that they would pass muster if their election (RfA) were held recently. In light of these developments the study argued that:
Significant factors affecting RfA outcome, numbers in parentheses are not statistically significant at p<.05 :
Contrary to expectations perhaps, "running" for administrator multiple times is detrimental to the candidate's chance of success. Each subsequent attempt has a 14.8% lower chance of success than the previous one. Length of participation in the project makes only a small contribution to the chance of a successful RfA.
Another significant finding of the paper is that one Wikipedia policy edit or WikiProject edit is worth ten article edits. A related observation is that candidates with experience in multiple areas of the site stood better chance of election. This was measured by the diversity score , a simple count of the number of areas that the editor has participated in. The paper divided Wikipedia in 16 areas: article, article talk, articles/categories/templates for deletion (XfD), (un)deletion review, etc. (see paper for full list). For instance, a user who has edited articles, her own user page, and posted once at (un)deletion review would have a diversity score of 3. Making a single edit in any additional region of Wikipedia correlated with a 2.8% increased likelihood of success in gaining administratorship.
Making minor edits also helped, although the study authors consider that this may be so because minor edits correlate with experience. In contrast, each edit to an Arbitration or Mediation committee page, or a Wikiquette notice, all of which are venues for dispute resolution, decreases the likelihood of success by 0.1%. Posting messages to administrator noticeboards had a similarly deleterious effect. The study interpreted this as evidence that editors involved in escalating or protracted conflicts lower their chances of becoming administrators.
Saying "thanks" or variations thereof in edit summaries, and pointing out point of view ("POV") issues (also only in edit summaries because the study only analyzed metadata) were of minor benefit, contributing to 0.3% and 0.1% to candidate's chances in 2006–2007, but did not reach statistical significance before.
A few factors that were found to be irrelevant or marginal at best:
The study suggests that some of the 25% unexplained variability in outcomes may be due to factors that were not measured, such as quality of edits or participation in off-site coordination, such as the (explicitly cited) secret mailing list reported in The Register . [23] The paper concludes:
Subsequent research by another group [26] probed the sensemaking activities of individuals during their contributions to RfA decisions. This work establishes that decisions about RfA candidates is based on a shared interpretation of evidence in the wiki and histories of prior interactions.

Machine learning
Automated semantic knowledge extraction using machine learning algorithms is used to "extract machine-processable information at a relatively low complexity cost". [27] DBpedia uses structured content extracted from infoboxes by machine learning algorithms to create a resource of linked data in a Semantic Web . [28]

Wikipedia view statistics and movie revenue
In a study published in PLoS ONE [29] researchers from Oxford Internet Institute and Central European University have shown that the page view statistics of articles about movies are well correlated with the box office revenue of them. They developed a mathematical model to predict the box office takings by analysing the page view counts as well as number of edits and unique editors of the Wikipedia pages on movies. [30] [31] In a related work published in Scientific Reports in 2013, [32] Helen Susannah Moat , Tobias Preis and colleagues demonstrated a link between changes in the number of views of Wikipedia articles relating to financial topics and subsequent large stock market moves. [33] [34]
WebPage index: 00047
The Journal of Academic Librarianship
The Journal of Academic Librarianship is a peer-reviewed academic journal that covers all topics dealing with academic libraries . The journal publishes book reviews , analytical articles, and bibliographic essays. It was established in 1975 and is published by Elsevier . The title is included in Magazines for Libraries . [1]

History
The Journal of Academic Librarianship was first published in March 1975 and has been a bimonthly publication ever since. It was initially edited by Richard M. Dougherty and William H. Webb . The current editor-in-chief is Elizabeth Blakesley ( Washington State University ).

Abstracting and indexing
The journal is abstracted and indexed in:
According to the Journal Citation Reports , the journal has a 2012 impact factor of 0.885. [2]
WebPage index: 00048
Confidence interval
In statistics , a confidence interval ( CI ) is a type of interval estimate (of a population parameter ) that is computed from the observed data. The confidence level is the frequency (i.e., the proportion) of confidence intervals that contain the true value of their corresponding parameter. In other words, if confidence intervals are constructed using a given confidence level in an infinite number of independent experiments, the proportion of those intervals that contain the true value of the parameter will match the confidence level. [1] [2] [3]
Confidence intervals consist of a range of values (interval) that act as good estimates of the unknown population parameter . However, the interval computed from a particular sample does not necessarily include the true value of the parameter. Since the observed data are random samples from the true population, the confidence interval obtained from the data is also random. If a corresponding hypothesis test is performed, the confidence level is the complement of the level of significance , i.e. a 95% confidence interval reflects a significance level of 0.05. [4] Confidence intervals of difference parameters not containing 0 imply that there is a statistically significant difference between the populations.
The desired level of confidence is set by the researcher (not determined by data). Most commonly, the 95% confidence level is used. [5] However, other confidence levels can be used, for example, 90% and 99%.
Factors affecting the width of the confidence interval include the size of the sample, the confidence level, and the variability in the sample. A larger sample size normally will lead to a better estimate of the population parameter.
Confidence intervals were introduced to statistics by Jerzy Neyman in a paper published in 1937. [3]

Conceptual basis

Introduction
Interval estimates can be contrasted with point estimates . A point estimate is a single value given as the estimate of a population parameter that is of interest, for example, the mean of some quantity. An interval estimate specifies instead a range within which the parameter is estimated to lie. Confidence intervals are commonly reported in tables or graphs along with point estimates of the same parameters, to show the reliability of the estimates.
For example, a confidence interval can be used to describe how reliable survey results are. In a poll of election–voting intentions, the result might be that 40% of respondents intend to vote for a certain party. A 99% confidence interval for the proportion in the whole population having the same intention on the survey might be 30% to 50%. From the same data one may calculate a 90% confidence interval, which in this case might be 37% to 43%. A major factor determining the length of a confidence interval is the size of the sample used in the estimation procedure, for example, the number of people taking part in a survey.

Meaning and interpretation
For users of frequentist methods , various interpretations of a confidence interval can be given (taking the 90% confidence interval as an example in the following).
In each of the above, the following applies: If the true value of the parameter lies outside the 90% confidence interval once it has been calculated, then a sampling event has occurred which had a probability of 10% (or less) of happening by chance.

Misunderstandings
Confidence intervals are frequently misunderstood, and published studies have shown that even professional scientists often misinterpret them. [7] [8] [9] [10]

Philosophical issues
The principle behind confidence intervals was formulated to provide an answer to the question raised in statistical inference of how to deal with the uncertainty inherent in results derived from data that are themselves only a randomly selected subset of a population. There are other answers, notably that provided by Bayesian inference in the form of credible intervals . Confidence intervals correspond to a chosen rule for determining the confidence bounds, where this rule is essentially determined before any data are obtained, or before an experiment is done. The rule is defined such that over all possible datasets that might be obtained, there is a high probability ("high" is specifically quantified) that the interval determined by the rule will include the true value of the quantity under consideration. The Bayesian approach appears to offer intervals that can, subject to acceptance of an interpretation of "probability" as Bayesian probability , be interpreted as meaning that the specific interval calculated from a given dataset has a particular probability of including the true value, conditional on the data and other information available. The confidence interval approach does not allow this since in this formulation and at this same stage, both the bounds of the interval and the true values are fixed values, and there is no randomness involved. On the other hand, the Bayesian approach is only as valid as the prior probability used in the computation, whereas the confidence interval does not depend on assumptions about the prior probability.
The questions concerning how an interval expressing uncertainty in an estimate might be formulated, and of how such intervals might be interpreted, are not strictly mathematical problems and are philosophically problematic. [14] Mathematics can take over once the basic principles of an approach to 'inference' have been established, but it has only a limited role in saying why one approach should be preferred to another: For example, a confidence level of 95% is often used in the biological sciences , but this is a matter of convention or arbitration. In the physical sciences , a much higher level may be used. [15]

Relationship with other statistical topics

Statistical hypothesis testing
Confidence intervals are closely related to statistical significance testing . For example, if for some estimated parameter θ one wants to test the null hypothesis that θ = 0 against the alternative that θ ≠ 0, then this test can be performed by determining whether the confidence interval for θ contains 0.
More generally, given the availability of a hypothesis testing procedure that can test the null hypothesis θ = θ 0 against the alternative that θ ≠ θ 0 for any value of θ 0 , then a confidence interval with confidence level γ = 1 − α can be defined as containing any number θ 0 for which the corresponding null hypothesis is not rejected at significance level α . [16]
If the estimates of two parameters (for example, the mean values of a variable in two independent groups) have confidence intervals that do not overlap, then the difference between the two values is more significant than indicated by the individual values of α . [17] So, this "test" is too conservative and can lead to a result that is more significant than the individual values of α would indicate. If two confidence intervals overlap, the two means still may be significantly different. [18] [19] [20] Accordingly, and consistent with the Mantel-Haenszel Chi-squared test , is a proposed fix whereby one reduces the error bounds for the two means by multiplying them by the square root of ½ (0.707107) before making the comparison. [21]
While the formulations of the notions of confidence intervals and of statistical hypothesis testing are distinct, they are in some senses related and to some extent complementary. While not all confidence intervals are constructed in this way, one general purpose approach to constructing confidence intervals is to define a 100(1 − α )% confidence interval to consist of all those values θ 0 for which a test of the hypothesis θ = θ 0 is not rejected at a significance level of 100α%. Such an approach may not always be available since it presupposes the practical availability of an appropriate significance test. Naturally, any assumptions required for the significance test would carry over to the confidence intervals.
It may be convenient to make the general correspondence that parameter values within a confidence interval are equivalent to those values that would not be rejected by a hypothesis test, but this would be dangerous. In many instances the confidence intervals that are quoted are only approximately valid, perhaps derived from "plus or minus twice the standard error," and the implications of this for the supposedly corresponding hypothesis tests are usually unknown.
It is worth noting that the confidence interval for a parameter is not the same as the acceptance region of a test for this parameter, as is sometimes thought. The confidence interval is part of the parameter space, whereas the acceptance region is part of the sample space. For the same reason, the confidence level is not the same as the complementary probability of the level of significance. [ further explanation needed ]

Confidence region
Confidence regions generalize the confidence interval concept to deal with multiple quantities. Such regions can indicate not only the extent of likely sampling errors but can also reveal whether (for example) it is the case that if the estimate for one quantity is unreliable, then the other is also likely to be unreliable.

Confidence band
A confidence band is used in statistical analysis to represent the uncertainty in an estimate of a curve or function based on limited or noisy data. Similarly, a prediction band is used to represent the uncertainty about the value of a new data point on the curve, but subject to noise. Confidence and prediction bands are often used as part of the graphical presentation of results of a regression analysis .
Confidence bands are closely related to confidence intervals, which represent the uncertainty in an estimate of a single numerical value. "As confidence intervals, by construction, only refer to a single point, they are narrower (at this point) than a confidence band which is supposed to hold simultaneously at many points." [22]

Basic steps
The basic breakdown of how to calculate a confidence interval for a population mean is as follows:

Statistical theory

Definition
Let X be a random sample from a probability distribution with statistical parameters θ , which is a quantity to be estimated, and φ , representing quantities that are not of immediate interest. A confidence interval for the parameter θ , with confidence level or confidence coefficient γ , is an interval with random endpoints ( u ( X ), v ( X )), determined by the pair of random variables u ( X ) and v ( X ), with the property:
The quantities φ in which there is no immediate interest are called nuisance parameters , as statistical theory still needs to find some way to deal with them. The number γ , with typical values close to but not greater than 1, is sometimes given in the form 1 − α (or as a percentage 100%·(1 − α )), where α is a small non-negative number, close to 0.
Here Pr θ , φ indicates the probability distribution of X characterised by ( θ , φ ). An important part of this specification is that the random interval ( u ( X ), v ( X )) covers the unknown value θ with a high probability no matter what the true value of θ actually is.
Note that here Pr θ , φ need not refer to an explicitly given parameterized family of distributions, although it often does. Just as the random variable X notionally corresponds to other possible realizations of x from the same population or from the same version of reality, the parameters ( θ , φ ) indicate that we need to consider other versions of reality in which the distribution of X might have different characteristics.
In a specific situation, when x is the outcome of the sample X , the interval ( u ( x ), v ( x )) is also referred to as a confidence interval for θ . Note that it is no longer possible to say that the (observed) interval ( u ( x ), v ( x )) has probability γ to contain the parameter θ . This observed interval is just one realization of all possible intervals for which the probability statement holds.

Approximate confidence intervals
In many applications, confidence intervals that have exactly the required confidence level are hard to construct. But practically useful intervals can still be found: the rule for constructing the interval may be accepted as providing a confidence interval at level γ if
to an acceptable level of approximation. Alternatively, some authors [25] simply require that
which is useful if the probabilities are only partially identified, or imprecise .

Desirable properties
When applying standard statistical procedures, there will often be standard ways of constructing confidence intervals. These will have been devised so as to meet certain desirable properties, which will hold given that the assumptions on which the procedure rely are true. These desirable properties may be described as: validity, optimality, and invariance. Of these "validity" is most important, followed closely by "optimality". "Invariance" may be considered as a property of the method of derivation of a confidence interval rather than of the rule for constructing the interval. In non-standard applications, the same desirable properties would be sought.

Methods of derivation
For non-standard applications, there are several routes that might be taken to derive a rule for the construction of confidence intervals. Established rules for standard procedures might be justified or explained via several of these routes. Typically a rule for constructing confidence intervals is closely tied to a particular way of finding a point estimate of the quantity being considered.

Examples

Practical example
A machine fills cups with a liquid, and is supposed to be adjusted so that the content of the cups is 250 g of liquid. As the machine cannot fill every cup with exactly 250.0 g, the content added to individual cups shows some variation, and is considered a random variable X. This variation is assumed to be normally distributed around the desired average of 250 g, with a standard deviation , σ , of 2.5 g. To determine if the machine is adequately calibrated, a sample of n = 25 cups of liquid are chosen at random and the cups are weighed. The resulting measured masses of liquid are X 1 , ..., X 25 , a random sample from X .
To get an impression of the expectation μ , it is sufficient to give an estimate. The appropriate estimator is the sample mean:
The sample shows actual weights x 1 , ..., x 25 , with mean:
If we take another sample of 25 cups, we could easily expect to find mean values like 250.4 or 251.1 grams. A sample mean value of 280 grams however would be extremely rare if the mean content of the cups is in fact close to 250 grams. There is a whole interval around the observed value 250.2 grams of the sample mean within which, if the whole population mean actually takes a value in this range, the observed data would not be considered particularly unusual. Such an interval is called a confidence interval for the parameter μ . How do we calculate such an interval? The endpoints of the interval have to be calculated from the sample, so they are statistics, functions of the sample X 1 , ..., X 25 and hence random variables themselves.
In our case we may determine the endpoints by considering that the sample mean X from a normally distributed sample is also normally distributed, with the same expectation μ , but with a standard error of:
By standardizing , we get a random variable:
dependent on the parameter μ to be estimated, but with a standard normal distribution independent of the parameter μ . Hence it is possible to find numbers − z and z , independent of μ , between which Z lies with probability 1 − α, a measure of how confident we want to be.
We take 1 − α = 0.95, for example. So we have:
The number z follows from the cumulative distribution function , in this case the cumulative normal distribution function :
and we get:
In other words, the lower endpoint of the 95% confidence interval is:
and the upper endpoint of the 95% confidence interval is:
With the values in this example, the confidence interval is:
As the standard deviation of the population σ is known in this case, the distribution of the sample mean X ¯ {\displaystyle {\bar {X}}} is a normal distribution with μ {\displaystyle \mu } the only unknown parameter. In the theoretical example below, the parameter σ is also unknown, which calls for using the Student's t-distribution .

Interpretation
This might be interpreted as: with probability 0.95 we will find a confidence interval in which the value of parameter μ will be between the stochastic endpoints
and
This does not mean there is 0.95 probability that the value of parameter μ is in the interval obtained by using the currently computed value of the sample mean,
Instead, every time the measurements are repeated, there will be another value for the mean X of the sample. In 95% of the cases μ will be between the endpoints calculated from this mean, but in 5% of the cases it will not be. The actual confidence interval is calculated by entering the measured masses in the formula. Our 0.95 confidence interval becomes:
In other words, the 95% confidence interval is between the lower endpoint 249.22 g and the upper endpoint 251.18 g.
As the desired value 250 of μ is within the resulted confidence interval, there is no reason to believe the machine is wrongly calibrated.
The calculated interval has fixed endpoints, where μ might be in between (or not). Thus this event has probability either 0 or 1. One cannot say: "with probability (1 − α) the parameter μ lies in the confidence interval." One only knows that by repetition in 100(1 − α) % of the cases, μ will be in the calculated interval. In 100α% of the cases however it does not. And unfortunately one does not know in which of the cases this happens. That is (instead of using the term "probability") why one can say: "with confidence level 100(1 − α) %, μ lies in the confidence interval."
The maximum error is calculated to be 0.98 since it is the difference between the value that we are confident of with upper or lower endpoint.
The figure on the right shows 50 realizations of a confidence interval for a given population mean μ . If we randomly choose one realization, the probability is 95% we end up having chosen an interval that contains the parameter; however, we may be unlucky and have picked the wrong one. We will never know; we are stuck with our interval.

Theoretical example
Suppose { X 1 , ..., X n } is an independent sample from a normally distributed population with unknown ( parameters ) mean μ and variance σ 2 . Let
Where X is the sample mean , and S 2 is the sample variance . Then
has a Student's t-distribution with n − 1 degrees of freedom. [27] Note that the distribution of T does not depend on the values of the unobservable parameters μ and σ 2 ; i.e., it is a pivotal quantity . Suppose we wanted to calculate a 95% confidence interval for μ . Then, denoting c as the 97.5th percentile of this distribution,
("97.5th" and "0.95" are correct in the preceding expressions. There is a 2.5% chance that T will be less than − c and a 2.5% chance that it will be larger than + c . Thus, the probability that T will be between − c and + c is 95%.)
Consequently,
and we have a theoretical (stochastic) 95% confidence interval for μ .
After observing the sample we find values x for X and s for S , from which we compute the confidence interval
an interval with fixed numbers as endpoints, of which we can no longer say there is a certain probability it contains the parameter μ ; either μ is in this interval or isn't.

Alternatives and critiques
Confidence intervals are one method of interval estimation , and the most widely used in frequentist statistics . An analogous concept in Bayesian statistics is credible intervals , while an alternative frequentist method is that of prediction intervals which, rather than estimating parameters, estimate the outcome of future samples. For other approaches to expressing uncertainty using intervals, see interval estimation .

Comparison to prediction intervals
A prediction interval for a random variable is defined similarly to a confidence interval for a statistical parameter . Consider an additional random variable Y which may or may not be statistically dependent on the random sample X . Then ( u ( X ), v ( X )) provides a prediction interval for the as-yet-to-be observed value y of Y if
Here Pr θ , φ indicates the joint probability distribution of the random variables ( X , Y ), where this distribution depends on the statistical parameters ( θ , φ ).

Comparison to tolerance intervals

Comparison to Bayesian interval estimates
A Bayesian interval estimate is called a credible interval . Using much of the same notation as above, the definition of a credible interval for the unknown true value of θ is, for a given γ , [28]
Here Θ is used to emphasize that the unknown value of θ is being treated as a random variable. The definitions of the two types of intervals may be compared as follows.
Note that the treatment of the nuisance parameters above is often omitted from discussions comparing confidence and credible intervals but it is markedly different between the two cases.
In some simple standard cases, the intervals produced as confidence and credible intervals from the same data set can be identical. They are very different if informative prior information is included in the Bayesian analysis , and may be very different for some parts of the space of possible data even if the Bayesian prior is relatively uninformative .
There is disagreement about which of these methods produces the most useful results: the mathematics of the computations are rarely in question–confidence intervals being based on sampling distributions, credible intervals being based on Bayes' theorem –but the application of these methods, the utility and interpretation of the produced statistics, is debated.

Confidence intervals for proportions and related quantities
An approximate confidence interval for a population mean can be constructed for random variables that are not normally distributed in the population, relying on the central limit theorem , if the sample sizes and counts are big enough. The formulae are identical to the case above (where the sample mean is actually normally distributed about the population mean). The approximation will be quite good with only a few dozen observations in the sample if the probability distribution of the random variable is not too different from the normal distribution (e.g. its cumulative distribution function does not have any discontinuities and its skewness is moderate).
One type of sample mean is the mean of an indicator variable , which takes on the value 1 for true and the value 0 for false. The mean of such a variable is equal to the proportion that has the variable equal to one (both in the population and in any sample). This is a useful property of indicator variables , especially for hypothesis testing. To apply the central limit theorem , one must use a large enough sample. A rough rule of thumb is that one should see at least 5 cases in which the indicator is 1 and at least 5 in which it is 0. Confidence intervals constructed using the above formulae may include negative numbers or numbers greater than 1, but proportions obviously cannot be negative or exceed 1. Additionally, sample proportions can only take on a finite number of values, so the central limit theorem and the normal distribution are not the best tools for building a confidence interval. See " Binomial proportion confidence interval " for better methods which are specific to this case.

Counter-examples
Since confidence interval theory was proposed, a number of counter-examples to the theory been developed to show how the interpretation of confidence intervals can be problematic, at least if one interprets them naïvely.

Confidence procedure for uniform location
Welch [29] presented example which clearly shows the difference between the theory of confidence intervals and other theories of interval estimation (including Fisher's fiducial intervals and objective Bayesian intervals). Robinson [30] called this example "[p]ossibly the best known counterexample for Neyman's version of confidence interval theory." To Welch, it showed the superiority of confidence interval theory; to critics of the theory, it shows a deficiency. Here we present a simplified version.
Suppose that X 1 , X 2 {\displaystyle X_{1},X_{2}} are independent observations from a Uniform ( θ − 1/2, θ + 1/2) distribution. Then the optimal 50% confidence procedure [31] is
A fiducial or objective Bayesian argument can be used to derive the interval estimate
which is also a 50% confidence procedure. Welch showed that the first confidence procedure dominates the second, according to desiderata from confidence interval theory; for every θ 1 ≠ θ {\displaystyle \theta _{1}\neq \theta } , the probability that the first procedure contains θ 1 {\displaystyle \theta _{1}} is less than or equal to the probability that the second procedure contains θ 1 {\displaystyle \theta _{1}} . The average width of the intervals from the first procedure is less than that of the second. Hence, the first procedure is preferred under classical confidence interval theory.
However, when | X 1 − X 2 | ≥ 1 / 2 {\displaystyle |X_{1}-X_{2}|\geq 1/2} , intervals from the first procedure are guaranteed to contain the true value θ {\displaystyle \theta } : Therefore, the nominal 50% confidence coefficient is unrelated to the uncertainty we should have that a specific interval contains the true value. The second procedure does not have this property.
Moreover, when the first procedure generates a very short interval, this indicates that X 1 , X 2 {\displaystyle X_{1},X_{2}} are very close together and hence only offer the information in a single data point. Yet the first interval will exclude almost all reasonable values of the parameter due to its short width. The second procedure does not have this property.
The two counter-intuitive properties of the first procedure — 100% coverage when X 1 , X 2 {\displaystyle X_{1},X_{2}} are far apart and almost 0% coverage when X 1 , X 2 {\displaystyle X_{1},X_{2}} are close together — balance out to yield 50% coverage on average. However, despite the first procedure being optimal, its intervals offer neither an assessment of the precision of the estimate nor an assessment of the uncertainty one should have that the interval contains the true value.
This counter-example is used to argue against naïve interpretations of confidence intervals. If a confidence procedure is asserted to have properties beyond that of the nominal coverage (such as relation to precision, or a relationship with Bayesian inference), those properties must be proved; they do not follow from the fact that a procedure is a confidence procedure.

Confidence procedure for ω
Steiger [32] suggested a number of confidence procedures for common effect size measures in ANOVA . Morey et al. [11] point out that several of these confidence procedures, including the one for ω 2 , have the property that as the F statistic is becomes increasingly small — indicating misfit with all possible values of ω 2 — the confidence interval shrinks and can even contain only the single value ω 2 =0; that is, the CI is infinitesimally narrow (this occurs when p ≥ 1 − α / 2 {\displaystyle p\geq 1-\alpha /2} for a 100 ( 1 − α ) % {\displaystyle 100(1-\alpha )\%} CI).
This behavior is consistent with the relationship between the confidence procedure and significance testing: as F becomes so small that the group means are much closer together than we would expect by chance, a significance test might indicate rejection for most or all values of ω 2 . Hence the interval will be very narrow or even empty (or, by a convention suggested by Steiger, containing only 0). However, this does not indicate that the estimate of ω 2 is very precise. In a sense, it indicates the opposite: that the trustworthiness of the results themselves may be in doubt. This is contrary to the common interpretation of confidence intervals that they reveal the precision of the estimate.

See also

Confidence interval for specific distributions
WebPage index: 00049
Internet troll
In Internet slang , a troll ( / ˈ t r oʊ l / , / ˈ t r ɒ l / ) is a person who sows discord on the Internet by starting arguments or upsetting people, by posting inflammatory, [1] extraneous , or off-topic messages in an online community (such as a newsgroup , forum, chat room , or blog) with the intent of provoking readers into an emotional response [2] or of otherwise disrupting normal, on-topic discussion, [3] often for the troll's amusement.
This sense of both the noun and the verb "troll" is associated with Internet discourse, but also has been used more widely. Media attention in recent years has equated trolling with online harassment . For example, the mass media have used "troll" to mean "a person who defaces Internet tribute sites with the aim of causing grief to families." [4] [5] In addition, depictions of trolling have been included in popular fictional works, such as the HBO television program The Newsroom , in which a main character encounters harassing persons online and tries to infiltrate their circles by posting negative sexual comments.

Usage
Application of the term troll is subjective . Some readers may characterize a post as trolling , while others may regard the same post as a legitimate contribution to the discussion, even if controversial. Like any pejorative term, it can be used as an ad hominem attack, suggesting a negative motivation. [6]
As noted in an OS News article titled "Why People Troll and How to Stop Them" (25 January 2012), "The traditional definition of trolling includes intent. That is, trolls purposely disrupt forums. This definition is too narrow. Whether someone intends to disrupt a thread or not, the results are the same if they do." [7] [8] Others have addressed the same issue, e.g., Claire Hardaker, in her Ph.D. thesis [8] "Trolling in asynchronous computer-mediated communication: From user discussions to academic definitions." [9] Popular recognition of the existence (and prevalence) of non-deliberate, "accidental trolls", has been documented widely, in sources as diverse as Nicole Sullivan's keynote speech at the 2012 Fluent Conference, titled "Don't Feed the Trolls" [10] Gizmodo , [11] online opinions on the subject written by Silicon Valley executives [12] and comics. [13]
Regardless of the circumstances, controversial posts may attract a particularly strong response from those unfamiliar with the robust dialogue found in some online, rather than physical, communities. Experienced participants in online forums know that the most effective way to discourage a troll is usually to ignore it, [ citation needed ] because responding tends to encourage trolls to continue disruptive posts – hence the often-seen warning: "Please do not feed the trolls".
The "trollface" is an image occasionally used to indicate trolling in Internet culture. [14] [15] [16]
At times, the word can be abused to refer to anyone with controversial opinions they disagree with. [17] Such usages goes against the ordinary meaning of troll in multiple ways. While psychologists have determined that the dark triad traits are common among internet trolls, some observers claim trolls don't actually believe the controversial views they claim. Farhad Manjoo criticises this view, noting that if the person really is trolling, they are a lot more intelligent than their critics would believe. [17]

Origin and etymology
There are competing theories of where and when "troll" was first used in Internet slang, with numerous unattested accounts of BBS and UseNet origins in the early 1980s or before.
The English noun "troll" in the standard sense of ugly dwarf or giant dates to 1610 and comes from the Old Norse word " troll " meaning giant or demon . [18] The word evokes the trolls of Scandinavian folklore and children's tales: antisocial, quarrelsome and slow-witted creatures which make life difficult for travellers. [19] [20]
In modern English usage, " trolling " may describe the fishing technique of slowly dragging a lure or baited hook from a moving boat [21] whereas trawling describes the generally commercial act of dragging a fishing net. Early non-Internet slang use of "trolling" can be found in the military: by 1972 the term "trolling for MiGs " was documented in use by US Navy pilots in Vietnam . It referred to use of "...decoys, with the mission of drawing...fire away..." [22]
The contemporary use of the term is alleged to have appeared on the Internet in the late 1980s, [23] [24] but the earliest known attestation according to the Oxford English Dictionary is in 1992. [25] [26] [27]
The context of the quote cited in the Oxford English Dictionary [26] sets the origin in Usenet in the early 1990s as in the phrase "trolling for newbies", as used in alt.folklore.urban (AFU). [28] [29] Commonly, what is meant is a relatively gentle inside joke by veteran users, presenting questions or topics that had been so overdone that only a new user would respond to them earnestly. For example, a veteran of the group might make a post on the common misconception that glass flows over time . Long-time readers would both recognize the poster's name and know that the topic had been discussed a lot, but new subscribers to the group would not realize, and would thus respond. These types of trolls served as a practice to identify group insiders. This definition of trolling, considerably narrower than the modern understanding of the term, was considered a positive contribution. [28] [30] One of the most notorious AFU trollers, David Mikkelson, [28] went on to create the urban folklore website Snopes.com .
By the late 1990s, alt.folklore.urban had such heavy traffic and participation that trolling of this sort was frowned upon. Others expanded the term to include the practice of playing a seriously misinformed or deluded user, even in newsgroups where one was not a regular; these were often attempts at humor rather than provocation. The noun troll usually referred to an act of trolling – or to the resulting discussion – rather than to the author, though some posts punned on the dual meaning of troll. [31]

In other languages
In Chinese , trolling is referred to as bái mù ( Chinese : 白目 ; literally: "white eye"), which can be straightforwardly explained as "eyes without pupils", in the sense that whilst the pupil of the eye is used for vision, the white section of the eye cannot see, and trolling involves blindly talking nonsense over the internet, having total disregard to sensitivities or being oblivious to the situation at hand, akin to having eyes without pupils. An alternative term is bái làn ( Chinese : 白爛 ; literally: "white rot"), which describes a post completely nonsensical and full of folly made to upset others, and derives from a Taiwanese slang term for the male genitalia , where genitalia that is pale white in colour represents that someone is young, and thus foolish. Both terms originate from Taiwan , and are also used in Hong Kong and mainland China . Another term, xiǎo bái ( Chinese : 小白 ; literally: "little white") is a derogatory term that refers to both bái mù and bái làn that is used on anonymous posting internet forums. Another common term for a troll used in mainland China is pēn zi ( Chinese : 噴子 ; literally: "sprayer, spurter").
In Japanese , tsuri ( 釣り ? ) means "fishing" and refers to intentionally misleading posts whose only purpose is to get the readers to react, i.e. get trolled. arashi ( 荒らし ? ) means "laying waste" and can also be used to refer to simple spamming .
In Icelandic , þurs (a thurs ) or tröll (a troll ) may refer to trolls, the verbs þursa (to troll) or þursast (to be trolling, to troll about) may be used.
In Korean , nak-si (낚시) means "fishing", and is used to refer to Internet trolling attempts, as well as purposefully misleading post titles. A person who recognizes the troll after having responded (or, in case of a post title nak-si , having read the actual post) would often refer to himself as a caught fish. [ citation needed ]
In Portuguese , more commonly in its Brazilian variant, troll (produced [ˈtɾɔw] in most of Brazil as spelling pronunciation ) is the usual term to denote internet trolls (examples of common derivate terms are trollismo or trollagem , "trolling", and the verb trollar , "to troll", which entered popular use), but an older expression, used by those which want to avoid anglicisms or slangs , is complexo do pombo enxadrista to denote trolling behavior, and pombos enxadristas (literally, "chessplayer pigeons") or simply pombos are the terms used to name the trolls. The terms are explained by an adage or popular saying: "Arguing with fulano (i.e., John Doe ) is the same as playing chess with a pigeon : the pigeon defecates on the table, drop the pieces and simply fly , claiming victory."
In Thai , the term krian ( เกรียน ) has been adopted to address Internet trolls. According to the Royal Institute of Thailand , the term, which literally refers to a closely cropped hairstyle worn by schoolboys in Thailand, is from the behaviour of these schoolboys who usually gather to play online games and, during which, make annoying, disruptive, impolite, or unreasonable expressions. [32] The term top krian (ตบเกรียน; "slap a cropped head") refers to the act of posting intellectual replies to refute and cause the messages of Internet trolls to be perceived as unintelligent. [ citation needed ]
In the Sinhala language , this is called ala kireema (අල කිරීම), which means "Turning it into Potatoes (Sabotage)". Sometimes it is used as ala vagaa kireema (අල වගා කිරීම) – "Planting Potatoes". People/Profiles who does trolling often are called "Potato Planters" – ala vagaakaruvan (අල වගාකරුවන්). This seems to be originated from university slang ala væda (අල වැඩ) which means "Potato business" is used for breaking the laws/codes of the university. [ citation needed ]

Trolling, identity, and anonymity
Early incidents of trolling [33] were considered to be the same as flaming , but this has changed with modern usage by the news media to refer to the creation of any content that targets another person. The Internet dictionary NetLingo suggests there are four grades of trolling: playtime trolling, tactical trolling, strategic trolling, and domination trolling. [34] The relationship between trolling and flaming was observed in open-access forums in California, on a series of modem-linked computers. CommuniTree was begun in 1978 but was closed in 1982 when accessed by high school teenagers, becoming a ground for trashing and abuse. [35] Some psychologists have suggested that flaming would be caused by deindividuation or decreased self-evaluation: the anonymity of online postings would lead to disinhibition amongst individuals [36] Others have suggested that although flaming and trolling is often unpleasant, it may be a form of normative behavior that expresses the social identity of a certain user group [37] [38] According to Tom Postmes, a professor of social and organisational psychology at the universities of Exeter, England, and Groningen, The Netherlands, and the author of Individuality and the Group , who has studied online behavior for 20 years, "Trolls aspire to violence, to the level of trouble they can cause in an environment. They want it to kick off. They want to promote antipathetic emotions of disgust and outrage, which morbidly gives them a sense of pleasure." [35]
The practice of trolling has been documented by a number of academics as early as the 1990s. This included Steven Johnson in 1997 in the book, Interface Culture, and Judith Donath in 1999. Donath's paper outlines the ambiguity of identity in a disembodied " virtual community " such as Usenet :
Donath provides a concise overview of identity deception games which trade on the confusion between physical and epistemic community :
Trolls can be costly in several ways. A troll can disrupt the discussion on a newsgroup, disseminate bad advice, and damage the feeling of trust in the newsgroup community. Furthermore, in a group that has become sensitized to trolling – where the rate of deception is high – many honestly naïve questions may be quickly rejected as trollings. This can be quite off-putting to the new user who upon venturing a first posting is immediately bombarded with angry accusations. Even if the accusation is unfounded, being branded a troll is quite damaging to one's online reputation. [39]
Susan Herring and colleagues in "Searching for Safety Online: Managing 'Trolling' in a Feminist Forum" point out the difficulty inherent in monitoring trolling and maintaining freedom of speech in online communities: "harassment often arises in spaces known for their freedom, lack of censure, and experimental nature". [40] Free speech may lead to tolerance of trolling behavior, complicating the members' efforts to maintain an open, yet supportive discussion area, especially for sensitive topics such as race, gender, and sexuality. [40]
In an effort to reduce uncivil behavior by increasing accountability, many web sites (e.g. Reuters , Facebook , and Gizmodo ) now require commenters to register their names and e-mail addresses. [41]

Corporate, political, and special interest sponsored trolls
Investigative journalist Sharyl Attkisson is one of several in the media who has reported on the increasing trend for organizations to utilize trolls to manipulate public opinion as part and parcel of an Astroturfing initiative. Teams of sponsored trolls, sometimes referred to as sockpuppet armies, [42] [43] swarm a site to overwhelm any honest discourse and denigrate any who disagree with them. [44] A 2012 Pew Center on the States presentation on Effective Messaging included two examples of social media posts by a recently launched "rapid response team" dedicated to promoting fluoridation of community water supplies. That same presentation also emphasized changing the topic of conversation as a winning strategy. [45]
A 2016 study by Harvard political scientist Gary King reported that the Chinese government's 50 Cent Party creates 440 million pro-government social media posts per year. [46] [47] The report said that government employees were paid to create pro-government posts around the time of national holidays to avoid mass political protests. The Chinese Government ran an editorial in the state-funded Global Times defending censorship and 50c party trolls. [48]
A 2016 study for the NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence (NATO StratCom COE) on hybrid warfare notes that the Russian military intervention in Ukraine "demonstrated how fake identities and accounts were used to disseminate narratives through social media, blogs, and web commentaries in order to manipulate, harass, or deceive opponents." [49]

Psychological characteristics
Researcher Ben Radford wrote about the phenomenon of clowns in history and modern day in his book Bad Clowns and found that bad clowns have evolved into Internet trolls. They do not dress up as traditional clowns but, for their own amusement, they tease and exploit "human foibles" in order to speak the "truth" and gain a reaction. Like clowns in make-up, Internet trolls hide behind "anonymous accounts and fake usernames." In their eyes they are the trickster and are performing for a nameless audience via the Internet. [50]

Concern troll
A concern troll is a false flag pseudonym created by a user whose actual point of view is opposed to the one that the troll claims to hold. The concern troll posts in Web forums devoted to its declared point of view and attempts to sway the group's actions or opinions while claiming to share their goals , but with professed "concerns". The goal is to sow fear, uncertainty and doubt within the group. [51] This is a particular case of sockpuppeting .
An example of this occurred in 2006 when Tad Furtado, a staffer for then-Congressman Charles Bass ( R - NH ), was caught posing as a "concerned" supporter of Bass' opponent, Democrat Paul Hodes , on several liberal New Hampshire blogs, using the pseudonyms "IndieNH" or "IndyNH". "IndyNH" expressed concern that Democrats might just be wasting their time or money on Hodes, because Bass was unbeatable. [52] [53] Hodes eventually won the election.
Although the term "concern troll" originated in discussions of online behavior, it now sees increasing use to describe similar behaviors that take place offline. For example, James Wolcott of Vanity Fair accused a conservative New York Daily News columnist of "concern troll" behavior in his efforts to downplay the Mark Foley scandal . Wolcott links what he calls concern trolls to what Saul Alinsky calls "Do-Nothings", giving a long quote from Alinsky on the Do-Nothings' method and effects:
The Hill published an op-ed piece by Markos Moulitsas of the liberal blog Daily Kos titled "Dems: Ignore 'Concern Trolls'". The concern trolls in question were not Internet participants but rather Republicans offering public advice and warnings to the Democrats. The author defines "concern trolling" as "offering a poisoned apple in the form of advice to political opponents that, if taken, would harm the recipient". [55]

Troll sites
While many webmasters and forum administrators consider trolls a scourge on their sites [ according to whom? ] , some websites welcome them. For example, a New York Times article discussed troll activity at 4chan and at Encyclopedia Dramatica , which it described as "an online compendium of troll humor and troll lore". [23] 4chan's /b/ board is recognized as "one of the Internet's most infamous and active trolling hotspots." [56] This site and others are often used as a base to troll against sites that their members can not normally post on. These trolls feed off the reactions of their victims because "their agenda is to take delight in causing trouble". [57]
Another site, NationStates , while not a troll site, has been known to have a unknown number of self-proclaimed 'professional trolls', who claim to be paid by the administrators and moderators of the site to harass people speaking out against them over cases of cyber-bullying on the site by the admins and mods.

Media coverage and controversy
Mainstream media outlets have focused their attention on the willingness of some Internet users to go to extreme lengths to participate in organized psychological harassment.

Australia
In February 2010, the Australian government became involved after users defaced the Facebook tribute pages of murdered children Trinity Bates and Elliott Fletcher. Australian communications minister Stephen Conroy decried the attacks, committed mainly by 4chan users, as evidence of the need for greater Internet regulation, stating, "This argument that the Internet is some mystical creation that no laws should apply to, that is a recipe for anarchy and the wild west." [58] Facebook responded by strongly urging administrators to be aware of ways to ban users and remove inappropriate content from Facebook pages. [59] In 2012, the Daily Telegraph started a campaign to take action against "Twitter trolls", who abuse and threaten users. Several high-profile Australians including Charlotte Dawson , Robbie Farah , Laura Dundovic , and Ray Hadley have been victims of this phenomenon. [60] [61] [62]

United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom, contributions made to the Internet are covered by the Malicious Communications Act 1988 as well as Section 127 of the Communications Act 2003 , under which jail sentences were, until 2015, limited to a maximum of six months. [63] In October 2014, the UK's Justice Secretary, Chris Grayling , said that "internet trolls" would face up to two years in jail, under measures in the Criminal Justice and Courts Bill that extend the maximum sentence and time limits for bringing prosecutions. [63] [64] The House of Lords Select Committee on Communications had earlier recommended against creating a specific offence of trolling. Sending messages which are "grossly offensive or of an indecent, obscene or menacing character" is an offence whether they are received by the intended recipient or not. Several people have been imprisoned in the UK for online harassment . [65]
Trolls of the testimonial page of Georgia Varley faced no prosecution due to misunderstandings of the legal system in the wake of the term trolling being popularized. [66] In October 2012, a twenty-year-old man was jailed for twelve weeks for posting offensive jokes to a support group for friends and family of April Jones . [67]

United States
On 31 March 2010, the Today Show ran a segment detailing the deaths of three separate adolescent girls and trolls' subsequent reactions to their deaths. Shortly after the suicide of high school student Alexis Pilkington, anonymous posters began performing organized psychological harassment across various message boards, referring to Pilkington as a "suicidal slut", and posting graphic images on her Facebook memorial page. The segment also included an exposé of a 2006 accident , in which an eighteen-year-old fatally crashed her father's car into a highway pylon; trolls emailed her grieving family the leaked pictures of her mutilated corpse. [5]
In 2007, the media was fooled by trollers into believing that students were consuming a drug called Jenkem , purportedly made of human waste. A user named Pickwick on TOTSE posted pictures implying that he was inhaling this drug. Major news corporations such as Fox News Channel reported the story and urged parents to warn their children about this drug. Pickwick's pictures of Jenkem were fake and the pictures did not actually feature human waste. [68]
In August 2012, the subject of trolling was featured on the HBO television series The Newsroom . The character of Neal Sampat encounters harassing individuals online, particularly looking at 4chan , and he ends up choosing to post negative comments himself on an economics related forum. The attempt by the character to infiltrate trolls' inner circles attracted debate from media reviewers critiquing the series. [69] [70]
The publication of the 2015 non-fiction book The Dark Net: Inside the Digital Underworld by Jamie Bartlett , a journalist and a representative of the British think tank Demos , attracted some attention for its depiction of misunderstood sections of the internet, describing interactions on encrypted sites such as those accessible with the software Tor . Detailing trolling-related groups and the harassment created by them, Bartlett advocated for greater awareness of them and monitoring of their activities. Professor Matthew Wisnioski wrote for The Washington Post that a "league of trolls, anarchists, perverts and drug dealers is at work building a digital world beyond the Silicon Valley offices where our era’s best and brightest have designed a Facebook-friendly" surface and agreed with Bartlett that the activities of trolls go back decades to the Usenet 'flame wars' of the 1990s and even earlier. [71]

India
Newslaundry covered the phenomenon of "Twitter Trolling" in its Criticles . [72] It has also been characterising Twitter trolls in its weekly podcasts. [73]

Examples
As reported on 8 April 1999, investors became victims of trolling via an online financial discussion regarding PairGain , a telephone equipment company based in California. Trolls operating in the stock's Yahoo Finance chat room posted a fabricated Bloomberg News article stating that an Israeli telecom company could potentially acquire PairGain. As a result, PairGain's stock jumped by 31%. However, the stock promptly crashed after the reports were identified as false. [74]
So-called Gold Membership trolling originated in 2007 on 4chan boards, when users posted fake images claiming to offer upgraded 4chan account privileges; without a "Gold" account, one could not view certain content. This turned out to be a hoax designed to fool board members, especially newcomers. It was copied and became an Internet meme . In some cases, this type of troll has been used as a scam, most notably on Facebook, where fake Facebook Gold Account upgrade ads have proliferated in order to link users to dubious websites and other content. [75]
The case of Zeran v. America Online, Inc. resulted primarily from trolling. Six days after the Oklahoma City bombing , anonymous users posted advertisements for shirts celebrating the bombing on AOL message boards, claiming that the shirts could be obtained by contacting Mr. Kenneth Zeran. The posts listed Zeran's address and home phone number. Zeran was subsequently harassed. [74]
Anti-Scientology protests by Anonymous , commonly known as Project Chanology , are sometimes labeled as "trolling" by media such as Wired , [76] and the participants sometimes explicitly self-identify as "trolls".
Neo-Nazi website The Daily Stormer orchestrates what it calls a "Troll Army", and has encouraged trolling of Jewish MP Luciana Berger and Muslim activist Mariam Veiszadeh . [77]

See also
WebPage index: 00050
The Colbert Report
The Colbert Report ( / k oʊ l ˈ b ɛr r ə ˈ p ɔːr / ) is an American late-night talk and news satire television program hosted by Stephen Colbert that aired four days a week on Comedy Central from October 17, 2005 to December 18, 2014 for 1,447 episodes. The show focused on a fictional anchorman character named Stephen Colbert , played by his real-life namesake. The character, described by Colbert as a "well-intentioned, poorly informed, high-status idiot ", is a caricature of televised political pundits . Furthermore, the show satirized conservative personality-driven political talk programs, particularly Fox News 's The O'Reilly Factor . The Colbert Report is a spin-off of Comedy Central's The Daily Show , where he acted as a correspondent for the program for several years while developing the character.
The program was created by Colbert, Jon Stewart , and Ben Karlin . The show's writing was grounded in improvisation , and often lampooned current events stories. The show's structure also included a guest interview, in which the Colbert character attempts to deconstruct his opponent's argument. The show was taped in New York City 's Hell's Kitchen neighborhood, and the program's set is "hyper-American", epitomizing the character's ego. The show was taped and broadcast Monday through Thursday, with weeks taken off at multiple points in a given year for breaks.
The Colbert Report saw immediate critical and ratings successes, leading to various awards, including two prestigious Peabody Awards . The show's cultural influence —which occasionally would require a fair degree of participation from the show’s audience, dubbed the Colbert Nation—extended beyond the program a number of times. This impact included the character running for U.S. President twice, co-hosting a rally at the National Mall , presenting a controversial performance at the White House Correspondents' Dinner , and establishing a real Super PAC that raised a million dollars. In addition, the show inspired various forms of multimedia, including music and multiple best-selling books.

Background
The Colbert Report satirized conservative personality-driven political pundit programs, and focused on a fictional anchorman character named Stephen Colbert , played by his real-life namesake. The character first made appearances on the short-lived sketch comedy series The Dana Carvey Show in 1996, described as "a self-important, trench-coated reporter who does on-location stories in a way that suggests his own presence is the real scoop." [1] Colbert joined Comedy Central 's The Daily Show in 1997, a year following its launch, then hosted by Craig Kilborn . When Jon Stewart became the program's host in 1999, The Daily Show developed a markedly different style, bringing a sharper political focus to the humor than the show previously exhibited. Colbert recalled that Stewart specifically asked him to have a political viewpoint, and to allow his passion for issues to carry through into his comedy. [2] [3] [4]
Colbert became a fixture on The Daily Show , occasionally hosting in Stewart's absence. [5] In 2003, the program began running advertisements for a fictional program titled The Colbert Réport , starring Colbert as a parody of cable news pundits. [1] When fellow Daily Show star Steve Carell left to pursue a film and television career, Comedy Central made attempts to keep Colbert at the network. He pitched The Colbert Report to the channel in 2004. Stewart pushed Comedy Central to pick up the show, and Colbert was given an eight-week tryout. Following the show's immediate success, the show "quickly became a fixture in the late-night lineup." [1] At its peak, the show averaged 1.5 million viewers each evening. [6]
The fictional Colbert anchorman character became gradually toned down over the course of the show's run, as the host believed he would eventually need to move beyond it. [7] He began to regard it as an act of discipline to perform as the character; he later remarked, "to model behavior, you have to consume that behavior on a regular basis. It became very hard to watch punditry of any kind, of whatever political stripe." [8] With his contract set to end in December 2014, he had already decided to leave the show when he was contacted by CBS to replace David Letterman as the host of its Late Show franchise. [9] The show's ending was announced concurrently with Colbert's jump to CBS in April 2014. [10] The last episode aired on December 18, 2014. [11] The show was replaced on Comedy Central's late-night lineup by The Nightly Show with Larry Wilmore , another spinoff of The Daily Show . [12] [13]

History

Development
The character first made appearances on the short-lived sketch comedy series The Dana Carvey Show in 1996, described as "a self-important, trench-coated reporter who does on-location stories in a way that suggests his own presence is the real scoop." [1]
When The Daily Show ran short on time, a short piece starring Colbert, advertising a fictional program titled The Colbert Réport , was added into the program. In these sketches, Colbert began to amplify his character to parody news pundits. [5] Colbert anchored many sketches in his persona, including "Even Stepvhen", in which he debated current issues with fellow correspondent Steve Carell , often devolving into petty name-calling and insults. [1] Colbert and Carell were viewed as potential breakout stars by staff, and when Carell left the series in 2004 to start a US version of The Office , Comedy Central made attempts to keep Colbert at the network. [14] Stewart and Karlin were already looking to expand the Daily Show franchise and their production company, Busboy. The duo supposedly came up with the idea for The Colbert Report after watching coverage of the sexual harassment lawsuit filed against Bill O'Reilly . Colbert met with network president Doug Herzog the day following the 2004 Emmy Awards to first discuss the concept. [14] The one-line pitch Colbert, Karlin and Stewart developed was "Our version of the O'Reilly Factor with Stephen Colbert." [15] Herzog committed to an eight-week tryout period without a pilot. [1]
By the time of the 2004 election, the character was fully developed. [5] In creating the character, which is designed to be repellant but entertaining, Colbert conferred with Stewart and Karlin. In expressing his hope that his character not be "an asshole," Stewart remarked, "You're not an asshole. You're an idiot. There's a difference." [14] Head writer Allison Silverman reiterated this trait in a later interview, commenting, "There is an essential innocence to his character." [16] Colbert initially felt the character might not be sustainable in a longer format. [1] Despite this, The Colbert Report was designed as an extension of the satiric goals of The Daily Show , combining it with general silliness and character-driven humor. [16] To make sure there was no overlap in subject matter with The Daily Show , Karlin made trips between the studios during the show's early days to supervise scripts. [14] For the first several years of the program, Colbert made an appearance at the end of each Daily Show in split-screen, having a short discussion with Stewart preceding his show. [17] [18]

Production
The show's writing was grounded in improv , employing a "yes to everything" mentality. [1] Much of the humor derived from extended improv games with the show's studio and at-home audience, such as Colbert's poll to name a bridge in Hungary after himself. [19] Many of the writers had improv training and at one point put together "improv evenings" at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theatre once a month. [1] Writers on The Colbert Report were predominantly male and white; Colbert acknowledged this lack of diversity, but he contended he had hired writers based solely on the quality of their material and had never looked at the names on writing packets submitted for employment. [20] Subjects considered too dark were not even considered for comedic material; for example, the show would poke fun at press coverage of a tragedy, rather than the tragedy itself. [21] Issues discussed on the show were later reported on actual newscasts, in turn allowing the show to comment on its own impact, creating an echo chamber of sorts. [19] This led Colbert to describe his show, "at its purest expression, [as] a pebble that we throw into the puddle of the news, and then we report on our own ripples." [19]
Ideas for each show were considered in the morning pitch meeting, which could range from "harrowing" to smooth. [21] Described as having "demanding standards", Colbert is quoted as remarking, "Let's make it perfect and then cut it." [1] Although dozens of ideas were either chosen for the show or deleted, other ideas, saved for a later date, were often forgotten because of the pace of news. [1] Ideas with considerable potential were put in the "hopper" to be developed and rewritten, while more fully formed ideas were placed in the "pantry." [21] Good jokes would still be sacrificed if they did not fit the character's specific point of view, which was deemed the inverse of what "any logical person" feels. [20] At least one writer has described the job as "all-consuming", leaving no time for outside activities. [1] Colbert himself eventually became withdrawn from morning meetings as the show continued on and he mulled a decision to leave. [9]
Usually by 11 a.m., a rough outline for the show was completed and writers sent off in pairs to create scripts that would be polished throughout the day. [1] First, writers would scan news articles for ideas and partner together in pairs, with one "keeping track of possible jokes." [21] During an appearance at the New York Comedy Festival in 2013, some writers admitted to procrastinating until the last hour before rehearsal to complete their sections; Colbert confirmed that, in the program's early days, segments such as ""The Word" were scripted entirely during the rewrite before rehearsal. [20] [21] Both writers read their dialogue aloud to see whether they thought the Colbert character would say it. [16] As writers were working on their respective scripts, the show's production and graphics team compiled music, footage, and props needed for the show. [16] To collect video clips, the show cross-referenced transcripts of hours and hours of archived TiVo recordings of news programs. [22] [23] In 2011, the show switched to Snapstream software, which streamlined the TV clip search and compilation process, allowing for searching closed captioning for select words. [23] In addition, a group of staff coders and independent contractors developed Scripto to collaborate on scripts in real time. [24]
By 1 p.m., the show held a second production meeting to go over scripts and determine which pieces to edit. [16] Scripts were "hopefully" completed around 4 p.m., and a rehearsal with the entire staff would begin at 5:30 p.m. or occasionally earlier. [16] Afterward, final changes were made to the script. [5] The final rewrite would take place in a "small, red, poorly ventilated room" until 6:45 p.m. [16] [20] Before interviewing his guests, Colbert met with them in the green room and acknowledged that he was playing a character, noting that the persona is "willfully ignorant of what you know and care about" and urging the guest to "honestly disabuse me of what you see as my ignorance." [19] Emily Lazar , a producer for the interview segments, advised guests to talk with Colbert as though he were a "harmless drunk at the next bar stool." [6] Guests would typically take their seats around 7 p.m., when a warm-up comedian (perhaps Jared Logan or Paul Mercurio ) delivered jokes. [25] Colbert, out of character, held a brief question and answer session with the audience prior to taping. [19] Taping lasted as long as three hours [25] but usually ended around 9 p.m., at which point the show was edited and sent to Comedy Central for broadcast. [1] As the show was being edited, the staff met one last time to work through details for the next show. [16]

Set
The Colbert Report was taped and broadcast four nights a week, Monday–Thursday. [15] The show's taping studio, at 513 W. 54th Street in New York City's Hell's Kitchen neighborhood, was used for The Daily Show until July 2005, [5] and has a capacity of 150. [25] NEP Studio 54 on 54th Street is owned by NEP Broadcasting which is New York City's largest production facility and also owns The Daily Show set at NEP Studio 52 two blocks south on 52nd Street . Aside from the set, the show's production offices have been described as "loft-like" and "all overhead pipes and exposed brick." [17] Following the show's conclusion, the building was used for The Nightly Show with Larry Wilmore . [26]
The set for The Colbert Report was called "The Eagle's Nest" and reflects and facilitates Colbert's self-aggrandizing style. [27] It was designed by Jim Fenhagen, and was intended to both capture the character's ego and be "hyper-American." [27] Elements incorporated into the set included architectural lines converged to Colbert's desk, and radial beams coming out from behind his chair. [19] Colbert's main influence for the set was Leonardo da Vinci's The Last Supper , [28] with the Colbert character as Jesus Christ . [27] In the set, "virtually every inch emblazoned with Colbert's name or the initial C"; [17] his name, initials and the name of the show appear on the desk's plasma screen , on the rafters above the desk, and the desk itself is shaped like a giant "C". [27] The background includes faux artifacts from the character's backstory, which are seldom seen by viewers. "I kept saying, 'People might not really notice this.' But when you're working with a comedy team, they really get into it. They couldn't help themselves," said Fenhagen. Among these touches are the United States Constitution , a miniature Ten Commandments , and a CliffNotes guide to American government. [27]
The set was described as "part Riefenstahlesque homage to the star, part symbologic gallery — where alert viewers are rewarded with snarky jokes at every turn." [27] Above a fireplace is a portrait of Colbert; it originally showed Colbert standing in front of the same mantel with another portrait of himself. On the show's first anniversary, the portrait was replaced by one of Colbert standing in front of the mantel with the first portrait above it, [29] and with each successive year, it became Colbert standing in front of the previous year's painting. [30] The graphics used throughout the show and the studio itself are saturated with American flags , bald eagles , Captain America's shield , and other patriotic imagery. [31]

Format
Typically, Colbert starts with the audience cheering and teasers regarding the show's topics and guest; each headline is structured to be a deliberate pun. The series of puns are followed by a verbal metaphor that promotes the show and is almost always finished with, "This is the Colbert Report ." The show's original opening title sequence began with an eagle diving past the host, following by images of Americana, stock footage of Colbert, and words describing Colbert flying by (some of which have been used as The Word). The first word used was "Grippy", and has changed to include, among others, "Megamerican", "Lincolnish", "Superstantial", "Flagaphile", and "Factose Intolerant". The May 4 episode in 2009 featured hints planted by J. J. Abrams about when and where Colbert would be in the Persian Gulf , [32] and "Farewellison" for the final episode of former producer Allison Silverman. [33] The show's opening credits depict the Colbert character clutching an American flag. [1] On January 4, 2010, a new opening debuted. The opening begins and ends with an eagle as before, but features new background renderings, new shots of Stephen Colbert, and is now colored in an American, red white and blue motif. The show's theme music is "Baby Mumbles" by Cheap Trick . Colbert phoned guitarist Rick Nielsen during development of the show to discuss the theme, noting that he loved the band's song " I Want You to Want Me "; the show's theme music is largely that song's melody backwards. [34]
Following the opening sequence, Colbert most often proceeds with a run-through of recent headlines in a manner parodying traditional news broadcasts; this is similar to The Daily Show but with a faux- right-wing spin. The program typically continues with Colbert addressing a specific topic. Colbert often calls to "Jimmy", a reference to program director Jim Hoskinson, to roll video clips. [20] That topic will often lead into a "The Word" segment, which juxtaposes Colbert's commentary with satirical bullet points on-screen, a parody of The O'Reilly Factor ' s "Talking Points Memo". [35] On occasion he will conduct a short interview with someone having to do with the topic. The format of the middle segment varies, but it is normally a visual presentation or skit. Often, these skits are parts of recurring segments , which may include " Better Know a District ", in which Colbert interviews a U.S. Representative from a certain district of the United States; "Tip of the Hat/Wag of the Finger", in which Colbert voices his approval or disapproval of prominent people and news items; "Cheating Death with Dr. Stephen T. Colbert, D.F.A.", a health segment; "The Sport Report" with the "t" in both Sport and Report silent, a sports segment; and "The ThreatDown", in which Colbert lists the five greatest threats to America, and others. His newest segment, "Thought for Food" deals with the consumption of specific foods across the world.
Sometimes, there is a " Colbert Report Special Repor-t " (the final 't' pronounced with special emphasis), or even a " Colbert Report, Sport Report, Special Repor-t ", in which Colbert devotes a section of an episode, and sometimes the entire episode to a special subject. The third segment is almost always an interview with a celebrity guest, often an author or government official. [36] Unlike the late night talk show standard of the guest walking out to the host’s desk, Colbert instead runs to a separate area of the set to interview his guest, basking in the applause and glory meant for the guest. [37] On the interview segment of the show, Colbert frequently attempts to nail his guest by using various rhetorical devices and fallacies to prove them wrong. [38] The real-life Colbert once remarked that his personal favorite segment of the program were the interviews, which involved more listening on his end in order for the character to "ignorantly deconstruct" his opponent's argument. [19] The third segment of the show is on occasion a musical guest. Prominent musical guests have included Metallica , [39] Paul McCartney , Rush , Green Day , Paul Simon , Crosby Stills & Nash , Pavement , Cat Stevens , Yo-Yo Ma , Radiohead and Black Star . Afterwards, Colbert ends the show by giving some parting words to the audience or, if short for time, a simple "that's it for the report everybody, good night".

Character
The host of The Colbert Report is Stephen Colbert, a "self-important right-wing commentator ", [41] portrayed by his real-life namesake. The character incorporates aspects of Colbert's real life, but is primarily a parody of cable news pundits , particularly Bill O'Reilly of Fox News ' The O'Reilly Factor , whom he refers to as "Papa Bear". [42] [43] To this end, the character even incorporates O'Reilly's mannerisms, described as his "pen-wielding, hand-stabbing gestures." [1] O'Reilly's use of "talking points" — illustrated onscreen graphics reflecting the host's opinions — are parodied on The Colbert Report with the segment "The Word". [18] [43] He initially incorporated long-winded, verbose metaphors to parody CNN correspondent Aaron Brown. [18] In addition, the character was also heavily inspired by Stone Phillips , Bill Kurtis and "especially" Geraldo Rivera . "I loved the way Geraldo made reporting a story seem like an act of courage," Colbert told a reporter in 2012. [1]
The core principle of The Colbert Report is that Colbert is a "well-intentioned, poorly informed, high-status idiot ." [19] The character believes that he himself is the news: rather than a vessel to deliver the news to the audience, or a general member of the media, the character sees himself as more important than the news. [19] [28] He is veracious in his approach, while often ridiculously overblown in his statements. [19] The character is egomaniacal , fact-averse ("factose intolerant"), God-fearing, and hyper-patriotic. He claims to be an independent who is often mistaken for a Republican , but uniformly despises liberals and generally agrees with the actions and decisions of the Republican Party. [44] Colbert's character has been described as a "caustic right-wing bully". [45] The character exists not in opposition to political leaders, but to common ignorances; for example, his insistence that then-presidential candidate Barack Obama had Socialist leanings was based on public misconceptions. [19] In parodying the cult of personality , [28] the Colbert character also developed a real-life equivalent, creating what was dubbed the "Colbert Nation". [14] While giving the character a certain mythos was part of the show's inception, show producers did not set out to create a loyal following; the joke was that the character thought he had an influence, but that was a figment of his ego-riddled imagination. [6]
Despite his appearance of always being in charge, Colbert is vulnerable: he feels deeply threatened by those wielding more power than he, [16] and he suffers from "arctophobia", the fear of bears , which he refers to as "giant, marauding, godless killing machines". [46] He will alert the audience to what he perceives as the latest national threat (the subject of a recurring bit, "ThreatDown"), only to justify his own fears and impose those onto his audience. [6]
As the show progressed, Colbert gradually began to tone down the character, [7] allowing guests in interviews to "get his or her own message across." The show's longevity created what The New York Times described as "a winking quality to the act, a sense that we’re all in on the joke." [1] Colbert himself acknowledged that he "rarely hit it as hard as I used to," noting that "You have to be vigilant to stay ignorant." [6] He noted that his own personal opinions can occasionally align with his character's, when liberal guests' agendas appeared based on dislike rather than logical argument. [19] Politician and former vice president Al Gore accidentally referred to the persona as a "character" in a 2011 interview on the show, and in 2013, Colbert further blurred lines when he spoke regarding the death of his mother on the program. [47] In doing so, many commentators referred the show's longevity and the development of a "third" Colbert — one a faux pundit and one informed by the performer's own life. [47] In the show's credits, Colbert was credited with a title, which became increasingly long and humorous as the show progressed: Her Excellency The Rev. Sir Doctor Stephen Tyrone Mos Def Colbert, D.F.A., Heavyweight Champion of the World ✱✱ featuring Flo Rida La Premiere Dame De France . [48]
When O'Reilly appeared on The Daily Show before the second episode of The Colbert Report aired, he commented, "Before we get started, somebody told me walking in here, you got some French guy on after you making fun of me?", and made several references in the following interview to 'the French Guy'. [49] [50] In a subsequent Newsweek interview, O'Reilly said that he "feels it's a compliment" to have Colbert parody him because Colbert "isn't mean-spirited" and does not "use [his] platform to injure people". Later, Colbert replied on-air, "I like you too. In fact, if it wasn't for you, this show wouldn't exist." [51]

Themes
Colbert disagreed that the show's emphasis on politics represented a liberal bias, noting that he himself was uninterested in modern politics. [19] He believed that political issues reflect basic human behavior, which he viewed as his satirical specialty, noting, "If I thought I had a political point, I'd be in big trouble." [19] In another interview, Colbert remarked, "I'm not someone with a particular political ax to grind. I'm a comedian. I love hypocrisy." [17]

Episodes

Notable episodes

Early years
The Colbert Report premiered in October 2005. The first guest was Stone Phillips , a partial influence on the character. [17] In the debut episode, Colbert coined the word truthiness , defined as "a quality characterizing a "truth" that a person making an argument or assertion claims to know intuitively "from the gut" or because it "feels right" without regard to evidence , logic , intellectual examination, or facts ." [52] Truthiness was named Word of the Year for 2005 by the American Dialect Society and for 2006 by Merriam-Webster . [53] [54] The character's forceful nature confused some in the program's early days. During an appearance on the segment " Better Know a District " in the show's first season, a frustrated Barney Frank declined to continue, deeming the conversation too dumb. [55] In one early episode, the Colbert character purported to be a former member of a 1980s new wave group, Stephen & the Colberts, and released a fictional music video from the band for the song "Charlene (I'm Right Behind You)". [56]
The show's popularity resulted in Colbert headlining the 2006 White House Correspondents' Dinner , which he performed in character. The controversial, searing routine targeted President George W. Bush and the media, and was greeted with chilly reception from the audience. [57] Although President Bush shook Colbert's hand after his presentation, several of Bush's aides and supporters walked out during Colbert's speech, and one former aide commented that the President had "that look that he's ready to blow". [58] Colbert's performance quickly became an Internet and media sensation. [59] [60] According to Vanity Fair , the speech transformed Colbert as a "folk hero" for liberals, and was later described by Frank Rich as the "defining moment" of the 2006 midterm elections. [5] Adam Sternbergh of New York , a year after the show's debut, deemed the character "something very close to what he's parodying, a kind of Bill O'Reilly for the angry left." [14]
In 2006, Colbert encouraged fans to vote for his name to be the new name of a bridge in Hungary, which was being decided via an online poll; he beat the runner-up by more than 14 million votes. He was, however, disqualified, as the name of the bridge was intended to be a memoriam. [5] Later that year, he began a mock feud with indie rock group the Decemberists over the subject of who was the first to challenge fans to create a green screen video; the fake conflict culminated in a guitar solo competition on the show's final episode of the year, featuring guest appearances from guitarist Peter Frampton and Dr. Henry Kissinger . [61] [62] Colbert later recalled it as the show's "craziest" moment, changing the way the staff viewed the program: "Because you realize the character believes anything he thinks, says, [or] cares about is important, anything fits on the show. [...] That is the show where we said, oh, there is unlimited open field running." [63]
In February 2007, Ben & Jerry's unveiled a new ice cream flavor in honor of Stephen Colbert, named Stephen Colbert's AmeriCone Dream . [64] All proceeds were donated to charity through the Stephen Colbert AmeriCone Dream Fund, which distributed the money to various causes. [65] In June 2007, Colbert broke his left wrist while performing his warm-up for the show. [66] It was the subject of an extended bit on the program, including the creation of the "Wriststrong" wrist band , based on Lance Armstrong 's " Livestrong " wrist band, which donated all proceeds to the Yellow Ribbon Fund . Colbert remained on the air without writers during the Writers Guild of America strike in 2007–08. [67] Colbert modified the pronunciation of the show's name, pronouncing both of the formerly elided final "t"s ( /ˈkoʊlbərt rəpɔrt/ ); a similar move was made by The Daily Show which returned to air as A Daily Show . [68] During this period, he staged a mock feud between himself, Jon Stewart, and Late Night host Conan O'Brien . [69]
In 2008, Colbert made a series of jokes directed at various towns in the United States named "Canton", with many attracting negative responses from each respective area's local government and residents. [70] [71] [72] The same year, the show filmed a tongue-in-cheek Christmas special titled A Colbert Christmas: The Greatest Gift of All! . In 2009, Colbert filmed a series of four episodes for the troops in Baghdad , Iraq . He had a suit tailored for him in the Army Combat Uniform pattern and went through an abbreviated version of the Army 's basic training regimen. On the first of the four episodes, Colbert had his head shaved on stage by General Ray Odierno who was jokingly "ordered" to do so by President Barack Obama , who appeared on the episode via a pre-recorded segment from the White House .

Later years
In 2010, while in character, Colbert appeared before judiciary subcommittee hearing on the issue of farm workers and immigration . [73] The New Yorker used Colbert's testimony before Congress as an example of the "third" Colbert: "Colbert was thoughtful and sincere—and had ruined the whole thing. By speaking honestly, he had become the very thing he was mocking, a celebrity testifying before Congress." [47] Beginning in June 2011, the show created a long-running gag that involved Colbert starting his own actual super PAC, Americans for a Better Tomorrow, Tomorrow , described by the character as "100 percent legal and at least 10 percent ethical." [74]
In 2012, Colbert interviewed illustrator/author Maurice Sendak , who managed to get him to break character ; show staff and Colbert himself retrospectively labeled the segment one of the show’s more memorable moments. [20] The Los Angeles Times called the September 2013 interview with intelligence official Philip Mudd his "most awkward interview", stating Mudd "could barely disguise his contempt" for Colbert. [75]
President Barack Obama guested during the show's final month, in a show taped from George Washington University in Washington, D.C. ; Obama sat in Colbert's seat and presided over " The Wørd " segment. [76] [77]
The final episode aired on December 18, 2014. In the episode Stephen becomes immortal after accidentally killing " Grimmy " during the opening of the segment of " Cheating Death with Dr. Stephen T. Colbert, D.F.A. ". This leads to Stephen singing " We'll Meet Again " in its entirety along with a large crowd of several recognizable figures , before meeting with Santa Claus , Abraham Lincoln , and Alex Trebek on the roof of the studio. [78] [79] [80] As they ride off together in Santa's sleigh, Stephen bids a final farewell to his viewers and tosses back to Jon Stewart at the desk of The Daily Show , who thanks Stephen for his report.

Reception

Critical response

Initial reviews
Reviews of The Colbert Report upon its 2005 premiere were positive, although critics were generally skeptical that the character could extend beyond one season without growing tiresome. [81] While positively reviewing the program as a whole, Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune echoed these sentiments: "The biggest question hanging over The Colbert Report is whether the show’s sendup of the pomposity and fear-mongering of cable news blowhards will be as appealing in the long term." [82] Melanie McFarland of the Seattle Post-Intelligencer summarized the show's early reaction: "Critics and bloggers either loved the premiere or declared themselves to be unmoved, but that's the standard reaction after any late-night program's debut. A truer measure will be seen in coming weeks, after the hype wears off and the ratings lose their exuberance." [83]
Gilbert Cruz of Entertainment Weekly noted that "Colbert proves that the line between serious TV journalism and utter nonsense is a very thin one indeed." [84] Heather Havrilesky of Salon was effusive, remarking, "Not only does Colbert maintain his persona without skipping a beat throughout the entire show, but he’s got great comic timing, the show’s writers are brilliant, and the whole thing is pure foolish, bizarre, idiotic fun." [85] Barry Garron of The Hollywood Reporter dubbed it an "auspicious debut", writing, "The new show dovetails nicely with its lead-in to present a solid hour of skewered news and punctured pomposity." [86] Variety 's Brian Lowry commented that the show had an "impressive start with a topnotch premiere followed by a respectable second outing." [87] Paul Brownfield of the Los Angeles Times wrote, "In the run-up to the show it all sounded a bit hard to get your head around, but in the flesh the show zinged, at least this first week." [81]
The Boston Globe 's Matthew Gilbert praised the show's wordplay, summarizing, "Colbert's a clever creation, and a necessary one, and he deserves an opportunity to offend as many people as possible with his pompous blather." [88] Alessandra Stanley of The New York Times commented that the show was a welcome addition to the Comedy Central lineup, remarking, "What puts Mr. Colbert over the top is that he is not just impersonating well known television personalities, he also uses parody to score larger points about politics and the press." [89] Nevertheless, there were more negative reviews: USA Today 's Robert Bianco opined that the show "tried too hard", writing, "Unfortunately, in just two weeks on the air, this half-hour spoof of a no-spin-zone type show has already stretched Colbert's character and the artifice that supports it past its natural breaking point." [90]

Later reviews
The New Yorker remarked that the show remained funny throughout its entire run. [47] The Colbert Report currently scores favorable reviews, with 65/100 on Metacritic (first season), while its viewers' ranking on the site is higher at 8.7/10. [91]

Ratings
The ratings of The Colbert Report , from its premiere, benefited from the lead-in The Daily Show provides, which at the time of the show's debut averaged 1.3 million viewers per night. [18] Comedy Central had previously struggled to produce a hit program on par with The Daily Show , and were counting on Colbert after a string of failures. [18] The Colbert Report drew 1.13 million viewers for its premiere episode, 47 percent greater than the average for that time slot over the previous four weeks, [92] and 98 percent of the viewership of The Daily Show , which had Comedy Central's second-largest viewership. [93] Averaged over its opening week, The Report had 1.2 million viewers per episode, more than double the average for the same time the previous year, when the time slot was occupied by Too Late with Adam Carolla . [94]
The show regularly began attracting over one million viewers with near immediacy. The show also drew more young men, a powerful demographic, than other late-night hosts (at that time, Jay Leno , David Letterman , and Conan O'Brien ). [5] Within a year, The Colbert Report began averaging 1.5 million viewers per night. [6] In early 2008, in the midst of the writer's strike , Colbert posted an eleven-percent gain over its averages from the following fall. [95]
From 2012 to 2013, viewership decreased from 1.2 million to 1.1 million. [96] In 2013, The Colbert Report was the second most-watched late-night talk show (behind The Daily Show ) among the demographic of adults 18-49, beating competition The Tonight Show with Jay Leno in that demographic for the first time. [97] That year, The Colbert Report attracted $52.1 million in advertising for an audience whose median age was 39.4, about a year younger than The Daily Show . [96] In 2014, the final year of the show's run, ratings were down three percent (coinciding with a general ratings slide for cable television). [98]
The series finale on December 18, 2014 was watched by 2.4 million viewers, making it the most watched episode ever in the show's history. The finale was the most watched cable program of the night in its time slot, beating The Daily Show which was seen by two million viewers. [99] [100]

Awards
The Colbert Report received numerous awards and accolades throughout its run. The show was nominated for four Emmy Awards in its inaugural year, but lost to The Daily Show . [5] The show was nominated each year for the rest of its run for Outstanding Variety, Music, or Comedy Series , but lost each time to The Daily Show until 2013, when it broke the latter program's winning streak, dubbed the longest in Emmy history. [101] Colbert subsequently referenced his win on his program as the conclusion of Stewart's "reign of terror." [102] It also won the award the following year, and is nominated in the same category in 2015.
The show received two Peabody Awards , recognizing its excellence in news and entertainment. [103] [104] It also won two Grammy Awards , one for Best Comedy Album for the soundtrack to the special A Colbert Christmas , and later for Best Spoken Word Album for the audiobook to America Again . [7]

Issue
The Colbert Report on occasion created controversy. In March 2014, the show attracted controversy when Colbert used a "fatuously fake parody stereotype character, 'Ching-Chong Ding-Dong,'" to "satirize knee-jerk mockery" of Asian dialect . [105] The name had been used before without incident, but the show's official Twitter account — run by an unknown individual — tweeted the remarks without context, leading to wide outrage over social media , including a hashtag campaign, "#CancelColbert", that was a worldwide trending topic for over 24 hours, thanks in-part by Colbert himself helping make it go viral for his show. [105]

Legacy
The New Yorker wrote that "Colbert has made vital observations about the American political system, particularly about the sordid role that money plays within it. The Colbert Report and the Daily Show [...] have changed the way that young liberals of a certain class think and talk about civic culture." [47]
The show also coined another word, wikiality , that means "reality as decided on majority rule." Viewers of the show also coined a word, freem , based on its inclusion in the show's opening sequence; the word refers to "'freedom' without having to 'do' anything — without any responsibility or action." [16] In response to the "Better Know a District" segment, Rahm Emanuel , then the Democratic Caucus chair, instructed incoming freshmen not to do appearances on the show in 2007. [107] In 2008, East Carolina University associate professor Jason Bond named a species of trapdoor spider Aptostichus stephencolberti in honor of Stephen Colbert. [108]
The "Colbert Bump" is defined, connotatively by the Report , as an increase in popularity of a person (author, musician, politician, etc.) or thing (website, etc.) as a result of appearing as a guest on or (in the case of a thing) being mentioned on the show. For example, if a politician appears on The Colbert Report , they may become more popular with certain voters and thus are more likely to be elected. According to the American Political Science Association , contributions to Democratic politicians rose 40% for 30 days after an appearance on the show. [109] Magazines such as GQ , Newsweek , and Sports Illustrated have all had sales spikes when Colbert appeared on their covers. [110]
Viewers of The Colbert Report were on numerous occasions cited as being more knowledgeable about current events than traditional news viewers. In April 2007, a Pew Research Center report cited both Colbert and The Daily Show viewers as more well-informed than those who gathered their information via newspapers, television news and radio. [5] Colbert's Super PAC coverage was widely lauded, and studies later found that this coverage was more effective than traditional news programs at educating the audience on campaign finance. He was awarded a Peabody Award for the parody, which was described as an "innovative means of teaching American viewers about the landmark court decision". [111] The Annenberg Public Policy Center reported in 2014 that the Colbert Super PAC segments increased viewers' knowledge of PAC and 501(c)(4) campaign finance regulation more successfully than other types of news media. [112] [113]

International distribution
Outside the United States, The Colbert Report has been shown in Canada on The Comedy Network , simultaneously with its original U.S. broadcast, since shortly after its debut. On September 22, 2014, due to The Comedy Network's acquisition of Canadian rights to Jimmy Kimmel Live! , the program began airing on M3 and did so for the remainder of the show's run. [114]
It airs on The Comedy Channel in Australia, Comedy Central in New Zealand, and on Maxxx in the Philippines . As of 2012, The Colbert Report has also been broadcast in Africa on DSTV's version of Comedy Central. It aired on FX in the United Kingdom until they decided not to renew their contract in May 2009. [115] In Portugal, it airs on Sic Radical .
Beginning June 3, 2008, The Colbert Report also aired on the ShowComedy channel of Showtime Arabia (Currently OSN First HD), a channel which broadcasts in the Middle East and North Africa. [116] The show is transmitted on a one-day delay from original transmission in the US.
The show was shown during prime time on Australia's free-to-air ABC2 in 2010, however the channel was outbid for rights for 2011. [117] [118] The show was available directly on the colbernation.com website for part of 2011, with Australian advertisements, however Australian access is now blocked.
Several international markets also air The Colbert Report Global Edition , which shows highlights from the previous week's shows and includes a special introduction by Stephen Colbert at the start of the program. This means a new or newly repackaged episode can be screened every weekday.
In addition most recent episodes (usually 3 weeks back) are available in full length on colbertnation.com. However some international audiences are unable to view the videos or episodes.

Related multimedia
The show spawned various merchandise and multimedia related to the show. Three books were released to accompany the show's humor, the first being I Am America (And So Can You!) , released both in print and as an audiobook in 2007. In 2012, two spinoff books of the show were released. America Again is a sequel to the show's first book, and addresses topics including Wall Street , campaign finance , energy policy , healthcare , eating on the campaign trail, and the United States Constitution . [119] Another book, I Am a Pole (And So Can You!) , was released the same year and purports to be a children's book telling the story of a fictional pole finding its purpose in life.
Segments from the show were also released on DVD during its run. The Best of The Colbert Report , released in 2007, contains several of the show's most memorable early moments. [120] The show's Christmas special, A Colbert Christmas: The Greatest Gift of All! , was also released on DVD the following year. [121] The soundtrack of that special also saw a digital release on the iTunes Store after its broadcast, and contains music from Feist , John Legend , Willie Nelson , Toby Keith , Jon Stewart , Elvis Costello , and Colbert himself. In 2011, Jack White's record label Third Man Records released a 7" vinyl single of Stephen Colbert and The Black Belles performing "Charlene II (I'm Over You)", [122] which they also performed together on the show. [123]

See also
WebPage index: 00051
The Harvard Crimson
WebPage index: 00052
Google
Google is an American multinational technology company specializing in Internet -related services and products. These include online advertising technologies, search , cloud computing , software , and hardware . Google was founded in 1996 by Larry Page and Sergey Brin while they were Ph.D. students at Stanford University , in California. Together, they own about 14 percent of its shares, and control 56 percent of the stockholder voting power through supervoting stock . They incorporated Google as a privately held company on September 4, 1998. An initial public offering (IPO) took place on August 19, 2004, and Google moved to its new headquarters in Mountain View, California , nicknamed the Googleplex . In August 2015, Google announced plans to reorganize its various interests as a conglomerate called Alphabet Inc. Google, Alphabet's leading subsidiary, will continue to be the umbrella company for Alphabet's Internet interests. Upon completion of the restructure, Sundar Pichai became CEO of Google, replacing Larry Page , who became CEO of Alphabet.
Rapid growth since incorporation has triggered a chain of products, acquisitions , and partnerships beyond Google's core search engine ( Google Search ). It offers services designed for work and productivity ( Google Docs, Sheets and Slides ), email ( Gmail / Inbox ), scheduling and time management ( Google Calendar ), cloud storage ( Google Drive ), social networking ( Google+ ), instant messaging and video chat ( Google Allo / Duo / Hangouts ), language translation ( Google Translate ), mapping and turn-by-turn navigation ( Google Maps ), video sharing ( YouTube ), notetaking ( Google Keep ), and photo organizing and editing ( Google Photos ). The company leads the development of the Android mobile operating system , the Google Chrome web browser, and Chrome OS , a lightweight operating system based on the Chrome browser. Google has moved increasingly into hardware; from 2010 to 2015, it partnered with major electronics manufacturers in the production of its Nexus devices, and in October 2016, it released multiple hardware products (including the Google Pixel smartphone, Home smart speaker, Wifi mesh wireless router , and Daydream View virtual reality headset). The new hardware chief, Rick Osterloh, stated: "a lot of the innovation that we want to do now ends up requiring controlling the end-to-end user experience". Google has also experimented with becoming an Internet carrier . In February 2010, it announced Google Fiber , a fiber-optic infrastructure that was installed in Kansas City ; in April 2015, it launched Project Fi in the United States, combining Wi-Fi and cellular networks from different providers; and in 2016, it announced the Google Station initiative to make public Wi-Fi around the world, which had already been deployed in India .
Alexa , a company that monitors commercial web traffic, lists Google.com as the most visited website in the world. Several other Google services also figure in the top 100 most visited websites, including YouTube and Blogger . Google has been the second most valuable brand in the world for 4 consecutive years, but has received significant criticism involving issues such as privacy concerns , tax avoidance , antitrust , censorship , and search neutrality . Google's mission statement , from the outset, was "to organize the world's information and make it universally accessible and useful", and its unofficial slogan was " Don't be evil ". In October 2015, the motto was replaced in the Alphabet corporate code of conduct by the phrase "Do the right thing".

History
Google began in January 1996 as a research project by Larry Page and Sergey Brin when they were both PhD students at Stanford University in Stanford, California . [6]
While conventional search engines ranked results by counting how many times the search terms appeared on the page, the two theorized about a better system that analyzed the relationships among websites. [7] They called this new technology PageRank ; it determined a website's relevance by the number of pages, and the importance of those pages, that linked back to the original site. [8] [9]
Page and Brin originally nicknamed their new search engine "BackRub", because the system checked backlinks to estimate the importance of a site. [10] [11] [12] Eventually, they changed the name to Google, originating from a misspelling of the word " googol ", [13] [14] the number 1 followed by 100 zeros, which was picked to signify that the search engine was intended to provide large quantities of information. [15] Originally, Google ran under Stanford University's website, with the domains google.stanford.edu and z.stanford.edu . [16] [17]
The domain name for Google was registered on September 15, 1997, [18] and the company was incorporated on September 4, 1998. It was based in the garage of a friend ( Susan Wojcicki [6] ) in Menlo Park, California . Craig Silverstein , a fellow PhD student at Stanford, was hired as the first employee. [6] [19] [20]

Financing, 1998 and initial public offering, 2004
The first funding for Google was an August 1998 contribution of $100,000 from Andy Bechtolsheim , co-founder of Sun Microsystems , given before Google was incorporated. [22] At least three other angel investors invested in 1998: Amazon.com founder Jeff Bezos , Stanford University computer science professor David Cheriton , and entrepreneur Ram Shriram . Author Ken Auletta claims that each (including Bechtolsheim) invested $250,000, [23] but other sources have reported a $100,000 level. [22]
After some additional, small investments through the end of 1998 to early 1999, [23] a new, $25 million round of funding was announced on June 7, 1999, [24] with major investors including the venture capital firms Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers and Sequoia Capital . [22]
Early in 1999, Brin and Page decided they wanted to sell Google to Excite . They went to Excite CEO George Bell and offered to sell it to him for $1 million. He rejected the offer. Vinod Khosla , one of Excite's venture capitalists, talked the duo down to $750,000, but Bell still rejected it. [25]
Google's initial public offering (IPO) took place five years later, on August 19, 2004. At that time Larry Page, Sergey Brin, and Eric Schmidt agreed to work together at Google for 20 years, until the year 2024. [26]
At IPO, the company offered 19,605,052 shares at a price of $85 per share. [27] [28] Shares were sold in an online auction format using a system built by Morgan Stanley and Credit Suisse , underwriters for the deal. [29] [30] The sale of $1.67 bn (billion) gave Google a market capitalization of more than $23bn. [31] By January 2014, its market capitalization had grown to $397bn. [32] The vast majority of the 271 million shares remained under the control of Google, and many Google employees became instant paper millionaires. Yahoo! , a competitor of Google's, also benefitted because it owned 8.4 million shares of Google before the IPO took place. [33]
There were concerns that Google's IPO would lead to changes in company culture. Reasons ranged from shareholder pressure for employee benefit reductions to the fact that many company executives would become instant paper millionaires. [34] As a reply to this concern, co-founders Brin and Page promised in a report to potential investors that the IPO would not change the company's culture. [35] In 2005, articles in The New York Times and other sources began suggesting that Google had lost its anti-corporate, no evil philosophy. [36] [37] [38] [39] [ excessive citations ] In an effort to maintain the company's unique culture, Google designated a Chief Culture Officer, who also serves as the Director of Human Resources. The purpose of the Chief Culture Officer is to develop and maintain the culture and work on ways to keep true to the core values that the company was founded on: a flat organization with a collaborative environment. [40] Google has also faced allegations of sexism and ageism from former employees. [41] [42] In 2013, a class action against several Silicon Valley companies, including Google, was filed for alleged "no cold call" agreements which restrained the recruitment of high-tech employees. [43]
The stock performed well after the IPO, with shares hitting $350 for the first time on October 31, 2007, [44] primarily because of strong sales and earnings in the online advertising market. [45] The surge in stock price was fueled mainly by individual investors, as opposed to large institutional investors and mutual funds . [45] GOOG shares split into GOOG Class C shares and GOOGL class A shares. [46] The company is listed on the NASDAQ stock exchange under the ticker symbols GOOGL and GOOG, and on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange under the ticker symbol GGQ1. These ticker symbols now refer to Alphabet Inc., Google's holding company, since the fourth quarter of 2015. [47]

Growth
In March 1999, the company moved its offices to Palo Alto, California , which is home to several prominent Silicon Valley technology start-ups. [48] The next year, against Page and Brin's initial opposition toward an advertising-funded search engine, [49] Google began selling advertisements associated with search keywords. [6] In order to maintain an uncluttered page design and increase speed, advertisements were solely text-based. Keywords were sold based on a combination of price bids and click-throughs, with bidding starting at five cents per click. [6]
This model of selling keyword advertising was first pioneered by Goto.com, an Idealab spin-off created by Bill Gross . [50] [51] When the company changed names to Overture Services, it sued Google over alleged infringements of the company's pay-per-click and bidding patents. Overture Services would later be bought by Yahoo! and renamed Yahoo! Search Marketing . The case was then settled out of court; Google agreed to issue shares of common stock to Yahoo! in exchange for a perpetual license. [52]
In 2001, Google received a patent for its PageRank mechanism. [53] The patent was officially assigned to Stanford University and lists Lawrence Page as the inventor. In 2003, after outgrowing two other locations, the company leased an office complex from Silicon Graphics , at 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway in Mountain View, California . [54] The complex became known as the Googleplex , a play on the word googolplex , the number one followed by a googol zeroes. The Googleplex interiors were designed by Clive Wilkinson Architects. Three years later, Google bought the property from SGI for $319 million. [55] By that time, the name "Google" had found its way into everyday language, causing the verb " google " to be added to the Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary and the Oxford English Dictionary , denoted as: "to use the Google search engine to obtain information on the Internet". [56] [57] The first use of "Google" as a verb in pop culture happened on the TV series Buffy the Vampire Slayer , in 2002. [58]
In 2005, The Washington Post reported on a 700 percent increase in third-quarter profit for Google, largely thanks to large companies shifting their advertising strategies from newspapers, magazines, and television to the Internet. [59] In January 2008, all the data that passed through Google's MapReduce software component had an aggregated size of 20 petabytes per day. [60] [61] [62] In 2009, a CNN report about top political searches of 2009 noted that "more than a billion searches" are being typed into Google on a daily basis. [63] In May 2011, the number of monthly unique visitors to Google surpassed one billion for the first time, an 8.4 percent increase from May 2010 (931 million). [64]
2012 was the first year that Google generated $50 billion in annual revenue, topping 2011's $38 billion generated. Then-CEO Larry Page commented in January 2013, "We ended 2012 with a strong quarter ... Revenues were up 36% year-on-year, and 8% quarter-on-quarter. And we hit $50 billion in revenues for the first time last year – not a bad achievement in just a decade and a half." [65]

2013 onward
Google announced the launch of a new company, called Calico , on September 19, 2013, to be led by Apple, Inc. chairman Arthur Levinson . In the official public statement, Page explained that the "health and well-being" company would focus on "the challenge of ageing and associated diseases". [66]
Google celebrated its 15-year anniversary on September 27, 2013, and in 2016 it celebrated its 18th birthday with an animated Doodle shown on web browsers around the world. [67] although it has used other dates for its official birthday. [68] The reason for the choice of September 27 remains unclear, and a dispute with rival search engine Yahoo! Search in 2005 has been suggested as the cause. [69] [70]
The Alliance for Affordable Internet (A4AI) was launched in October 2013; Google is part of the coalition of public and private organisations that also includes Facebook , Intel , and Microsoft . Led by Sir Tim Berners-Lee , the A4AI seeks to make Internet access more affordable so that access is broadened in the developing world, where only 31% of people are online. Google will help to decrease Internet access prices so they fall below the UN Broadband Commission's worldwide target of 5% of monthly income. [71]
The corporation's consolidated revenue for the third quarter of 2013 was reported in mid-October 2013 as $14.89 billion, a 12 percent increase compared to the previous quarter. [72] Google's Internet business was responsible for $10.8 billion of this total, with an increase in the number of users' clicks on advertisements. [73] In November 2013, Google announced plans for a new 1-million-sq-ft (93,000 sq m) office in London, which was due to open in 2016. The new premises, able to accommodate 4,500 employees, has been identified as one of the biggest ever commercial property acquisitions in Britain. [74] According to Interbrand 's annual Best Global Brands report, Google has been the second most valuable brand in the world (behind Apple Inc. ) in 2013, [75] 2014, [76] 2015, [77] and 2016, with a valuation of $133 billion. [78]
In September 2015, Google engineering manager Rachel Potvin revealed details about Google's software code at an engineering conference. She revealed that the entire Google codebase, which spans every single service it develops, consists of over 2 billion lines of code. All that code is stored on a code repository available to all 25,000 Google engineers, and the code is regularly copied and updated on 10 Google data centers. To keep control, Potvin said Google has built its own "version control system", called "Piper", and that "when you start a new project, you have a wealth of libraries already available to you. Almost everything has already been done." Engineers can make a single code change and deploy it on all services at the same time. The only major exceptions are that the PageRank search results algorithm is stored separately with only specific employee access, and the code for the Android operating system and the Google Chrome browser are also stored separately, as they don't run on the Internet. The "Piper" system spans 85 TB of data. Google engineers make 25,000 changes to the code each day, and on a weekly basis change approximately 15 million lines of code across 250,000 files. With that much code, automated bots have to help. Potvin reported, "You need to make a concerted effort to maintain code health. And this is not just humans maintaining code health, but robots too.” Bots aren't writing code, but generating a lot of the data and configuration files needed to run the company’s software. "Not only is the size of the repository increasing," Potvin explained, "but the rate of change is also increasing. This is an exponential curve." [79] [80]
As of October 2016, Google operates 70 offices in more than 40 countries. [81] Alexa , a company that monitors commercial web traffic, lists Google.com as the most visited website in the world. [82] Several other Google services also figure in the top 100 most visited websites, including YouTube [83] and Blogger. [84]

Push into hardware
In April 2016, Recode reported that Google had hired Rick Osterloh, Motorola Mobility 's former President, to head Google's new hardware division. [85] Later, in October 2016, The Information reported that David Foster, Amazon.com 's former Kindle hardware chief, had joined Google as hardware chief for a new brand of smartphones by Google. [86]
On October 4, 2016, Google held a press event, where it announced its intention to create more hardware. Rick Osterloh stated: "a lot of the innovation that we want to do now ends up requiring controlling the end-to-end user experience", [87] and introduced:
David Foster left Google in April 2017, after working at Google for six months. [92] [93]

Acquisitions and partnerships

2000–2009
In 2001, Google acquired Deja News , the operators of a large archive of materials from Usenet . [94] [95] Google rebranded the archive as Google Groups , and by the end of the year, it had expanded the history back to 1981. [96] [97]
In April 2003, Google acquired Applied Semantics , a company specializing in making software applications for the online advertising space. [98] [99] The AdSense contextual advertising technology developed by Applied Semantics was adopted into Google's advertising efforts. [100] [97]
In 2004, Google acquired Keyhole, Inc . [101] Keyhole's eponymous product was later renamed Google Earth .
in 2005. Google acquired Urchin Software in April 2005, using their Urchin on Demand product (along with ideas from Adaptive Path's Measure Map) to create Google Analytics in 2006.
In October 2006, Google announced that it had acquired the video-sharing site YouTube for $1.65 billion in Google stock, [102] [103] and the deal was finalized on November 13, 2006. [104] [105]
On April 13, 2007, Google reached an agreement to acquire DoubleClick for $3.1 billion, transferring to Google valuable relationships that DoubleClick had with Web publishers and advertising agencies. [106]
In addition to the many companies Google has purchased, the firm has partnered with other organizations for research, advertising, and other activities. In 2005, Google partnered with NASA Ames Research Center to build 1,000,000 square feet (93,000 m 2 ) of offices. [107]
In 2005 Google partnered with AOL [108] to enhance each other's video search services. In 2006 Google and Fox Interactive Media of News Corporation entered into a $900 million agreement to provide search and advertising on the then-popular social networking site MySpace . [109]
In 2007, Google began sponsoring NORAD Tracks Santa , displacing the former sponsor AOL. NORAD Tracks Santa purports to follow Santa Claus ' progress on Christmas Eve , [110] using Google Earth to "track Santa" in 3-D for the first time. [111] [112]
In 2008, Google developed a partnership with GeoEye to launch a satellite providing Google with high-resolution (0.41 m monochrome, 1.65 m color) imagery for Google Earth. The satellite was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base on September 6, 2008. [113] Google also announced in 2008 that it was hosting an archive of Life Magazine ' s photographs. [114] [115]

2010–present
In 2010, Google Energy made its first investment in a renewable energy project, putting $38.8 million into two wind farms in North Dakota . The company announced the two locations will generate 169.5 megawatts of power, enough to supply 55,000 homes. The farms, which were developed by NextEra Energy Resources , will reduce fossil fuel use in the region and return profits. NextEra Energy Resources sold Google a twenty-percent stake in the project to get funding for its development. [116] In February 2010, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission FERC granted Google an authorization to buy and sell energy at market rates. [117] The order specifically states that Google Energy—a subsidiary of Google—holds the rights "for the sale of energy, capacity, and ancillary services at market-based rates", but acknowledges that neither Google Energy nor its affiliates "own or control any generation or transmission" facilities. [118] The corporation exercised this authorization in September 2013 when it announced it would purchase all the electricity produced by the not-yet-built 240-megawatt Happy Hereford wind farm. [119]
Also in 2010, Google purchased Global IP Solutions , a Norway-based company that provides web-based teleconferencing and other related services. This acquisition enabled Google to add telephone-style services to its list of products. [120] On May 27, 2010, Google announced it had also closed the acquisition of the mobile ad network AdMob . This occurred days after the Federal Trade Commission closed its investigation into the purchase. [121] Google acquired the company for an undisclosed amount. [122] In July 2010, Google signed an agreement with an Iowa wind farm to buy 114 megawatts of energy for 20 years. [123]
On April 4, 2011, The Globe and Mail reported that Google bid $900 million for 6000 Nortel Networks patents. [124]
On August 15, 2011, Google made its largest-ever acquisition to-date when it announced that it would acquire Motorola Mobility for $12.5 billion [125] [126] subject to approval from regulators in the United States and Europe. In a post on Google's blog, Google Chief Executive and co-founder Larry Page revealed that the acquisition was a strategic move to strengthen Google's patent portfolio. The company's Android operating system has come under fire in an industry-wide patent battle, as Apple and Microsoft have sued Android device makers such as HTC, Samsung, and Motorola. [127] The merger was completed on May 22, 2012, after the approval of People's Republic of China . [128]
This purchase was made in part to help Google gain Motorola's considerable patent portfolio on mobile phones and wireless technologies, to help protect Google in its ongoing patent disputes with other companies, [129] mainly Apple and Microsoft , [127] and to allow it to continue to freely offer Android . [130] After the acquisition closed, Google began to restructure the Motorola business to fit Google's strategy. On August 13, 2012, Google announced plans to lay off 4000 Motorola Mobility employees. [131] On December 10, 2012, Google sold the manufacturing operations of Motorola Mobility to Flextronics for $75 million. [132] As a part of the agreement, Flextronics will manufacture undisclosed Android and other mobile devices. [133] On December 19, 2012, Google sold the Motorola Home business division of Motorola Mobility to Arris Group for $2.35 billion in a cash-and-stock transaction. As a part of this deal, Google acquired a 15.7% stake in Arris Group valued at $300 million. [134] [135]
On June 5, 2012, Google announced it had acquired Quickoffice , a company widely known for their mobile productivity suite for both iOS and Android. Google plans to integrate Quickoffice's technology into its own product suite. [136]
On February 6, 2013, Google announced it had acquired Channel Intelligence for $125 million. Channel Intelligence, a technology company that helps customers buy products online, is active globally in 31 different countries and works with over 850 retailers. Google will use this technology to enhance its e-commerce business. [137]
The official confirmation of Google's acquisition of the Israel-based startup Waze occurred in June 2013. Waze is promoted as a "community-based traffic and navigation app". [138]
The 2012 acquisition of WIMM Labs, a company that previously made an Android-powered smartwatch , was confirmed in August 2013. As of August 31, 2013, Google has not publicly commented on the news concerning WIMM Labs. [139] The acquisition of Flutter, a creator of hand gesture recognition technology , was confirmed by the corporation in early October 2013. The reported price is $40 million and Google spokesperson stated: "We're really impressed by the Flutter team's ability to design new technology based on cutting-edge research." Flutter's technology allows users to enact hand gestures to control navigation for apps such as iTunes, Windows Media Player, and Winamp. [140]
On January 26, 2014, Google Inc. announced it had agreed to acquire DeepMind Technologies , a privately held artificial intelligence company from London . DeepMind describes itself as having the ability to combine the best techniques from machine learning and systems neuroscience to build general-purpose learning algorithms. DeepMind's first commercial applications were used in simulations, e-commerce and games. As of December 2013, it was reported that DeepMind had roughly 75 employees. [141] The technology news website Re/code reported that the company was purchased for $400 million though it was not disclosed where the information came from. A Google spokesman would not comment of the price. [142] [143] The purchase of DeepMind aids in Google's recent growth in the artificial intelligence and robotics community. [144]
On January 29, 2014, Google announced it was selling its Motorola Mobility unit to China-based Lenovo , for $2.91bn. The company kept the extensive patent collection used to develop Android products, considered the most valuable part of the original deal. [145] Nonetheless, the sale price was significantly less than the $12.5 billion Google had bought Motorola Mobility for. The $2.91bn price tag consisted of $660 million in cash, $750 million in Lenovo ordinary shares, and a $1.5 billion 3-year promissory note. [146] In March 2014, Google confirmed it had purchased the remnants of gaming startup, Green Throttle Games , which developed a Bluetooth gaming controller for Android . [147]
In May 2014, Google announced it had purchased Quest Visual , maker of the augmented reality translator app Word Lens. [148] In June 2014, Google purchased satellite imaging firm Skybox Imaging for $500 million. [149] In July 2014, Google purchased the online music service Songza . [150]
On September 10, 2015, Google announced to form strategic partnership with Mobvoi to bring Android Wear to mainland China. [151] In October 2015, Google invested in a China-based artificial intelligence (AI) company, Mobvoi. The funding will enable the Company to further enhance its core AI technologies, and develop new consumer products empowered by AI. [152]
In July 2016, Google announced that it had purchased Moodstocks, a startup which specializes in instant image recognition . [153] In August 2016, Google acquired Orbitera, a startup that developed a platform for buying and selling cloud-based software, for around $100 million. [154]
In October 2016, Google announced it has acquired FameBit, a marketplace that connects video creators with marketers. [155] Also in October 2016, Google acquired eye-tracking startup Eyefluence. Matt Brian of Engadget drew references to Google's Daydream VR platform and Google's effort to create its own VR headsets that need eye-tracking sensors, and that the Eyefluence company, which specializes in turning eye movements into virtual actions, can be helpful in that process. [156]

Google data centers
As of 2016, Google owned and operated nine data centers across the U.S., two in Asia, and four in Europe. [157]
In 2011, the company had announced plans to build three data centers at a cost of more than $200 million in Asia ( Singapore , Hong Kong and Taiwan ) and said they would be operational within two years. [158] [159] In December 2013, Google announced that it had scrapped the plan to build a data center in Hong Kong. [160]
In October 2013, The Washington Post reported that the U.S. National Security Agency intercepted communications between Google's data centers, as part of a program named MUSCULAR . [161] [162] This wiretapping was made possible because Google did not encrypt data passed inside its own network. [163] Google began encrypting data sent between data centers in 2013. [164]
Google’s most efficient data center runs at 95 °F (35 °C) using only fresh air cooling, requiring no electrically powered air conditioning; the servers run so hot that humans cannot go near them for extended periods. [165]
An August 2011 report estimated that Google had about 900,000 servers in their data centers, based on energy usage. The report does state that "Google never says how many servers are running in its data centers." [166]
In December 2016, Google announced that starting in 2017, it will power all of its data centers, as well as all of its offices, from 100% renewable energy. The commitment will make Google "the world’s largest corporate buyer of renewable power, with commitments reaching 2.6 gigawatts (2,600 megawatts) of wind and solar energy". Google also stated that it does not count that as its final goal; it says that "since the wind doesn’t blow 24 hours a day, we’ll also broaden our purchases to a variety of energy sources that can enable renewable power, every hour of every day". Additionally, the project will "help support communities" around the world, as the purchase commitments will "result in infrastructure investments of more than $3.5 billion globally", and will "generate tens of millions of dollars per year in revenue to local property owners, and tens of millions more to local and national governments in tax revenue". [167] [168] [169]

Alphabet
On August 10, 2015, Google announced plans to reorganize its various interests as a conglomerate called Alphabet . Google, Alphabet's leading subsidiary, will continue to be the umbrella company for Alphabet's Internet interests. Upon completion of the restructure, Sundar Pichai became CEO of Google, replacing Larry Page , who became CEO of Alphabet. [170] [171] [172]

Products and services

Advertising
For the 2006 fiscal year, the company reported $10.492 billion in total advertising revenues and only $112 million in licensing and other revenues. [173] In 2011, 96% of Google's revenue was derived from its advertising programs. [174] In addition to its own algorithms for understanding search requests, Google uses technology from the company DoubleClick , to project user interest and target advertising to the search context and the user history. [175] [176]
In 2007, Google launched " AdSense for Mobile ", taking advantage of the emerging mobile advertising market. [177]
Google Analytics allows website owners to track where and how people use their website, for example by examining click rates for all the links on a page. [178] Google advertisements can be placed on third-party websites in a two-part program. Google's AdWords allows advertisers to display their advertisements in the Google content network, through either a cost-per-click or cost-per-view scheme. The sister service, Google AdSense , allows website owners to display these advertisements on their website and earn money every time ads are clicked. [179]
One of the criticisms of this program is the possibility of click fraud , which occurs when a person or automated script clicks on advertisements without being interested in the product, causing the advertiser to pay money to Google unduly. Industry reports in 2006 claimed that approximately 14 to 20 percent of clicks were fraudulent or invalid. [180]
In February 2003, Google stopped showing the advertisements of Oceana , a non-profit organization protesting a major cruise ship's sewage treatment practices. Google cited its editorial policy at the time, stating "Google does not accept advertising if the ad or site advocates against other individuals, groups, or organizations." [181] The policy was later changed. [182] In June 2008, Google reached an advertising agreement with Yahoo!, which would have allowed Yahoo! to feature Google advertisements on its web pages. The alliance between the two companies was never completely realized because of antitrust concerns by the U.S. Department of Justice . As a result, Google pulled out of the deal in November 2008. [183] [184]

Search engine
According to market research published by comScore in November 2009, Google Search is the dominant search engine in the United States market, with a market share of 65.6%. [185] Google indexes billions [186] of web pages, so that users can search for the information they desire through the use of keywords and operators .
In 2003, The New York Times complained about Google's indexing, claiming that Google's caching of content on its site infringed its copyright for the content. [187] In this case, the United States District Court of Nevada ruled in favor of Google in Field v. Google and Parker v. Google . [188] [189] The publication 2600: The Hacker Quarterly has compiled a list of words that the web giant's new instant search feature will not search. [190]
Google Watch has criticized Google's PageRank algorithms, saying that they discriminate against new websites and favor established sites. [191]
Google also hosts Google Books . The company began scanning books and uploading limited previews, and full books were allowed, into its new book search engine. The Authors Guild , a group that represents 8,000 U.S. authors, filed a class action suit in a New York City federal court against Google in 2005 over this service. Google replied that it is in compliance with all existing and historical applications of copyright laws regarding books. [192] Google eventually reached a revised settlement in 2009 to limit its scans to books from the U.S., the UK, Australia, and Canada. [193] Furthermore, the Paris Civil Court ruled against Google in late 2009, asking it to remove the works of La Martinière ( Éditions du Seuil ) from its database. [194] In competition with Amazon.com , Google sells digital versions of new books. [195]
On July 21, 2010, in response to Bing , Google updated its image search to display a streaming sequence of thumbnails that enlarge when pointed at. Though web searches still appear in a batch per page format, on July 23, 2010, dictionary definitions for certain English words began appearing above the linked results for web searches. [196]
The "Hummingbird" update to the Google search engine was announced in September 2013. The update was introduced over the month prior to the announcement and allows users ask the search engine a question in natural language rather than entering keywords into the search box. [197]
In August 2016, Google announced two major changes related to its mobile search results. The first, removing the "mobile-friendly" label that highlighted pages were easy to read on mobile from its mobile search results page. The second, on January 10, 2017, the company will start punishing mobile pages that show intrusive interstitials when a user first opens a page and they will rank lower in its search results. [198]

Enterprise services
G Suite is a monthly subscription offering for organizations and businesses to get access to a collection of Google's services, including Gmail , Google Drive and Docs, Sheets, and Slides , with additional administrative tools, unique domain names, and 24/7 support. [199]
Google Search Appliance was launched in February 2002, targeted toward providing search technology for larger organizations. [6] Google launched the Mini three years later, which was targeted at smaller organizations. Late in 2006, Google began to sell Custom Search Business Edition, providing customers with an advertising-free window into Google.com's index. The service was renamed Google Site Search in 2008. [200] Site Search customers were notified by email in late March 2017 that no new licenses for Site Search would be sold after April 1, 2017, but that customer and technical support would be provided for the duration of existing license agreements. [201] [202]
On March 15, 2016, Google announced the introduction of Google Analytics 360 Suite, "a set of integrated data and marketing analytics products, designed specifically for the needs of enterprise-class marketers." Among other things, the suite is designed to help "enterprise class marketers" "see the complete customer journey", generate "useful insights", and "deliver engaging experiences to the right people". [203] Jack Marshall of The Wall Street Journal wrote that the suite competes with existing marketing cloud offerings by companies including Adobe , Oracle , Salesforce , and IBM . [204]

Consumer services

Web-based services
In 2004, Google launched Gmail , a web-based email service, with a significantly higher storage offer than competitors. [205] Gmail grew to become the world's most popular email service, with over a billion active users in February 2016. [206] Gmail faces significant criticism over privacy, due to its usage of machine scanning of email content, [207] a practice that Google says is necessary of web-based email. [208]
In April 2012, Google launched Google Drive , a cloud storage service [209] with 15 GB free storage space and paid plans up to 30 TB available. [210]
Google Docs, Sheets and Slides are a web-based word processor, spreadsheet and presentation program, respectively, that form the Google Docs suite. Docs originated from a Silicon Valley startup that was acquired by Google in 2006. [211] The suite was integrated into Google Drive when Drive launched in 2012. [209]
Google Photos is a photo sharing and storage service , offering unlimited free storage for photos up to 16 megapixels and 1080p resolution . [212]

Operating systems
In 2007, reports surfaced that Google was planning the release of its own mobile phone, possibly a competitor to Apple 's iPhone . [213] [214] [215] The project, called Android , turned out not to be a phone but an operating system for mobile devices, which Google acquired and then released as an open source project under the Apache 2.0 license . [216] Google provides a software development kit for developers so applications can be created to be run on Android-based phones. In September 2008, T-Mobile released the G1 , the first Android-based phone. [217]
Google released the seventh major version of the Android operating system in August 2016, [218] which featured the Google Daydream virtual reality platform. [219] [220]
Android is the world's most widely used operating system, with over 1.4 billion active users in September 2015. [221] However, Android's platform fragmentation (millions of devices from hundreds of manufacturers who each design their own version of Android) means that the operating system suffers significant issues with security vulnerabilities due to a lack of updates and support. [222]
Google has also developed variations of Android for smartwatches ( Android Wear ), [223] televisions ( Android TV ), [224] cars ( Android Auto ), [225] and Internet of things -enabled smart devices ( Android Things ). [226]
Following the launch of the Chrome browser in 2008, Google introduced Chrome OS in 2009, described as a new, open-source, lightweight operating system based entirely around the browser, and targeted at netbooks . [227]

Software services
In September 2008, Google introduced the Google Chrome web browser in beta testing status. [228] The Chrome browser is the world's most widely used web browser across all platforms as of October 2016. [229]

Hardware platforms
In January 2010, Google released Nexus One , the first Android phone under its own, "Nexus", brand. [230] It spawned a number of phones and tablets under the "Nexus" branding, [231] which some referred to as "high-quality low-cost" devices. [232] The Nexus line was discontinued and replaced by a new brand, called Pixel , in 2016. [233]
In 2011, the Chromebook was introduced, described as a "new kind of computer" running Chrome OS, with the first Chromebooks coming from Samsung and Acer . [234]
In July 2013, Google introduced the Chromecast dongle, that allows users to stream YouTube and Netflix videos via smartphones. [235] [236] [237]
In June 2014, Google announced Google Cardboard , a simple cardboard viewer that lets user place their smartphone in a special front compartment to view virtual reality (VR) media. [238] [239]

Internet services
In February 2010, Google announced the Google Fiber project, with experimental plans to build an ultra-high-speed broadband network for 50,000 to 500,000 customers in one or more American cities. [240] [241]
In March 2011, Google announced that Kansas City, Kansas would be the first community where the new network would be deployed. [242]
Following Google's corporate restructure to make Alphabet Inc. its parent company, Google Fiber was moved to Alphabet's Access division. [243] [244]
In April 2015, Google announced Project Fi , a mobile virtual network operator, that combines Wi-Fi and cellular networks from different telecommunication providers to enable seamless connectivity and fast Internet signal. [245] [246] [247]
In September 2016, Google began expanding its Google Station initiative, which was previously a project for public Wi-Fi at railway stations in India. Caesar Sengupta, VP for Google’s next billion users, told The Verge that 15,000 people get online for the first time thanks to Google Station and that 3.5 million people use the service every month. The expansion meant that Google was looking for partners around the world to further develop the initiative, which promised "high-quality, secure, easily accessible Wi-Fi". [248]

Other products
Google Translate is a server-side machine translation service, which can translate between 80 different languages. [249] For some languages, handwriting recognition , or speech recognition can be used as input, and translated text can be pronounced through speech synthesis . [250] The software uses corpus linguistics techniques, where the program "learns" from professionally translated documents, specifically UN and European Parliament proceedings. [251]
Google launched its Google News service in 2002, an automated service which summarizes news articles from various websites. [252] In March 2005, Agence France Presse (AFP) sued Google for copyright infringement in federal court in the District of Columbia, a case which Google settled for an undisclosed amount in a pact that included a license of the full text of AFP articles for use on Google News. [253]
In August 2016, media outlets reported on a mysterious code published on GitHub , that revealed that Google was developing a new operating system called " Fuchsia ". While no official announcement was made, inspection of the code suggested its capability to run on universal devices, including "dash infotainment systems for cars, to embedded devices like traffic lights and digital watches, all the way up to smartphones, tablets and PCs". The code differed from Android and Chrome OS due to its code base being called "Magenta", rather than a Linux kernel . [254] [255] In May 2017, Ars Technica wrote about Fuchsia's new user interface , an upgrade from its command-line interface at its first reveal in August, along with a developer writing that Fuchsia "isn't a toy thing, it's not a 20% project, it's not a dumping ground of a dead thing that we don't care about anymore". [256] Multiple media outlets wrote about the project's seemingly close ties to Android, with some speculating that Fuchsia might be an effort to "re-do" [257] or replace Android [258] [259] in a way that fixes problems on that platform. [256]
In May 2011, Google announced Google Wallet , a mobile application for wireless payments. [260]
In late June 2011, Google launched a social networking service called Google+ . [261] [262]
In 2013, Google launched Google Shopping Express , a delivery service initially available only in San Francisco and Silicon Valley. [263]
Google Alerts is a content change detection and notification service, offered by the search engine company Google. The service sends emails to the user when it finds new results—such as web pages, newspaper articles, or blogs—that match the user's search term. [264] [265] [266]
In July 2015 Google released DeepDream , an image recognition software capable of creating psychedelic images using a convolutional neural network . [267] [268] [269]
Google introduced its Family Link service in March 2017, letting parents buy Android Nougat -based Android devices for kids under 13 years of age and create a Google account through the app, with the parents controlling the apps installed, monitor the time spent using the device, and setting a "Bedtime" feature that remotely locks the device. [270] [271] [272]
In April 2017, Google launched AutoDraw, a web-based tool using artificial intelligence and machine learning to recognize users' drawings and replace scribbles with related stock images that have been created by professional artists. [273] [274] [275] The tool is built using the same technology as QuickDraw, an experimental game from Google's Creative Lab where users were tasked with drawing objects that algorithms would recognize within 20 seconds. [276]
In May 2017, Google added "Family Groups" to several of its services. The feature, which lets users create a group consisting of their family members' individual Google accounts, lets users add their "Family Group" as a collaborator to shared albums in Google Photos , shared notes in Google Keep , and common events in Google Calendar . At announcement, the feature is limited to Australia, Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, Russia, Spain, United Kingdom and United States. [277] [278]

APIs
Google APIs are a set of application programming interfaces (APIs) developed by Google which allow communication with Google Services and their integration to other services. Examples of these include Search, Gmail, Translate or Google Maps. Third-party apps can use these APIs to take advantage of or extend the functionality of the existing services.

Other websites
Google Developers is Google's site for software development tools, APIs, and technical resources. The site contains documentation on using Google developer tools and APIs—including discussion groups and blogs for developers using Google's developer products.
Google Labs was a page created by Google to demonstrate and test new projects.
Google owns the top-level domain 1e100.net which is used for some servers within Google's network. The name is a reference to the scientific E notation representation for 1 googol, 1E100 = 1 × 10 100 . [279]
In March 2017, Google launched a new website, opensource.google.com, to publish its internal documentation for Google Open Source projects. [280] [281]

Corporate affairs and culture
On Fortune magazine's list of the best companies to work for, Google ranked first in 2007, 2008 and 2012 [282] [283] [284] and fourth in 2009 and 2010. [285] [286] Google was also nominated in 2010 to be the world's most attractive employer to graduating students in the Universum Communications talent attraction index. [287] Google's corporate philosophy includes principles such as "you can make money without doing evil," "you can be serious without a suit," and "work should be challenging and the challenge should be fun." [288]

Employees
As of the second quarter in 2015, Google has 57,100 employees. [289] A March 2013 report detailed that it had 10,000 developers based in more than 40 offices. [290]
After the company's IPO in 2004, founders Sergey Brin and Larry Page and CEO Eric Schmidt requested that their base salary be cut to $1 . Subsequent offers by the company to increase their salaries were turned down, primarily because their main compensation continues to come from owning stock in Google. Before 2004, Schmidt made $250,000 per year, and Page and Brin each received an annual salary of $150,000. [291]
In March 2008, Sheryl Sandberg , then vice-president of global online sales and operations, began her position as chief operating officer of Facebook. [292] [293] In 2009, early employee Tim Armstrong left to become CEO of AOL . In July 2012, Google's first female engineer, Marissa Mayer , left Google to become Yahoo! 's CEO. [294]
As a motivation technique, Google uses a policy often called Innovation Time Off, where Google engineers are encouraged to spend 20% of their work time on projects that interest them. Some of Google's newer services, such as Gmail, Google News, Orkut, and AdSense originated from these independent endeavors. [296] In a talk at Stanford University, Marissa Mayer , Google's Vice President of Search Products and User Experience until July 2012, showed that half of all new product launches in the second half of 2005 had originated from the Innovation Time Off. [297]

Office locations and headquarters
Google's headquarters in Mountain View , California, is referred to as "the Googleplex ", a play on words on the number googolplex and the headquarters itself being a complex of buildings. The lobby is decorated with a piano, lava lamps , old server clusters, and a projection of search queries on the wall. The hallways are full of exercise balls and bicycles. Many employees have access to the corporate recreation center. Recreational amenities are scattered throughout the campus and include a workout room with weights and rowing machines, locker rooms, washers and dryers, a massage room, assorted video games, table football , a baby grand piano, a billiard table, and ping pong. In addition to the recreation room, there are snack rooms stocked with various foods and drinks, with special emphasis placed on nutrition. [298] Free food is available to employees 24/7, with the offerings provided by paid vending machines prorated based on and favoring those of better nutritional value. [299]
Google's extensive amenities are not available to all of its workers. Temporary workers such as book scanners do not have access to shuttles, Google cafes, or other perks. [300]
In 2006, Google moved into 311,000 square feet (28,900 m 2 ) of office space in New York City, at 111 Eighth Avenue in Manhattan. [301] The office was specially designed and built for Google and houses its largest advertising sales team, which has been instrumental in securing large partnerships. [301] The New York headquarters is similar in design and functionality to its Mountain View headquarters, and includes a game room, micro kitchens, and a video game area. [302] As of February 2012, a significant engineering team is based in New York City. [303]
By late 2006, Google established a new headquarters for its AdWords division in Ann Arbor, Michigan . [304] In November 2006, Google opened offices on Carnegie Mellon 's campus in Pittsburgh , focusing on shopping-related advertisement coding and smartphone applications and programs. [305] [306] Other office locations in the U.S. include Atlanta, Georgia ; Austin, Texas ; Boulder, Colorado ; Cambridge, Massachusetts ; San Francisco , California ; Seattle, Washington ; Reston, Virginia , and Washington, D.C. [307]
In October 2006, the company announced plans to install thousands of solar panels to provide up to 1.6 mega watts of electricity, enough to satisfy approximately 30% of the campus' energy needs. [308] The system will be the largest solar power system constructed on a U.S. corporate campus and one of the largest on any corporate site in the world. [308] In addition, Google announced in 2009 that it was deploying herds of goats to keep grassland around the Googleplex short, helping to prevent the threat from seasonal bush fires while also reducing the carbon footprint of mowing the extensive grounds. [309] [310] The idea of trimming lawns using goats originated from Bob Widlar , an engineer who worked for National Semiconductor . [311] In 2008, Google faced accusations in Harper's Magazine of being an "energy glutton". The company was accused of employing its " Don't be evil " motto and its public energy-saving campaigns to cover up or make up for the massive amounts of energy its servers require. [312]
On May 12, 2015, Google announced the setting up of its largest campus outside the United States in Hyderabad, India. The proposed campus can accommodate 6500 employees. [313]
Internationally, Google has over 70 offices outside the US, the majority of which are local corporate offices and data centers. [314] Google also has regional business and sales headquarters including in Dublin (for Europe) and Singapore (for Asia-Pacific). [315] [316]
Google also has product research and development operations in cities around the world, namely Sydney (main development location of Google Maps) and London (part of Android development), [317] [318] as well as numerous others including Zurich , Munich , Tokyo , Tel Aviv and Hyderabad . [319]

Doodles
Since 1998, Google has been designing special, temporary alternate logos to place on their homepage intended to celebrate holidays , events, achievements and people. The first Google Doodle was in honor of the Burning Man Festival of 1998. [320] [321] The doodle was designed by Larry Page and Sergey Brin to notify users of their absence in case the servers crashed. Subsequent Google Doodles were designed by an outside contractor, until Larry and Sergey asked then- intern Dennis Hwang to design a logo for Bastille Day in 2000. From that point onward, Doodles have been organized and created by a team of employees termed "Doodlers". [322]

Easter eggs and April Fools' Day jokes
Google has a tradition of creating April Fools' Day jokes. On April 1, 2000, Google MentalPlex allegedly featured the use of mental power to search the web. [323] In 2007, Google announced a free Internet service called TiSP , or Toilet Internet Service Provider, where one obtained a connection by flushing one end of a fiber-optic cable down their toilet. [324] Also in 2007, Google's Gmail page displayed an announcement for Gmail Paper , allowing users to have email messages printed and shipped to them. [325] In 2008, Google announced Gmail Custom time where users could change the time that the email was sent. [326]
In 2010, Google changed its company name to Topeka in honor of Topeka, Kansas , whose mayor changed the city's name to Google for a short amount of time in an attempt to sway Google's decision in its new Google Fiber Project . [327] [328] In 2011, Google announced Gmail Motion , an interactive way of controlling Gmail and the computer with body movements via the user's webcam. [329]
Google's services contain easter eggs , such as the Swedish Chef 's "Bork bork bork," Pig Latin , "Hacker" or leetspeak , Elmer Fudd , Pirate , and Klingon as language selections for its search engine. [330] The search engine calculator provides the Answer to the Ultimate Question of Life, the Universe, and Everything from Douglas Adams ' The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy . [331] When searching the word "recursion", the spell-checker's result for the properly spelled word is exactly the same word, creating a recursive link. [332]
When searching for the word " anagram ," meaning a rearrangement of letters from one word to form other valid words, Google's suggestion feature displays "Did you mean: nag a ram?" [333] In Google Maps, searching for directions between places separated by large bodies of water, such as Los Angeles and Tokyo, results in instructions to " kayak across the Pacific Ocean ." During FIFA World Cup 2010 , search queries including " World Cup " and " FIFA " caused the "Goooo...gle" page indicator at the bottom of every result page to read "Goooo...al!" instead. [334]

Philanthropy
In 2004, Google formed the not-for-profit philanthropic Google.org , with a start-up fund of $1 billion. [335] The mission of the organization is to create awareness about climate change , global public health, and global poverty. One of its first projects was to develop a viable plug-in hybrid electric vehicle that can attain 100 miles per gallon. Google hired Larry Brilliant as the program's executive director in 2004, [336] and the current director is Megan Smith. [337]
In 2008, Google announced its "project 10 100 " which accepted ideas for how to help the community and then allowed Google users to vote on their favorites. [338] After two years of silence, during which many wondered what had happened to the program, [339] Google revealed the winners of the project, giving a total of ten million dollars to various ideas ranging from non-profit organizations that promote education to a website that intends to make all legal documents public and online. [340]
In 2011, Google donated 1 million euros to International Mathematical Olympiad to support the next five annual International Mathematical Olympiads (2011–2015). [341] [342] On July 2012, Google launched a " Legalize Love " campaign in support of gay rights . [343]

Tax avoidance
Google uses various tax avoidance strategies . Out of the five largest American technology companies , it pays the lowest taxes to the countries of origin of its revenues. The company accomplishes this partly by licensing technology through shell subsidiaries in tax havens such as Ireland, Bermuda, the Bahamas, and the Netherlands. [344] This has reportedly sparked a French investigation into Google's transfer pricing practices. [345]
Following criticism of the amount of corporate taxes that Google paid in the United Kingdom, Chairman Eric Schmidt said, "It's called capitalism. We are proudly capitalistic." During the same December 2012 interview, Schmidt "confirmed that the company had no intention of paying more to the UK exchequer." [346] In 2013, Schmidt responded to questions about taxes paid in the UK by pointing to the advertising fees Google charged UK companies as a source of economic growth. [347]
Google Vice President Matt Brittin testified to the Public Accounts Committee of the UK House of Commons that his UK sales team made no sales and hence owed no sales taxes to the UK. [348] In January 2016, Google reached a settlement with the UK to pay £130m in back taxes plus higher taxes in future. [349]

Environment
Since 2007, Google has aimed for carbon neutrality in regard to its operations. [350]
Google disclosed in September 2011 that it "continuously uses enough electricity to power 200,000 homes", almost 260 million watts or about a quarter of the output of a nuclear power plant. Total carbon emissions for 2010 were just under 1.5 million metric tons, most due to fossil fuels that provide electricity for the data centers. Google said that 25 percent of its energy was supplied by renewable fuels in 2010. An average search uses only 0.3 watt-hours of electricity, so all global searches are only 12.5 million watts or 5% of the total electricity consumption by Google. [351]
In 2007, Google launched a project centered on developing renewable energy, titled the "Renewable Energy Cheaper than Coal (RE<C)" project. [352] However, the project was cancelled in 2014, after engineers Ross Koningstein and David Fork understood, after years of study, that "best-case scenario, which was based on our most optimistic forecasts for renewable energy, would still result in severe climate change", writing that they "came to the conclusion that even if Google and others had led the way toward a wholesale adoption of renewable energy, that switch would not have resulted in significant reductions of carbon dioxide emissions". [353]
In June 2013, The Washington Post reported that Google had donated $50,000 to the Competitive Enterprise Institute , a libertarian think tank that calls human carbon emissions a positive factor in the environment and argues that global warming is not a concern. [354]
In July 2013, it was reported that Google had hosted a fundraising event for Oklahoma Senator Jim Inhofe , who has called climate change a "hoax". [355] In 2014 Google cut ties with the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC) after pressure from the Sierra Club, major unions and Google's own scientists because of ALEC's stance on climate change and opposition to renewable energy. [356]

Lobbying
In 2013, Google ranked 5th in lobbying spending, up from 213th in 2003. In 2012, the company ranked 2nd in campaign donations of technology and Internet sections. [357]

Litigation
Google has been involved in a number of lawsuits including the High-Tech Employee Antitrust Litigation which resulted in Google being one of four companies to pay a $415 million settlement to employees. [358]

Criticism and controversy
Google's market dominance has led to prominent media coverage, including criticism of the company over issues such as aggressive tax avoidance , [359] search neutrality , copyright , censorship of search results and content, and privacy . [360] [361] Other criticisms include alleged misuse and manipulation of search results, its use of others' intellectual property , concerns that its compilation of data may violate people's privacy , and the energy consumption of its servers, as well as concerns over traditional business issues such as monopoly , restraint of trade , anti-competitive practices , and patent infringement .
Google's mission statement , from the outset, was "to organize the world's information and make it universally accessible and useful", [362] and its unofficial slogan was " Don't be evil ". [363] In October 2015, the motto was replaced in the Alphabet corporate code of conduct by the phrase: "Do the right thing". [364] Google's commitment to such robust idealism has been increasingly called into doubt due to a number of the firm's actions and behaviours which appear to contradict this. [365] [366]
Following media reports about PRISM , NSA's massive electronic surveillance program , in June 2013, several technology companies were identified as participants, including Google. [367] According to leaks of said program, Google joined the PRISM program in 2009. [368]

See also
WebPage index: 00053
Abraham Lincoln
Abraham Lincoln ( i / ˈ eɪ b r ə h æ m ˈ l ɪ ŋ k ən / ; February 12, 1809 – April 15, 1865) was an American politician and lawyer who served as the 16th President of the United States from March 1861 until his assassination in April 1865 . Lincoln led the United States through its Civil War —its bloodiest war and perhaps its greatest moral, constitutional, and political crisis. [2] [3] In doing so, he preserved the Union , paved the way to the abolition of slavery, strengthened the federal government, and modernized the economy.
Born in Hodgenville, Kentucky , Lincoln grew up on the western frontier in Kentucky and Indiana . Largely self-educated, he became a lawyer in Illinois , a Whig Party leader , and was elected to the Illinois House of Representatives , in which he served for eight years. Elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1846, Lincoln promoted rapid modernization of the economy through banks, tariffs, and railroads. Because he had originally agreed not to run for a second term in Congress, and because his opposition to the Mexican–American War was unpopular among Illinois voters, Lincoln returned to Springfield and resumed his successful law practice. Reentering politics in 1854, he became a leader in building the new Republican Party , which had a statewide majority in Illinois. In 1858, while taking part in a series of highly publicized debates with his opponent and rival, Democrat Stephen A. Douglas , Lincoln spoke out against the expansion of slavery, but lost the U.S. Senate race to Douglas.
In 1860, Lincoln secured the Republican Party presidential nomination as a moderate from a swing state. Though he gained very little support in the slaveholding states of the South, he swept the North and was elected president in 1860 . Lincoln's victory prompted seven southern slave states to form the Confederate States of America before he moved into the White House —no compromise or reconciliation was found regarding slavery and secession. Subsequently, on April 12, 1861, a Confederate attack on Fort Sumter inspired the North to enthusiastically rally behind the Union . As the leader of the moderate faction of the Republican Party, Lincoln confronted Radical Republicans, who demanded harsher treatment of the South, War Democrats , who called for more compromise, anti-war Democrats (called Copperheads ), who despised him, and irreconcilable secessionists, who plotted his assassination. Politically, Lincoln fought back by pitting his opponents against each other, by carefully planned political patronage , and by appealing to the American people with his powers of oratory. [4] His Gettysburg Address became an iconic endorsement of the principles of nationalism, republicanism, equal rights, liberty, and democracy.
Lincoln initially concentrated on the military and political dimensions of the war. His primary goal was to reunite the nation. He suspended habeas corpus , leading to the controversial ex parte Merryman decision, and he averted potential British intervention in the war by defusing the Trent Affair in late 1861. Lincoln closely supervised the war effort, especially the selection of top generals, including his most successful general, Ulysses S. Grant . He also made major decisions on Union war strategy, including a naval blockade that shut down the South's normal trade, moves to take control of Kentucky and Tennessee, and using gunboats to gain control of the southern river system. Lincoln tried repeatedly to capture the Confederate capital at Richmond ; each time a general failed, Lincoln substituted another, until finally Grant succeeded. As the war progressed, his complex moves toward ending slavery included the Emancipation Proclamation of 1863; Lincoln used the U.S. Army to protect escaped slaves, encouraged the border states to outlaw slavery, and pushed through Congress the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution , which permanently outlawed slavery.
An exceptionally astute politician deeply involved with power issues in each state, Lincoln reached out to the War Democrats and managed his own re-election campaign in the 1864 presidential election . Anticipating the war's conclusion, Lincoln pushed a moderate view of Reconstruction , seeking to reunite the nation speedily through a policy of generous reconciliation in the face of lingering and bitter divisiveness. On April 14, 1865, five days after the surrender of Confederate commanding general Robert E. Lee , Lincoln was assassinated by John Wilkes Booth , a Confederate sympathizer. Secretary of War Edwin Stanton launched a manhunt for Booth, and 12 days later on April 26, Booth was fatally shot by Union Army soldier Boston Corbett .
Lincoln has been consistently ranked both by scholars [5] and the public [6] as among the greatest U.S. presidents.

Family and childhood

Early life and ancestry
Abraham Lincoln was born February 12, 1809, the second child of Thomas and Nancy Hanks Lincoln , in a one-room log cabin on the Sinking Spring Farm near Hodgenville, Kentucky . [7] He was a descendant of Samuel Lincoln , an Englishman who migrated from Hingham, Norfolk to its namesake of Hingham, Massachusetts in 1638. Samuel's grandson and great-grandson began the family's western migration, which passed through New Jersey , Pennsylvania , and Virginia . [8] [9] Lincoln's paternal grandfather and namesake, Captain Abraham Lincoln , moved the family from Virginia to Jefferson County, Kentucky in the 1780s. [10] Captain Lincoln was killed in an Indian raid in 1786. His children, including eight-year-old Thomas, [12] the future president's father, witnessed the attack. [13] [14] [15] After his father's murder, Thomas was left to make his own way on the frontier, working at odd jobs in Kentucky and in Tennessee , before settling with members of his family in Hardin County, Kentucky in the early 1800s. [16] [17]
Lincoln's mother, Nancy, is widely assumed to have been the daughter of Lucy Hanks, although no record of Nancy Hanks' birth has ever been found. [18] According to William Ensign Lincoln's book The Ancestry of Abraham Lincoln , Nancy was the daughter of Joseph Hanks; [19] however, the debate continues over whether she was born out of wedlock. Still another researcher, Adin Baber, claims that Nancy Hanks was the daughter of Abraham Hanks and Sarah Harper of Virginia. [20]
Thomas Lincoln and Nancy Hanks were married on June 12, 1806, in Washington County, and moved to Elizabethtown, Kentucky , following their marriage. [21] They became the parents of three children: Sarah, born on February 10, 1807; Abraham, on February 12, 1809; and another son, Thomas, who died in infancy. [22] Thomas Lincoln bought or leased several farms in Kentucky, including the Sinking Spring farm, where Abraham was born; however, a land title dispute soon forced the Lincolns to move. [23] [24] In 1811, the family moved eight miles (13 km) north, to Knob Creek Farm , where Thomas acquired title to 230 acres (93 ha) of land. In 1815 a claimant in another land dispute sought to eject the family from the farm. [24] Of the 816.5 acres (330 ha) that Thomas held in Kentucky, he lost all but 200 acres (81 ha) of his land in court disputes over property titles. [25] Frustrated over the lack of security provided by the Kentucky title survey system in the courts, Thomas sold the remaining land he held in Kentucky in 1814, and began planning a move to Indiana , where the land survey process was more reliable and the ability for an individual to retain land titles was more secure. [26]
In 1816, the family moved north across the Ohio River to Indiana , a free, non-slaveholding territory, where they settled in an "unbroken forest" [27] in Hurricane Township, Perry County . (Their land in southern Indiana became part of Spencer County, Indiana , when the county was established in 1818.) [28] [29] The farm is preserved as part of the Lincoln Boyhood National Memorial . In 1860, Lincoln noted that the family's move to Indiana was "partly on account of slavery"; but mainly due to land title difficulties in Kentucky. [25] [30] During the family's years in Kentucky and Indiana, Thomas Lincoln worked as a farmer, cabinetmaker, and carpenter. [31] He owned farms, several town lots and livestock, paid taxes, sat on juries, appraised estates, served on country slave patrols, and guarded prisoners. Thomas and Nancy Lincoln were also members of a Separate Baptists church, which had restrictive moral standards and opposed alcohol, dancing, and slavery. [32] Within a year of the family's arrival in Indiana, Thomas claimed title to 160 acres (65 ha) of Indiana land. Despite some financial challenges he eventually obtained clear title to 80 acres (32 ha) of land in what became known as the Little Pigeon Creek Community in Spencer County. [33] Prior to the family's move to Illinois in 1830, Thomas had acquired an additional twenty acres of land adjacent to his property. [34]
Several significant family events took place during Lincoln's youth in Indiana. On October 5, 1818, Nancy Lincoln died of milk sickness , leaving eleven-year-old Sarah in charge of a household that included her father, nine-year-old Abraham, and Dennis Hanks, Nancy's nineteen-year-old orphaned cousin. [35] On December 2, 1819, Lincoln's father married Sarah "Sally" Bush Johnston , a widow from Elizabethtown, Kentucky, with three children of her own. [36] Abraham became very close to his stepmother, whom he referred to as "Mother". [37] [38] Those who knew Lincoln as a teenager later recalled him being very distraught over his sister Sarah's death on January 20, 1828, while giving birth to a stillborn son. [39] [40]
As a youth, Lincoln disliked the hard labor associated with frontier life. Some of his neighbors and family members thought for a time that he was lazy for all his "reading, scribbling, writing, ciphering, writing Poetry, etc.", [41] [42] [43] and must have done it to avoid manual labor. His stepmother also acknowledged he did not enjoy "physical labor", but loved to read. [44] Lincoln was largely self-educated. His formal schooling from several itinerant teachers was intermittent, the aggregate of which may have amounted to less than a year; however, he was an avid reader and retained a lifelong interest in learning. [45] [46] Family, neighbors, and schoolmates of Lincoln's youth recalled that he read and reread the King James Bible , Aesop's Fables , Bunyan 's The Pilgrim's Progress , Defoe 's Robinson Crusoe , Weems's The Life of Washington , and Franklin 's Autobiography , among others. [47] [48] [49] [50]
As he grew into his teens, Lincoln took responsibility for the chores expected of him as one of the boys in the household. He also complied with the customary obligation of a son giving his father all earnings from work done outside the home until the age of twenty-one. [51] Abraham became adept at using an axe. Tall for his age, Lincoln was also strong and athletic. [52] He attained a reputation for brawn and audacity after a very competitive wrestling match with the renowned leader of a group of ruffians known as "the Clary's Grove boys". [53]
In early March 1830, partly out of fear of a milk sickness outbreak along the Ohio River, several members of the extended Lincoln family moved west to Illinois, a non-slaveholding state, and settled in Macon County , 10 miles (16 km) west of Decatur . [54] [55] Historians disagree on who initiated the move; Thomas Lincoln had no obvious reason to leave Indiana, and one possibility is that other members of the family, including Dennis Hanks, might not have attained the stability and steady income that Thomas Lincoln had. [56] After the family relocated to Illinois, Abraham became increasingly distant from his father, [57] in part because of his father's lack of education, and occasionally lent him money. [58] In 1831, as Thomas and other members of the family prepared to move to a new homestead in Coles County, Illinois , Abraham was old enough to make his own decisions and struck out on his own. [59] Traveling down the Sangamon River , he ended up in the village of New Salem in Sangamon County . [60] Later that spring, Denton Offutt , a New Salem merchant, hired Lincoln and some friends to take goods by flatboat from New Salem to New Orleans via the Sangamon, Illinois, and Mississippi rivers. After arriving in New Orleans—and witnessing slavery firsthand—Lincoln returned to New Salem, where he remained for the next six years. [61] [62]

Marriage and children
According to some sources, Lincoln's first romantic interest was Ann Rutledge , whom he met when he first moved to New Salem; these sources indicate that by 1835, they were in a relationship but not formally engaged. [63] She died at the age of 22 on August 25, 1835, most likely of typhoid fever . [64] In the early 1830s, he met Mary Owens from Kentucky when she was visiting her sister. [65]
Late in 1836, Lincoln agreed to a match with Mary if she returned to New Salem. Mary did return in November 1836, and Lincoln courted her for a time; however, they both had second thoughts about their relationship. On August 16, 1837, Lincoln wrote Mary a letter suggesting he would not blame her if she ended the relationship. She never replied and the courtship ended. [65]
In 1840, Lincoln became engaged to Mary Todd , who was from a wealthy slave-holding family in Lexington , Kentucky. [66] They met in Springfield , Illinois, in December 1839 [67] and were engaged the following December. [68] A wedding set for January 1, 1841, was canceled when the two broke off their engagement at Lincoln's initiative. [67] [69] They later met again at a party and married on November 4, 1842, in the Springfield mansion of Mary's married sister. [70] While preparing for the nuptials and feeling anxiety again, Lincoln, when asked where he was going, replied, "To hell, I suppose." [71] In 1844, the couple bought a house in Springfield near Lincoln's law office. Mary Todd Lincoln kept house, often with the help of a relative or hired servant girl. [72]
He was an affectionate, though often absent, husband and father of four children. Robert Todd Lincoln was born in 1843 and Edward Baker Lincoln (Eddie) in 1846. Edward died on February 1, 1850, in Springfield, probably of tuberculosis. "Willie" Lincoln was born on December 21, 1850, and died of a fever on February 20, 1862. The Lincolns' fourth son, Thomas "Tad" Lincoln , was born on April 4, 1853, and died of heart failure at the age of 18 on July 16, 1871. [73] Robert was the only child to live to adulthood and have children. The Lincolns' last descendant, great-grandson Robert Todd Lincoln Beckwith , died in 1985. [74] Lincoln "was remarkably fond of children", [75] and the Lincolns were not considered to be strict with their own. [76]
The deaths of their sons had profound effects on both parents. Later in life, Mary struggled with the stresses of losing her husband and sons, and Robert Lincoln committed her temporarily to a mental health asylum in 1875. [77] Abraham Lincoln suffered from " melancholy ", a condition which now is referred to as clinical depression . [78]
Lincoln's father-in-law and others of the Todd family were either slave owners or slave traders. Lincoln was close to the Todds, and he and his family occasionally visited the Todd estate in Lexington. [79]
During his term as President of the United States of America, Mary was known to cook for Lincoln often. Since she was raised by a wealthy family, her cooking abilities were simple, but satisfied Lincoln's tastes, which included, particularly, imported oysters. [80]

Early career and militia service
In 1832, at age 23, Lincoln and a partner bought a small general store on credit in New Salem , Illinois. [81] Although the economy was booming in the region, the business struggled and Lincoln eventually sold his share. That March he began his political career with his first campaign for the Illinois General Assembly . He had attained local popularity and could draw crowds as a natural raconteur in New Salem, though he lacked an education, powerful friends, and money, which may be why he lost. He advocated navigational improvements on the Sangamon River. [82] [83]
Before the election, Lincoln served as a captain in the Illinois Militia during the Black Hawk War . [84] Following his return, Lincoln continued his campaign for the August 6 election for the Illinois General Assembly. At 6 feet 4 inches (193 cm), [85] he was tall and "strong enough to intimidate any rival". At his first speech, when he saw a supporter in the crowd being attacked, Lincoln grabbed the assailant by his "neck and the seat of his trousers" and threw him. [86] Lincoln finished eighth out of 13 candidates (the top four were elected), though he received 277 of the 300 votes cast in the New Salem precinct. [87]
Lincoln served as New Salem's postmaster and later as county surveyor, all the while reading voraciously. He then decided to become a lawyer and began teaching himself law by reading Blackstone 's Commentaries on the Laws of England and other law books. Of his learning method, Lincoln stated: "I studied with nobody". [88] His second campaign in 1834 was successful. He won election to the state legislature; though he ran as a Whig , many Democrats favored him over a more powerful Whig opponent. [89]
Admitted to the bar in 1836, [90] he moved to Springfield, Illinois, and began to practice law under John T. Stuart , Mary Todd's cousin. [91] Lincoln became an able and successful lawyer with a reputation as a formidable adversary during cross-examinations and closing arguments. He partnered with Stephen T. Logan from 1841 until 1844. Then Lincoln began his practice with William Herndon , whom Lincoln thought "a studious young man". [92]
Successful on his second run for office, Lincoln served four successive terms in the Illinois House of Representatives as a Whig representative from Sangamon County. [93] He supported the construction of the Illinois and Michigan Canal , which he remained involved with later as a Canal Commissioner. [94] In the 1835–36 legislative session, he voted to expand suffrage to white males, whether landowners or not. [95] He was known for his "free soil" stance of opposing both slavery and abolitionism . He first articulated this in 1837, saying, "[The] Institution of slavery is founded on both injustice and bad policy, but the promulgation of abolition doctrines tends rather to increase than abate its evils." [96] His stance closely followed Henry Clay in supporting the American Colonization Society program of making the abolition of slavery practical by its advocation and helping the freed slaves to settle in Liberia in Africa. [97]

U.S. House of Representatives, 1847–49
From the early 1830s, Lincoln was a steadfast Whig and professed to friends in 1861 to be "an old line Whig, a disciple of Henry Clay". [98] The party, including Lincoln, favored economic modernization in banking, protective tariffs to fund internal improvements including railroads, and espoused urbanization as well. [99]
In 1846, Lincoln was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives , where he served one two-year term. He was the only Whig in the Illinois delegation, but he showed his party loyalty by participating in almost all votes and making speeches that echoed the party line. [100] Lincoln, in collaboration with abolitionist Congressman Joshua R. Giddings , wrote a bill to abolish slavery in the District of Columbia with compensation for the owners, enforcement to capture fugitive slaves, and a popular vote on the matter. He abandoned the bill when it failed to garner sufficient Whig supporters. [101]
On foreign and military policy, Lincoln spoke out against the Mexican–American War , which he attributed to President Polk 's desire for "military glory—that attractive rainbow, that rises in showers of blood". [102] Lincoln also supported the Wilmot Proviso , which, if it had been adopted, would have banned slavery in any U.S. territory won from Mexico. [103]
Lincoln emphasized his opposition to Polk by drafting and introducing his Spot Resolutions . The war had begun with a Mexican slaughter of American soldiers in territory disputed by Mexico and the U.S. Polk insisted that Mexican soldiers had "invaded our territory and shed the blood of our fellow-citizens on our own soil " . [104] [105] Lincoln demanded that Polk show Congress the exact spot on which blood had been shed and prove that the spot was on American soil. [105]
Congress never enacted the resolution or even debated it, the national papers ignored it, and it resulted in a loss of political support for Lincoln in his district. One Illinois newspaper derisively nicknamed him "spotty Lincoln". [106] [107] [108] Lincoln later regretted some of his statements, especially his attack on the presidential war-making powers. [109]
Realizing Clay was unlikely to win the presidency, Lincoln, who had pledged in 1846 to serve only one term in the House, supported General Zachary Taylor for the Whig nomination in the 1848 presidential election . [110] Taylor won and Lincoln hoped to be appointed Commissioner of the General Land Office , but that lucrative patronage job went to an Illinois rival, Justin Butterfield , considered by the administration to be a highly skilled lawyer, but in Lincoln's view, an "old fossil". [111] The administration offered him the consolation prize of secretary or governor of the Oregon Territory . [112] This distant territory was a Democratic stronghold, and acceptance of the post would have effectively ended his legal and political career in Illinois, so he declined and resumed his law practice. [113]

Prairie lawyer
Lincoln returned to practicing law in Springfield, handling "every kind of business that could come before a prairie lawyer". [114] Twice a year for 16 years, 10 weeks at a time, he appeared in county seats in the midstate region when the county courts were in session. [115] Lincoln handled many transportation cases in the midst of the nation's western expansion, particularly the conflicts arising from the operation of river barges under the many new railroad bridges. As a riverboat man, Lincoln initially favored those interests, but ultimately represented whoever hired him. [116] In fact, he later represented a bridge company against a riverboat company in a landmark case involving a canal boat that sank after hitting a bridge. [117] [118] In 1849, he received a patent for a flotation device for the movement of boats in shallow water. The idea was never commercialized, but Lincoln is the only president to hold a patent. [119] [120]
In 1851, he represented the Alton & Sangamon Railroad in a dispute with one of its shareholders, James A. Barret, who had refused to pay the balance on his pledge to buy shares in the railroad on the grounds that the company had changed its original train route. [121] [122] Lincoln successfully argued that the railroad company was not bound by its original charter extant at the time of Barret's pledge; the charter was amended in the public interest to provide a newer, superior, and less expensive route, and the corporation retained the right to demand Barret's payment. The decision by the Illinois Supreme Court has been cited by numerous other courts in the nation. [121] Lincoln appeared before the Illinois Supreme Court in 175 cases, in 51 as sole counsel, of which 31 were decided in his favor. [123] From 1853 to 1860, another of Lincoln's largest clients was the Illinois Central Railroad . [124] Lincoln's reputation with clients gave rise to his nickname "Honest Abe." [125]
Lincoln's most notable criminal trial occurred in 1858 when he defended William "Duff" Armstrong , who was on trial for the murder of James Preston Metzker. [126] The case is famous for Lincoln's use of a fact established by judicial notice in order to challenge the credibility of an eyewitness. After an opposing witness testified seeing the crime in the moonlight, Lincoln produced a Farmers' Almanac showing the moon was at a low angle, drastically reducing visibility. Based on this evidence, Armstrong was acquitted. [126]
Lincoln rarely raised objections in the courtroom; but in an 1859 case, where he defended a cousin, Peachy Harrison, who was accused of stabbing another to death, Lincoln angrily protested the judge's decision to exclude evidence favorable to his client. Instead of holding Lincoln in contempt of court as was expected, the judge, a Democrat, reversed his ruling, allowing the evidence and acquitting Harrison. [126] [127]

Republican politics 1854–60

Slavery and a "House Divided"
By the 1850s, slavery was still legal in the southern United States, but had been outlawed in all the northern states since 1803, including Illinois, whose original 1818 Constitution forbade slavery. [128] Lincoln disapproved of slavery, but he only demanded the end to the spread of slavery to new territory in the west. [129] He returned to politics to oppose the pro-slavery Kansas–Nebraska Act (1854); this law repealed the slavery-restricting Missouri Compromise (1820). Senior Senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois had incorporated popular sovereignty into the Act. Douglas' provision, which Lincoln opposed, specified settlers had the right to determine locally whether to allow slavery in new U.S. territory, rather than have such a decision restricted by the national Congress. [130]
Eric Foner (2010) contrasts the abolitionists and anti-slavery Radical Republicans of the Northeast who saw slavery as a sin, with the conservative Republicans who thought it was bad because it hurt white people and blocked progress. Foner argues that Lincoln was a moderate in the middle, opposing slavery primarily because it violated the republicanism principles of the Founding Fathers , especially the equality of all men and democratic self-government as expressed in the Declaration of Independence . [131]
On October 16, 1854, in his " Peoria Speech ", Lincoln declared his opposition to slavery, which he repeated en route to the presidency. [132] Speaking in his Kentucky accent, with a very powerful voice, [133] he said the Kansas Act had a " declared indifference, but as I must think, a covert real zeal for the spread of slavery. I cannot but hate it. I hate it because of the monstrous injustice of slavery itself. I hate it because it deprives our republican example of its just influence in the world ..." [134]
In late 1854, Lincoln ran as a Whig for the U.S. Senate. At that time, senators were elected by the state legislature. [135] After leading in the first six rounds of voting, but unable to obtain a majority, Lincoln instructed his backers to vote for Lyman Trumbull . Trumbull was an antislavery Democrat, and had received few votes in the earlier ballots; his supporters, also antislavery Democrats, had vowed not to support any Whig. Lincoln's decision to withdraw enabled his Whig supporters and Trumbull's antislavery Democrats to combine and defeat the mainstream Democratic candidate, Joel Aldrich Matteson . [136]
Nationally, the Whigs had been irreparably split by the Kansas–Nebraska Act and other efforts to compromise on the slavery issue. Lincoln wrote, "I think I am a Whig, but others say there are no Whigs, and that I am an abolitionist [...] I do no more than oppose the extension of slavery." [137] Drawing on the antislavery portion of the Whig Party, and combining Free Soil , Liberty , and antislavery Democratic Party members, the new Republican Party formed as a northern party dedicated to antislavery. [138] Lincoln was one of those instrumental in forging the shape of the new party; at the 1856 Republican National Convention , he placed second in the contest to become its candidate for vice president. [139]
In 1857–1858, Douglas broke with President James Buchanan , leading to a fight for control of the Democratic Party. Some eastern Republicans even favored the reelection of Douglas for the Senate in 1858, since he had led the opposition to the Lecompton Constitution , which would have admitted Kansas as a slave state . [140] In March 1857, the Supreme Court issued its decision in Dred Scott v. Sandford ; Chief Justice Roger B. Taney opined that blacks were not citizens, and derived no rights from the Constitution. Lincoln denounced the decision, alleging it was the product of a conspiracy of Democrats to support the Slave Power . [141] Lincoln argued, "The authors of the Declaration of Independence never intended 'to say all were equal in color, size, intellect, moral developments, or social capacity', but they 'did consider all men created equal—equal in certain inalienable rights, among which are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness'." [142]
After the state Republican party convention nominated him for the U.S. Senate in 1858, Lincoln delivered his House Divided Speech , drawing on Mark 3:25 , "A house divided against itself cannot stand. I believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free. I do not expect the Union to be dissolved—I do not expect the house to fall—but I do expect it will cease to be divided. It will become all one thing, or all the other." [143] The speech created an evocative image of the danger of disunion caused by the slavery debate, and rallied Republicans across the North. [144] The stage was then set for the campaign for statewide election of the Illinois legislature which would, in turn, select Lincoln or Douglas as its U.S. senator. [145]

Lincoln–Douglas debates and Cooper Union speech
The Senate campaign featured the seven Lincoln–Douglas debates of 1858, the most famous political debates in American history. [146] The principals stood in stark contrast both physically and politically. Lincoln warned that " The Slave Power " was threatening the values of republicanism, and accused Douglas of distorting the values of the Founding Fathers that all men are created equal , while Douglas emphasized his Freeport Doctrine , that local settlers were free to choose whether to allow slavery or not, and accused Lincoln of having joined the abolitionists. [147] The debates had an atmosphere of a prize fight and drew crowds in the thousands. Lincoln stated Douglas' popular sovereignty theory was a threat to the nation's morality and that Douglas represented a conspiracy to extend slavery to free states. Douglas said that Lincoln was defying the authority of the U.S. Supreme Court and the Dred Scott decision. [148]
Though the Republican legislative candidates won more popular votes, the Democrats won more seats, and the legislature re-elected Douglas to the Senate. Despite the bitterness of the defeat for Lincoln, his articulation of the issues gave him a national political reputation. [149] In May 1859, Lincoln purchased the Illinois Staats-Anzeiger , a German-language newspaper which was consistently supportive; most of the state's 130,000 German Americans voted Democratic but there was Republican support that a German-language paper could mobilize. [150]
On February 27, 1860, New York party leaders invited Lincoln to give a speech at Cooper Union to a group of powerful Republicans. Lincoln argued that the Founding Fathers had little use for popular sovereignty and had repeatedly sought to restrict slavery. Lincoln insisted the moral foundation of the Republicans required opposition to slavery, and rejected any "groping for some middle ground between the right and the wrong". [151] Despite his inelegant appearance—many in the audience thought him awkward and even ugly [152] —Lincoln demonstrated an intellectual leadership that brought him into the front ranks of the party and into contention for the Republican presidential nomination. Journalist Noah Brooks reported, "No man ever before made such an impression on his first appeal to a New York audience." [153] [154]
Historian Donald described the speech as a "superb political move for an unannounced candidate, to appear in one rival's ( William H. Seward ) own state at an event sponsored by the second rival's ( Salmon P. Chase ) loyalists, while not mentioning either by name during its delivery". [155] In response to an inquiry about his presidential intentions, Lincoln said, "The taste is in my mouth a little." [156]

1860 Presidential nomination and campaign
On May 9–10, 1860, the Illinois Republican State Convention was held in Decatur. [157] Lincoln's followers organized a campaign team led by David Davis , Norman Judd , Leonard Swett , and Jesse DuBois, and Lincoln received his first endorsement to run for the presidency. [158] Exploiting the embellished legend of his frontier days with his father (clearing the land and splitting fence rails with an ax), Lincoln's supporters adopted the label of "The Rail Candidate". [159] In 1860 Lincoln described himself : "I am in height, six feet, four inches, nearly; lean in flesh, weighing, on an average, one hundred and eighty pounds; dark complexion, with coarse black hair, and gray eyes." A biographer added that he had a:
On May 18, at the Republican National Convention in Chicago, Lincoln's friends promised and manipulated and won the nomination on the third ballot, beating candidates such as William H. Seward and Salmon P. Chase. A former Democrat, Hannibal Hamlin of Maine, was nominated for Vice President to balance the ticket. Lincoln's success depended on his reputation as a moderate on the slavery issue, and his strong support for Whiggish programs of internal improvements and the protective tariff. [161]
On the third ballot Pennsylvania put him over the top. Pennsylvania iron interests were reassured by his support for protective tariffs. [162] Lincoln's managers had been adroitly focused on this delegation as well as the others, while following Lincoln's strong dictate to "Make no contracts that bind me". [163]
Most Republicans agreed with Lincoln that the North was the aggrieved party, as the Slave Power tightened its grasp on the national government with the Dred Scott decision and the presidency of James Buchanan. Throughout the 1850s, Lincoln doubted the prospects of civil war, and his supporters rejected claims that his election would incite secession. [164] Meanwhile, Douglas was selected as the candidate of the Northern Democrats. Delegates from 11 slave states walked out of the Democratic convention , disagreeing with Douglas' position on popular sovereignty, and ultimately selected John C. Breckinridge as their candidate. [165]
Prior to the Republican convention, the Lincoln campaign began cultivating a nationwide teen and young adult organization, the Wide Awakes , which it used to generate popular support for Lincoln throughout the country to spearhead large voter registration drives, knowing that new voters and young voters tend to embrace new and young parties. [166] As Lincoln's ideas of abolishing slavery grew, so did his supporters. People of the Northern states knew the Southern states would vote against Lincoln because of his ideas of anti-slavery and took action to rally supporters for Lincoln. [167]
As Douglas and the other candidates went through with their campaigns, Lincoln was the only one of them who gave no speeches. Instead, he monitored the campaign closely and relied on the enthusiasm of the Republican Party. The party did the leg work that produced majorities across the North, and produced an abundance of campaign posters, leaflets, and newspaper editorials. There were thousands of Republican speakers who focused first on the party platform, and second on Lincoln's life story, emphasizing his childhood poverty. The goal was to demonstrate the superior power of "free labor", whereby a common farm boy could work his way to the top by his own efforts. [168] The Republican Party's production of campaign literature dwarfed the combined opposition; a Chicago Tribune writer produced a pamphlet that detailed Lincoln's life, and sold 100,000 to 200,000 copies. [169]

Presidency

1860 election and secession
On November 6, 1860, Lincoln was elected the 16th president of the United States, beating Democrat Stephen A. Douglas, John C. Breckinridge of the Southern Democrats, and John Bell of the new Constitutional Union Party . He was the first president from the Republican Party. His victory was entirely due to the strength of his support in the North and West; no ballots were cast for him in 10 of the 15 Southern slave states, and he won only two of 996 counties in all the Southern states. [170]
Lincoln received 1,866,452 votes, Douglas 1,376,957 votes, Breckinridge 849,781 votes, and Bell 588,789 votes. Turnout was 82.2 percent, with Lincoln winning the free Northern states, as well as California and Oregon. Douglas won Missouri, and split New Jersey with Lincoln. [171] Bell won Virginia, Tennessee, and Kentucky, and Breckinridge won the rest of the South. [172]
Although Lincoln won only a plurality of the popular vote, his victory in the electoral college was decisive: Lincoln had 180 and his opponents added together had only 123. There were fusion tickets in which all of Lincoln's opponents combined to support the same slate of Electors in New York, New Jersey, and Rhode Island, but even if the anti-Lincoln vote had been combined in every state, Lincoln still would have won a majority in the Electoral College. [173]
As Lincoln's election became evident, secessionists made clear their intent to leave the Union before he took office the next March. [174] On December 20, 1860, South Carolina took the lead by adopting an ordinance of secession; by February 1, 1861, Florida, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas followed. [175] [176] Six of these states then adopted a constitution and declared themselves to be a sovereign nation, the Confederate States of America . [175] The upper South and border states (Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, Kentucky, Missouri, and Arkansas) listened to, but initially rejected, the secessionist appeal. [177] President Buchanan and President-elect Lincoln refused to recognize the Confederacy, declaring secession illegal. [178] The Confederacy selected Jefferson Davis as its provisional President on February 9, 1861. [179]
There were attempts at compromise. The Crittenden Compromise would have extended the Missouri Compromise line of 1820, dividing the territories into slave and free, contrary to the Republican Party's free-soil platform. [180] Lincoln rejected the idea, saying, "I will suffer death before I consent ... to any concession or compromise which looks like buying the privilege to take possession of this government to which we have a constitutional right." [181]
Lincoln, however, did tacitly support the proposed Corwin Amendment to the Constitution, which passed Congress before Lincoln came into office and was then awaiting ratification by the states. That proposed amendment would have protected slavery in states where it already existed and would have guaranteed that Congress would not interfere with slavery without Southern consent. [182] [183] A few weeks before the war, Lincoln sent a letter to every governor informing them Congress had passed a joint resolution to amend the Constitution. [184] Lincoln was open to the possibility of a constitutional convention to make further amendments to the Constitution. [185]
En route to his inauguration by train, Lincoln addressed crowds and legislatures across the North. [186] The president-elect then evaded possible assassins in Baltimore, who were uncovered by Lincoln's head of security, Allan Pinkerton . On February 23, 1861, he arrived in disguise in Washington, D.C., which was placed under substantial military guard. [187] Lincoln directed his inaugural address to the South, proclaiming once again that he had no intention, or inclination, to abolish slavery in the Southern states:
The President ended his address with an appeal to the people of the South: "We are not enemies, but friends. We must not be enemies ... The mystic chords of memory, stretching from every battlefield, and patriot grave, to every living heart and hearthstone, all over this broad land, will yet swell the chorus of the Union, when again touched, as surely they will be, by the better angels of our nature." [189] The failure of the Peace Conference of 1861 signaled that legislative compromise was impossible. By March 1861, no leaders of the insurrection had proposed rejoining the Union on any terms. Meanwhile, Lincoln and the Republican leadership agreed that the dismantling of the Union could not be tolerated. [190] Lincoln said as the war was ending:

Beginning of the war
The commander of Fort Sumter, South Carolina, Major Robert Anderson , sent a request for provisions to Washington, and the execution of Lincoln's order to meet that request was seen by the secessionists as an act of war. On April 12, 1861, Confederate forces fired on Union troops at Fort Sumter , forcing them to surrender, and began the war. Historian Allan Nevins argued that the newly inaugurated Lincoln made three miscalculations: underestimating the gravity of the crisis, exaggerating the strength of Unionist sentiment in the South, and not realizing the Southern Unionists were insisting there be no invasion. [192]
William Tecumseh Sherman talked to Lincoln during inauguration week and was "sadly disappointed" at his failure to realize that "the country was sleeping on a volcano" and that the South was preparing for war. [193] Historian Donald concludes that, "His repeated efforts to avoid collision in the months between inauguration and the firing on Ft. Sumter showed he adhered to his vow not to be the first to shed fraternal blood. But he also vowed not to surrender the forts. The only resolution of these contradictory positions was for the confederates to fire the first shot; they did just that." [194]
On April 15, Lincoln called on all the states to send detachments totaling 75,000 troops to recapture forts, protect Washington, and "preserve the Union", which, in his view, still existed intact despite the actions of the seceding states. This call forced the states to choose sides. Virginia declared its secession and was rewarded with the Confederate capital, despite the exposed position of Richmond so close to Union lines. North Carolina, Tennessee, and Arkansas also voted for secession over the next two months. Secession sentiment was strong in Missouri and Maryland, but did not prevail; Kentucky tried to be neutral. [195] The Confederate attack on Fort Sumter rallied Americans north of the Mason-Dixon line to the defense of the American nation. Historian Allan Nevins says:
States sent Union regiments south in response to Lincoln's call to save the capital and confront the rebellion. On April 19, mobs in Baltimore, which controlled the rail links, attacked Union troops who were changing trains, and local leaders' groups later burned critical rail bridges to the capital. The Army responded by arresting local Maryland officials. Lincoln suspended the writ of habeas corpus in areas the army felt it needed to secure for troops to reach Washington. [198] John Merryman , a Maryland official involved in hindering the U.S. troop movements, petitioned Supreme Court Chief Justice and Marylander, Roger B. Taney , author of the controversial pro-slavery Dred Scott opinion, to issue a writ of habeas corpus , and in June Taney, acting as a circuit judge and not speaking for the Supreme Court, issued the writ, because in his opinion only Congress could suspend the writ. Lincoln continued the army policy that the writ was suspended in limited areas despite the Ex parte Merryman ruling. [199] [200]

War strategy
After the Battle of Fort Sumter , Lincoln realized the importance of taking immediate executive control of the war and making an overall strategy to put down the rebellion. Lincoln encountered an unprecedented political and military crisis, and he responded as commander-in-chief , using unprecedented powers. He expanded his war powers, and imposed a blockade on all the Confederate shipping ports, disbursed funds before appropriation by Congress, and after suspending habeas corpus , arrested and imprisoned thousands of suspected Confederate sympathizers. Lincoln was supported by Congress and the northern public for these actions. In addition, Lincoln had to contend with reinforcing strong Union sympathies in the border slave states and keeping the war from becoming an international conflict. [201]
The war effort was the source of continued disparagement of Lincoln, and dominated his time and attention. From the start, it was clear that bipartisan support would be essential to success in the war effort, and any manner of compromise alienated factions on both sides of the aisle, such as the appointment of Republicans and Democrats to command positions in the Union Army. Copperheads criticized Lincoln for refusing to compromise on the slavery issue. Conversely, the Radical Republicans criticized him for moving too slowly in abolishing slavery. [202] On August 6, 1861, Lincoln signed the Confiscation Act that authorized judiciary proceedings to confiscate and free slaves who were used to support the Confederate war effort. In practice, the law had little effect, but it did signal political support for abolishing slavery in the Confederacy. [203]
In late August 1861, General John C. Frémont , the 1856 Republican presidential nominee, issued, without consulting his superiors in Washington, a proclamation of martial law in Missouri. He declared that any citizen found bearing arms could be court-martialed and shot, and that slaves of persons aiding the rebellion would be freed. Frémont was already under a cloud with charges of negligence in his command of the Department of the West compounded with allegations of fraud and corruption. Lincoln overruled Frémont's proclamation. Lincoln believed that Fremont's emancipation was political; neither militarily necessary nor legal. [204] After Lincoln acted, Union enlistments from Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri increased by over 40,000 troops. [205]
Lincoln left most diplomatic matters to his Secretary of State, William Seward. At times Seward was too bellicose, so for balance Lincoln stuck a close working relationship with Senator Charles Sumner , the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee . [206] The Trent Affair of late 1861 threatened war with Great Britain. The U.S. Navy had illegally intercepted a British mail ship, the Trent , on the high seas and seized two Confederate envoys; Britain protested vehemently while the U.S. cheered. Lincoln ended the crisis by releasing the two diplomats. Biographer James G. Randall has dissected Lincoln's successful techniques:
Lincoln painstakingly monitored the telegraphic reports coming into the War Department headquarters. He kept close tabs on all phases of the military effort, consulted with governors, and selected generals based on their past success (as well as their state and party). In January 1862, after many complaints of inefficiency and profiteering in the War Department, Lincoln replaced Simon Cameron with Edwin Stanton as War Secretary . Stanton was a staunchly Unionist pro-business conservative Democrat who moved toward the Radical Republican faction. Nevertheless, he worked more often and more closely with Lincoln than any other senior official. "Stanton and Lincoln virtually conducted the war together," say Thomas and Hyman. [208]
In terms of war strategy, Lincoln articulated two priorities: to ensure that Washington was well-defended, and to conduct an aggressive war effort that would satisfy the demand in the North for prompt, decisive victory; major Northern newspaper editors expected victory within 90 days. [209] Twice a week, Lincoln would meet with his cabinet in the afternoon, and occasionally Mary Lincoln would force him to take a carriage ride because she was concerned he was working too hard. [210] Lincoln learned from reading the theoretical book of his chief of staff General Henry Halleck, a disciple of the European strategist Jomini ; he began to appreciate the critical need to control strategic points, such as the Mississippi River. [211] Lincoln saw the importance of Vicksburg and understood the necessity of defeating the enemy's army, rather than simply capturing territory. [212]

General McClellan
After the Union defeat at the First Battle of Bull Run and the retirement of the aged Winfield Scott in late 1861, Lincoln appointed Major General George B. McClellan general-in-chief of all the Union armies. [213] McClellan, a young West Point graduate, railroad executive, and Pennsylvania Democrat, took several months to plan and attempt his Peninsula Campaign , longer than Lincoln wanted. The campaign's objective was to capture Richmond by moving the Army of the Potomac by boat to the peninsula and then overland to the Confederate capital. McClellan's repeated delays frustrated Lincoln and Congress, as did his position that no troops were needed to defend Washington. Lincoln insisted on holding some of McClellan's troops in defense of the capital; McClellan, who consistently overestimated the strength of Confederate troops, blamed this decision for the ultimate failure of the Peninsula Campaign. [214]
Lincoln removed McClellan as general-in-chief in March 1862, after McClellan's "Harrison's Landing Letter", in which he offered unsolicited political advice to Lincoln urging caution in the war effort. [215] The office remained empty until July, when Henry Halleck was selected for it. [216] McClellan's letter incensed Radical Republicans, who successfully pressured Lincoln to appoint John Pope , a Republican, as head of the new Army of Virginia . Pope complied with Lincoln's strategic desire to move toward Richmond from the north, thus protecting the capital from attack. [217]
However, lacking requested reinforcements from McClellan, now commanding the Army of the Potomac, Pope was soundly defeated at the Second Battle of Bull Run in the summer of 1862, forcing the Army of the Potomac to defend Washington for a second time. [217] The war also expanded with naval operations in 1862 when the CSS Virginia , formerly the USS Merrimack , damaged or destroyed three Union vessels in Norfolk, Virginia, before being engaged and damaged by the USS Monitor . Lincoln closely reviewed the dispatches and interrogated naval officers during their clash in the Battle of Hampton Roads . [218]
Despite his dissatisfaction with McClellan's failure to reinforce Pope, Lincoln was desperate, and restored him to command of all forces around Washington, to the dismay of all in his cabinet but Seward. [219] Two days after McClellan's return to command, General Robert E. Lee 's forces crossed the Potomac River into Maryland, leading to the Battle of Antietam in September 1862. [220] The ensuing Union victory was among the bloodiest in American history, but it enabled Lincoln to announce that he would issue an Emancipation Proclamation in January. Having composed the Proclamation some time earlier, Lincoln had waited for a military victory to publish it to avoid it being perceived as the product of desperation. [221]
McClellan then resisted the President's demand that he pursue Lee's retreating and exposed army, while his counterpart General Don Carlos Buell likewise refused orders to move the Army of the Ohio against rebel forces in eastern Tennessee. As a result, Lincoln replaced Buell with William Rosecrans ; and, after the 1862 midterm elections, he replaced McClellan with Republican Ambrose Burnside . Both of these replacements were political moderates and prospectively more supportive of the Commander-in-Chief. [222]
Burnside, against the advice of the president, prematurely launched an offensive across the Rappahannock River and was stunningly defeated by Lee at Fredericksburg in December. Not only had Burnside been defeated on the battlefield, but his soldiers were disgruntled and undisciplined. Desertions during 1863 were in the thousands and they increased after Fredericksburg. [223] Lincoln brought in Joseph Hooker , despite his record of loose talk about the need for a military dictatorship. [224]
The mid-term elections in 1862 brought the Republicans severe losses due to sharp disfavor with the administration over its failure to deliver a speedy end to the war, as well as rising inflation, new high taxes, rumors of corruption, the suspension of habeas corpus , the military draft law , and fears that freed slaves would undermine the labor market. The Emancipation Proclamation announced in September gained votes for the Republicans in the rural areas of New England and the upper Midwest, but it lost votes in the cities and the lower Midwest. [225]
While Republicans were discouraged, Democrats were energized and did especially well in Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, and New York. The Republicans did maintain their majorities in Congress and in the major states, except New York. The Cincinnati Gazette contended that the voters were "depressed by the interminable nature of this war, as so far conducted, and by the rapid exhaustion of the national resources without progress". [225]
In the spring of 1863, Lincoln was optimistic about upcoming military campaigns to the point of thinking the end of the war could be near if a string of victories could be put together; these plans included Hooker's attack on Lee north of Richmond, Rosecrans' on Chattanooga, Grant's on Vicksburg, and a naval assault on Charleston. [226]
Hooker was routed by Lee at the Battle of Chancellorsville in May, [227] but continued to command his troops for some weeks. He ignored Lincoln's order to divide his troops, and possibly force Lee to do the same in Harper's Ferry , and tendered his resignation, which Lincoln accepted. He was replaced by George Meade , who followed Lee into Pennsylvania for the Gettysburg Campaign , which was a victory for the Union, though Lee's army avoided capture. At the same time, after initial setbacks, Grant laid siege to Vicksburg and the Union navy attained some success in Charleston harbor. [228] After the Battle of Gettysburg, Lincoln clearly understood that his military decisions would be more effectively carried out by conveying his orders through his War Secretary or his general-in-chief on to his generals, who resented his civilian interference with their own plans. Even so, he often continued to give detailed directions to his generals as Commander-in-Chief. [229]

Emancipation Proclamation
Lincoln understood that the Federal government's power to end slavery was limited by the Constitution, which before 1865, committed the issue to individual states. He argued before and during his election that the eventual extinction of slavery would result from preventing its expansion into new U.S. territory. At the beginning of the war, he also sought to persuade the states to accept compensated emancipation in return for their prohibition of slavery. Lincoln believed that curtailing slavery in these ways would economically expunge it, as envisioned by the Founding Fathers , under the constitution. [230] President Lincoln rejected two geographically limited emancipation attempts by Major General John C. Frémont in August 1861 and by Major General David Hunter in May 1862, on the grounds that it was not within their power, and it would upset the border states loyal to the Union. [231]
On June 19, 1862, endorsed by Lincoln, Congress passed an act banning slavery on all federal territory. In July, the Confiscation Act of 1862 was passed, which set up court procedures that could free the slaves of anyone convicted of aiding the rebellion. Although Lincoln believed it was not within Congress's power to free the slaves within the states, he approved the bill in deference to the legislature. He felt such action could only be taken by the Commander-in-Chief using war powers granted to the president by the Constitution, and Lincoln was planning to take that action. In that month, Lincoln discussed a draft of the Emancipation Proclamation with his cabinet. In it, he stated that "as a fit and necessary military measure, on January 1, 1863, all persons held as slaves in the Confederate states will thenceforward, and forever, be free". [232]
Privately, Lincoln concluded at this point that the slave base of the Confederacy had to be eliminated. However Copperheads argued that emancipation was a stumbling block to peace and reunification. Republican editor Horace Greeley of the highly influential New York Tribune fell for the ploy, [233] and Lincoln refuted it directly in a shrewd letter of August 22, 1862. Although he said he personally wished all men could be free, Lincoln stated that the primary goal of his actions as the U.S. president (he used the first person pronoun and explicitly refers to his "official duty") was that of preserving the Union: [234]
The Emancipation Proclamation, issued on September 22, 1862, and put into effect on January 1, 1863, declared free the slaves in 10 states not then under Union control, with exemptions specified for areas already under Union control in two states. [236] Lincoln spent the next 100 days preparing the army and the nation for emancipation, while Democrats rallied their voters in the 1862 off-year elections by warning of the threat freed slaves posed to northern whites. [237]
Once the abolition of slavery in the rebel states became a military objective, as Union armies advanced south, more slaves were liberated until all three million of them in Confederate territory were freed. Lincoln's comment on the signing of the Proclamation was: "I never, in my life, felt more certain that I was doing right, than I do in signing this paper." [238] For some time, Lincoln continued earlier plans to set up colonies for the newly freed slaves. He commented favorably on colonization in the Emancipation Proclamation, but all attempts at such a massive undertaking failed. [239] A few days after Emancipation was announced, 13 Republican governors met at the War Governors' Conference ; they supported the president's Proclamation, but suggested the removal of General George B. McClellan as commander of the Union Army. [240]
Enlisting former slaves in the military was official government policy after the issuance of the Emancipation Proclamation. By the spring of 1863, Lincoln was ready to recruit black troops in more than token numbers. In a letter to Andrew Johnson , the military governor of Tennessee, encouraging him to lead the way in raising black troops, Lincoln wrote, "The bare sight of 50,000 armed and drilled black soldiers on the banks of the Mississippi would end the rebellion at once". [241] By the end of 1863, at Lincoln's direction, General Lorenzo Thomas had recruited 20 regiments of blacks from the Mississippi Valley. [242] Frederick Douglass once observed of Lincoln: "In his company, I was never reminded of my humble origin, or of my unpopular color". [243]

Gettysburg Address (1863)
With the great Union victory at the Battle of Gettysburg in July 1863, and the defeat of the Copperheads in the Ohio election in the fall, Lincoln maintained a strong base of party support and was in a strong position to redefine the war effort, despite the New York City draft riots . The stage was set for his address at the Gettysburg battlefield cemetery on November 19, 1863. [244] Defying Lincoln's prediction that "the world will little note, nor long remember what we say here", the Address became the most quoted speech in American history. [245]
In 272 words, and three minutes, Lincoln asserted the nation was born not in 1789, but in 1776, "conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal". He defined the war as an effort dedicated to these principles of liberty and equality for all. The emancipation of slaves was now part of the national war effort. He declared that the deaths of so many brave soldiers would not be in vain, that slavery would end as a result of the losses, and the future of democracy in the world would be assured, that "government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth". Lincoln concluded that the Civil War had a profound objective: a new birth of freedom in the nation. [246] [247]

General Grant
Meade's failure to capture Lee's army as it retreated from Gettysburg, and the continued passivity of the Army of the Potomac, persuaded Lincoln that a change in command was needed. General Ulysses S. Grant 's victories at the Battle of Shiloh and in the Vicksburg campaign impressed Lincoln and made Grant a strong candidate to head the Union Army. Responding to criticism of Grant after Shiloh, Lincoln had said, "I can't spare this man. He fights." [248] With Grant in command, Lincoln felt the Union Army could relentlessly pursue a series of coordinated offensives in multiple theaters, and have a top commander who agreed on the use of black troops. [249]
Nevertheless, Lincoln was concerned that Grant might be considering a candidacy for President in 1864, as McClellan was. Lincoln arranged for an intermediary to make inquiry into Grant's political intentions, and being assured that he had none, submitted to the Senate Grant's promotion to commander of the Union Army. He obtained Congress's consent to reinstate for Grant the rank of Lieutenant General, which no officer had held since George Washington. [250]
Grant waged his bloody Overland Campaign in 1864. This is often characterized as a war of attrition , given high Union losses at battles such as the Battle of the Wilderness and Cold Harbor . Even though they had the advantage of fighting on the defensive, the Confederate forces had "almost as high a percentage of casualties as the Union forces". [251] The high casualty figures of the Union alarmed the North; Grant had lost a third of his army, and Lincoln asked what Grant's plans were, to which the general replied, "I propose to fight it out on this line if it takes all summer." [252]
The Confederacy lacked reinforcements, so Lee's army shrank with every costly battle. Grant's army moved south, crossed the James River , forcing a siege and trench warfare outside Petersburg, Virginia . Lincoln then made an extended visit to Grant's headquarters at City Point, Virginia. This allowed the president to confer in person with Grant and William Tecumseh Sherman about the hostilities, as Sherman coincidentally managed a hasty visit to Grant from his position in North Carolina. [253] Lincoln and the Republican Party mobilized support for the draft throughout the North, and replaced the Union losses. [254]
Lincoln authorized Grant to target the Confederate infrastructure—such as plantations, railroads, and bridges—hoping to destroy the South's morale and weaken its economic ability to continue fighting. Grant's move to Petersburg resulted in the obstruction of three railroads between Richmond and the South. This strategy allowed Generals Sherman and Philip Sheridan to destroy plantations and towns in Virginia's Shenandoah Valley . The damage caused by Sherman's March to the Sea through Georgia in 1864 was limited to a 60-mile (97 km) swath, but neither Lincoln nor his commanders saw destruction as the main goal, but rather defeat of the Confederate armies. Mark E. Neely Jr. has argued that there was no effort to engage in " total war " against civilians which he believed did take place during World War II. [255] [ vague ]
Confederate general Jubal Early began a series of assaults in the North that threatened the Capital. During Early's raid on Washington, D.C. in 1864, Lincoln was watching the combat from an exposed position; Captain Oliver Wendell Holmes shouted at him, "Get down, you damn fool, before you get shot!" [256] After repeated calls on Grant to defend Washington, Sheridan was appointed and the threat from Early was dispatched. [257]
As Grant continued to wear down Lee's forces, efforts to discuss peace began. Confederate Vice President Stephens led a group to meet with Lincoln, Seward, and others at Hampton Roads . Lincoln refused to allow any negotiation with the Confederacy as a coequal; his sole objective was an agreement to end the fighting and the meetings produced no results. [258] On April 1, 1865, Grant successfully outflanked Lee's forces in the Battle of Five Forks and nearly encircled Petersburg, and the Confederate government evacuated Richmond. Days later, when that city fell, Lincoln visited the vanquished Confederate capital; as he walked through the city, white Southerners were stone-faced, but freedmen greeted him as a hero. On April 9, Lee surrendered to Grant at Appomattox and the war was effectively over. [259]

1864 re-election
While the war was still being waged, Lincoln faced reelection in 1864. Lincoln was a master politician, bringing together—and holding together—all the main factions of the Republican Party, and bringing in War Democrats such as Edwin M. Stanton and Andrew Johnson as well. Lincoln spent many hours a week talking to politicians from across the land and using his patronage powers—greatly expanded over peacetime—to hold the factions of his party together, build support for his own policies, and fend off efforts by Radicals to drop him from the 1864 ticket. [260] [261] At its 1864 convention, the Republican Party selected Johnson, a War Democrat from the Southern state of Tennessee, as his running mate. To broaden his coalition to include War Democrats as well as Republicans, Lincoln ran under the label of the new Union Party . [262]
When Grant's 1864 spring campaigns turned into bloody stalemates and Union casualties mounted, the lack of military success wore heavily on the President's re-election prospects, and many Republicans across the country feared that Lincoln would be defeated. Sharing this fear, Lincoln wrote and signed a pledge that, if he should lose the election, he would still defeat the Confederacy before turning over the White House: [263]
Lincoln did not show the pledge to his cabinet, but asked them to sign the sealed envelope.
While the Democratic platform followed the "Peace wing" of the party and called the war a "failure", their candidate, General George B. McClellan, supported the war and repudiated the platform. Lincoln provided Grant with more troops and mobilized his party to renew its support of Grant in the war effort. Sherman's capture of Atlanta in September and David Farragut 's capture of Mobile ended defeatist jitters; [265] the Democratic Party was deeply split, with some leaders and most soldiers openly for Lincoln. By contrast, the National Union Party was united and energized as Lincoln made emancipation the central issue, and state Republican parties stressed the perfidy of the Copperheads. [266] On November 8, Lincoln was re-elected in a landslide, carrying all but three states, and receiving 78 percent of the Union soldiers' vote. [263] [267]
On March 4, 1865, Lincoln delivered his second inaugural address . In it, he deemed the high casualties on both sides to be God's will. Historian Mark Noll concludes it ranks "among the small handful of semi-sacred texts by which Americans conceive their place in the world". [268] Lincoln said:

Reconstruction
Reconstruction began during the war, as Lincoln and his associates anticipated questions of how to reintegrate the conquered southern states, and how to determine the fates of Confederate leaders and freed slaves. Shortly after Lee's surrender, a general had asked Lincoln how the defeated Confederates should be treated, and Lincoln replied, "Let 'em up easy." [270] In keeping with that sentiment, Lincoln led the moderates regarding Reconstruction policy, and was opposed by the Radical Republicans, under Rep. Thaddeus Stevens , Sen. Charles Sumner and Sen. Benjamin Wade , political allies of the president on other issues. Determined to find a course that would reunite the nation and not alienate the South, Lincoln urged that speedy elections under generous terms be held throughout the war. His Amnesty Proclamation of December 8, 1863, offered pardons to those who had not held a Confederate civil office, had not mistreated Union prisoners, and would sign an oath of allegiance. [271]
As Southern states were subdued, critical decisions had to be made as to their leadership while their administrations were re-formed. Of special importance were Tennessee and Arkansas, where Lincoln appointed Generals Andrew Johnson and Frederick Steele as military governors, respectively. In Louisiana, Lincoln ordered General Nathaniel P. Banks to promote a plan that would restore statehood when 10 percent of the voters agreed to it. Lincoln's Democratic opponents seized on these appointments to accuse him of using the military to ensure his and the Republicans' political aspirations. On the other hand, the Radicals denounced his policy as too lenient, and passed their own plan, the Wade-Davis Bill , in 1864. When Lincoln vetoed the bill, the Radicals retaliated by refusing to seat representatives elected from Louisiana, Arkansas, and Tennessee. [272]
Lincoln's appointments were designed to keep both the moderate and Radical factions in harness. To fill Chief Justice Taney's seat on the Supreme Court, he named the choice of the Radicals, Salmon P. Chase, who Lincoln believed would uphold the emancipation and paper money policies. [273]
After implementing the Emancipation Proclamation, which did not apply to every state, Lincoln increased pressure on Congress to outlaw slavery throughout the entire nation with a constitutional amendment. Lincoln declared that such an amendment would "clinch the whole matter". [274] By December 1863, a proposed constitutional amendment that would outlaw slavery was brought to Congress for passage. This first attempt at an amendment failed to pass, falling short of the required two-thirds majority on June 15, 1864, in the House of Representatives. Passage of the proposed amendment became part of the Republican/Unionist platform in the election of 1864. After a long debate in the House, a second attempt passed Congress on January 31, 1865, and was sent to the state legislatures for ratification. [275] [276] Upon ratification, it became the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution on December 6, 1865. [277]
As the war drew to a close, Lincoln's presidential Reconstruction for the South was in flux; having believed the federal government had limited responsibility to the millions of freedmen. He signed into law Senator Charles Sumner's Freedmen's Bureau bill that set up a temporary federal agency designed to meet the immediate material needs of former slaves. The law assigned land for a lease of three years with the ability to purchase title for the freedmen. Lincoln stated that his Louisiana plan did not apply to all states under Reconstruction. Shortly before his assassination, Lincoln announced he had a new plan for southern Reconstruction. Discussions with his cabinet revealed Lincoln planned short-term military control over southern states, until readmission under the control of southern Unionists. [278]
Historians agree that it is impossible to predict exactly what Lincoln would have done about Reconstruction if he had lived, but they make projections based on his known policy positions and political acumen. Lincoln biographers James G. Randall and Richard Current , according to David Lincove, argue that:
Eric Foner argues that:

Redefining the republic and republicanism
The successful reunification of the states had consequences for the name of the country. The term "the United States" has historically been used, sometimes in the plural ("these United States"), and other times in the singular, without any particular grammatical consistency. The Civil War was a significant force in the eventual dominance of the singular usage by the end of the 19th century. [281]
In recent years, historians such as Harry Jaffa, Herman Belz, John Diggins, Vernon Burton and Eric Foner have stressed Lincoln's redefinition of republican values . As early as the 1850s, a time when most political rhetoric focused on the sanctity of the Constitution, Lincoln redirected emphasis to the Declaration of Independence as the foundation of American political values—what he called the "sheet anchor" of republicanism. [282] The Declaration's emphasis on freedom and equality for all, in contrast to the Constitution's tolerance of slavery, shifted the debate. As Diggins concludes regarding the highly influential Cooper Union speech of early 1860, "Lincoln presented Americans a theory of history that offers a profound contribution to the theory and destiny of republicanism itself." [283] His position gained strength because he highlighted the moral basis of republicanism, rather than its legalisms. [284] Nevertheless, in 1861, Lincoln justified the war in terms of legalisms (the Constitution was a contract, and for one party to get out of a contract all the other parties had to agree), and then in terms of the national duty to guarantee a republican form of government in every state. [285] Burton (2008) argues that Lincoln's republicanism was taken up by the Freedmen as they were emancipated. [286]
In March 1861, in Lincoln's first inaugural address , he explored the nature of democracy. He denounced secession as anarchy, and explained that majority rule had to be balanced by constitutional restraints in the American system. He said "A majority held in restraint by constitutional checks and limitations, and always changing easily with deliberate changes of popular opinions and sentiments, is the only true sovereign of a free people." [287]

Other enactments
Lincoln adhered to the Whig theory of the presidency, which gave Congress primary responsibility for writing the laws while the Executive enforced them. Lincoln vetoed only four bills passed by Congress; the only important one was the Wade-Davis Bill with its harsh program of Reconstruction. [288] He signed the Homestead Act in 1862, making millions of acres of government-held land in the West available for purchase at very low cost. The Morrill Land-Grant Colleges Act , also signed in 1862, provided government grants for agricultural colleges in each state. The Pacific Railway Acts of 1862 and 1864 granted federal support for the construction of the United States' First Transcontinental Railroad , which was completed in 1869. [289] The passage of the Homestead Act and the Pacific Railway Acts was made possible by the absence of Southern congressmen and senators who had opposed the measures in the 1850s. [290]
Other important legislation involved two measures to raise revenues for the Federal government: tariffs (a policy with long precedent), and a new Federal income tax. In 1861, Lincoln signed the second and third Morrill Tariff , the first having become law under James Buchanan. Also in 1861, Lincoln signed the Revenue Act of 1861 , creating the first U.S. income tax. [292] This created a flat tax of 3 percent on incomes above $800 ($21,300 in current dollar terms), which was later changed by the Revenue Act of 1862 to a progressive rate structure. [293]
Lincoln also presided over the expansion of the federal government's economic influence in several other areas. The creation of the system of national banks by the National Banking Act provided a strong financial network in the country. It also established a national currency. In 1862, Congress created, with Lincoln's approval, the Department of Agriculture . [294] In 1862, Lincoln sent a senior general, John Pope, to put down the " Sioux Uprising " in Minnesota. Presented with 303 execution warrants for convicted Santee Dakota who were accused of killing innocent farmers, Lincoln conducted his own personal review of each of these warrants, eventually approving 39 for execution (one was later reprieved). [295] President Lincoln had planned to reform federal Indian policy. [296]
In the wake of Grant's casualties in his campaign against Lee, Lincoln had considered yet another executive call for a military draft, but it was never issued. In response to rumors of one, however, the editors of the New York World and the Journal of Commerce published a false draft proclamation which created an opportunity for the editors and others employed at the publications to corner the gold market. Lincoln's reaction was to send the strongest of messages to the media about such behavior; he ordered the military to seize the two papers. The seizure lasted for two days. [297]
Lincoln is largely responsible for the institution of the Thanksgiving holiday in the United States. [298] Before Lincoln's presidency, Thanksgiving, while a regional holiday in New England since the 17th century, had been proclaimed by the federal government only sporadically and on irregular dates. The last such proclamation had been during James Madison 's presidency 50 years before. In 1863, Lincoln declared the final Thursday in November of that year to be a day of Thanksgiving. [298] In June 1864, Lincoln approved the Yosemite Grant enacted by Congress, which provided unprecedented federal protection for the area now known as Yosemite National Park . [299]

Judicial appointments

Supreme Court appointments
Lincoln's declared philosophy on court nominations was that "we cannot ask a man what he will do, and if we should, and he should answer us, we should despise him for it. Therefore we must take a man whose opinions are known." [298] Lincoln made five appointments to the United States Supreme Court. Noah Haynes Swayne , nominated January 21, 1862, and appointed January 24, 1862, was chosen as an anti-slavery lawyer who was committed to the Union. Samuel Freeman Miller , nominated and appointed on July 16, 1862, supported Lincoln in the 1860 election and was an avowed abolitionist. David Davis, Lincoln's campaign manager in 1860, nominated December 1, 1862, and appointed December 8, 1862, had also served as a judge in Lincoln's Illinois court circuit. Stephen Johnson Field , a previous California Supreme Court justice, was nominated March 6, 1863, and appointed March 10, 1863, and provided geographic balance, as well as political balance to the court as a Democrat. Finally, Lincoln's Treasury Secretary, Salmon P. Chase, was nominated as Chief Justice, and appointed the same day, on December 6, 1864. Lincoln believed Chase was an able jurist, would support Reconstruction legislation, and that his appointment united the Republican Party. [300]

Other judicial appointments
Lincoln appointed 32 federal judges, including four Associate Justices and one Chief Justice to the Supreme Court of the United States , and 27 judges to the United States district courts . Lincoln appointed no judges to the United States circuit courts during his time in office. [301] [302]

States admitted to the Union
West Virginia , admitted to the Union June 20, 1863, contained the former north-westernmost counties of Virginia that seceded from Virginia after that commonwealth declared its secession from the Union. As a condition for its admission, West Virginia's constitution was required to provide for the gradual abolition of slavery. Nevada , which became the third State in the far-west of the continent, was admitted as a free state on October 31, 1864. [303]

Assassination and funeral
Abraham Lincoln was assassinated by John Wilkes Booth on Good Friday, April 14, 1865, while attending a play at Ford's Theatre as the American Civil War was drawing to a close. The assassination occurred five days after the surrender of Robert E. Lee and the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia. Booth was a well-known actor and a Confederate spy from Maryland; though he never joined the Confederate army, he had contacts with the Confederate secret service. [304] In 1864, Booth formulated a plan (very similar to one of Thomas N. Conrad previously authorized by the Confederacy) [305] to kidnap Lincoln in exchange for the release of Confederate prisoners. After attending an April 11, 1865, speech in which Lincoln promoted voting rights for blacks, an incensed Booth changed his plans and became determined to assassinate the president. [306] Learning that the President and Grant would be attending Ford's Theatre , Booth formulated a plan with co-conspirators to assassinate Lincoln and Grant at the theater, as well as Vice President Johnson and Secretary of State Seward at their homes. Without his main bodyguard, Ward Hill Lamon , Lincoln left to attend the play Our American Cousin on April 14. At the last minute, Grant decided to go to New Jersey to visit his children instead of attending the play. [307]
Lincoln's bodyguard, John Parker, left Ford's Theater during intermission to drink at the saloon next door. The now unguarded President sat in his state box in the balcony. Seizing the opportunity, Booth crept up from behind and at about 10:13 pm, aimed at the back of Lincoln's head and fired at point-blank range, mortally wounding the President. Major Henry Rathbone momentarily grappled with Booth, but Booth stabbed him and escaped. [308] [309]
After being on the run for 12 days, Booth was tracked down and found on a farm in Virginia, some 70 miles (110 km) south of Washington. After refusing to surrender to Union troops, Booth was killed by Sergeant Boston Corbett on April 26. [310] [311]
Doctor Charles Leale , an Army surgeon, found the President unresponsive, barely breathing and with no detectable pulse. Having determined that the President had been shot in the head, and not stabbed in the shoulder as originally thought, he made an attempt to clear the blood clot, after which the President began to breathe more naturally. [312] The dying President was taken across the street to Petersen House . After remaining in a coma for nine hours, Lincoln died at 7:22 am on April 15. Secretary of War Stanton saluted and said, "Now he belongs to the ages." [313]
Lincoln's flag-enfolded body was then escorted in the rain to the White House by bareheaded Union officers, while the city's church bells rang. President Johnson was sworn in at 10:00 am, less than 3 hours after Lincoln's death. The late President lay in state in the East Room, and then in the Capitol Rotunda from April 19 through April 21. For his final journey with his son Willie, both caskets were transported in the executive coach "United States" and for three weeks the Lincoln Special funeral train decorated in black bunting [314] bore Lincoln's remains on a slow circuitous waypoint journey from Washington D.C. to Springfield, Illinois, stopping at many cities across the North for large-scale memorials attended by hundreds of thousands, as well as many people who gathered in informal trackside tributes with bands, bonfires, and hymn singing [315] [316] or silent reverence with hat in hand as the railway procession slowly passed by. Poet Walt Whitman composed When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd to eulogize Lincoln, one of four poems he wrote about the assassinated president. [317] Historians have emphasized the widespread shock and sorrow, but also noted that some Lincoln haters cheered when they heard the news. [318] African-Americans were especially moved; they had lost 'their Moses '. [319] In a larger sense, the outpouring of grief and anguish was in response to the deaths of so many men in the war that had just ended. [320]

Religious and philosophical beliefs
As a young man, Lincoln was a religious skeptic , [321] or, in the words of a biographer, an iconoclast . [322] Later in life, Lincoln's frequent use of religious imagery and language might have reflected his own personal beliefs or might have been a device to appeal to his audiences, who were mostly evangelical Protestants. [323] He never joined a church, although he frequently attended with his wife. [324] However, he was deeply familiar with the Bible , and he both quoted and praised it. [325] He was private about his beliefs and respected the beliefs of others. Lincoln never made a clear profession of Christian beliefs. However, he did believe in an all-powerful God that shaped events and, by 1865, was expressing those beliefs in major speeches. [326]
In the 1840s, Lincoln subscribed to the Doctrine of Necessity , a belief that asserted the human mind was controlled by some higher power. [327] In the 1850s, Lincoln believed in "providence" in a general way, and rarely used the language or imagery of the evangelicals; he regarded the republicanism of the Founding Fathers with an almost religious reverence. [328] When he suffered the death of his son Edward, Lincoln more frequently expressed a need to depend on God. [329] The death of his son Willie in February 1862 may have caused Lincoln to look toward religion for answers and solace. [330] After Willie's death, Lincoln considered why, from a divine standpoint, the severity of the war was necessary. He wrote at this time that God "could have either saved or destroyed the Union without a human contest. Yet the contest began. And having begun He could give the final victory to either side any day. Yet the contest proceeds." [331] On the day Lincoln was assassinated, he reportedly told his wife he desired to visit the Holy Land . [332]

Health
Several claims abound that Lincoln's health was declining before the assassination. These are often based on photographs appearing to show weight loss and muscle wasting. One such claim is that he suffered from a rare genetic disorder, MEN2b , [333] which manifests with a medullary thyroid carcinoma , mucosal neuromas and a Marfanoid appearance . Others simply claim he had Marfan syndrome , based on his tall appearance with spindly fingers, and the association of possible aortic regurgitation , which can cause bobbing of the head ( DeMusset's sign ) — based on blurring of Lincoln's head in photographs, which back then had a long exposure time. As of 2009 [update] , DNA analysis was being refused by the Grand Army of the Republic museum in Philadelphia. [333]

Historical reputation
In surveys of U.S. scholars ranking presidents conducted since the 1940s, Lincoln is consistently ranked in the top three, often as number one. [5] [6] A 2004 study found that scholars in the fields of history and politics ranked Lincoln number one, while legal scholars placed him second after Washington. [334] In presidential ranking polls conducted in the United States since 1948, Lincoln has been rated at the very top in the majority of polls. Generally, the top three presidents are rated as 1. Lincoln; 2. George Washington; and 3. Franklin D. Roosevelt, although Lincoln and Washington, and Washington and Roosevelt, are occasionally reversed. [335]
President Lincoln's assassination increased his status to the point of making him a national martyr. Lincoln was viewed by abolitionists as a champion for human liberty. Republicans linked Lincoln's name to their party. Many, though not all, in the South considered Lincoln as a man of outstanding ability. [336] Historians have said he was "a classical liberal" in the 19th century sense. Allen C. Guelzo states that Lincoln was a:
Lincoln became a favorite exemplar for liberal intellectuals across Europe and Latin America and even in Asia. [339]
Schwartz argues that Lincoln's American reputation grew slowly in the late 19th century until the Progressive Era (1900–1920s) when he emerged as one of the most venerated heroes in American history, with even white Southerners in agreement. The high point came in 1922 with the dedication of the Lincoln Memorial on the National Mall in Washington, D.C. [340] In the New Deal era liberals honored Lincoln not so much as the self-made man or the great war president, but as the advocate of the common man who they believe would have supported the welfare state. In the Cold War years, Lincoln's image shifted to emphasize the symbol of freedom who brought hope to those oppressed by communist regimes. [341]
By the 1970s Lincoln had become a hero to political conservatives [342] for his intense nationalism, support for business, his insistence on stopping the spread of human bondage, his acting in terms of Lockean and Burkean principles on behalf of both liberty and tradition, and his devotion to the principles of the Founding Fathers. [343] [344] [345] As a Whig activist, Lincoln was a spokesman for business interests, favoring high tariffs, banks, internal improvements, and railroads in opposition to the agrarian Democrats . [346] William C. Harris found that Lincoln's "reverence for the Founding Fathers, the Constitution, the laws under it, and the preservation of the Republic and its institutions undergirded and strengthened his conservatism". [347] James G. Randall emphasizes his tolerance and especially his moderation "in his preference for orderly progress, his distrust of dangerous agitation, and his reluctance toward ill digested schemes of reform". Randall concludes that, "he was conservative in his complete avoidance of that type of so-called 'radicalism' which involved abuse of the South, hatred for the slaveholder, thirst for vengeance, partisan plotting, and ungenerous demands that Southern institutions be transformed overnight by outsiders." [348]
By the late 1960s, some African American intellectuals led by Lerone Bennett Jr. , rejected Lincoln's role as the Great Emancipator. [349] [350] Bennett won wide attention when he called Lincoln a white supremacist in 1968. [351] He noted that Lincoln used ethnic slurs and told jokes that ridiculed blacks. Bennett argued that Lincoln opposed social equality, and proposed sending freed slaves to another country. Defenders, such as authors Dirck and Cashin, retorted that he was not as bad as most politicians of his day; [352] and that he was a "moral visionary" who deftly advanced the abolitionist cause, as fast as politically possible. [353] The emphasis shifted away from Lincoln-the-emancipator to an argument that blacks had freed themselves from slavery, or at least were responsible for pressuring the government on emancipation. [354] [355] Historian Barry Schwartz wrote in 2009 that Lincoln's image suffered "erosion, fading prestige, benign ridicule" in the late 20th century. [356] On the other hand, Donald opined in his 1996 biography that Lincoln was distinctly endowed with the personality trait of negative capability , defined by the poet John Keats and attributed to extraordinary leaders who were "content in the midst of uncertainties and doubts, and not compelled toward fact or reason". [357] In the 21st century, President Barack Obama named Lincoln his favorite president and insisted on using Lincoln's Bible for his swearing in of office at both his inaugurations. [358] [359]
Lincoln has often been portrayed by Hollywood, almost always in a flattering light. [360] [361]

Memory and memorials
Lincoln's portrait appears on two denominations of United States currency , the penny and the $5 bill . His likeness also appears on many postage stamps and he has been memorialized in many town, city, and county names, [362] including the capital of Nebraska. [363] While he is usually portrayed bearded, he first grew a beard in 1860 at the suggestion of 11-year old Grace Bedell .
The most famous and most visited memorials are Lincoln's sculpture on Mount Rushmore ; [364] Lincoln Memorial , Ford's Theatre , and Petersen House (where he died) in Washington, D.C. ; and the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum in Springfield, Illinois , not far from Lincoln's home , as well as his tomb . [365] [366]
There was also the Great Moments with Mr. Lincoln exhibit in Disneyland , and the Hall of Presidents at Walt Disney World , which had to do with Walt Disney admiring Lincoln ever since he was a little boy.
Barry Schwartz, a sociologist who has examined America's cultural memory, argues that in the 1930s and 1940s, the memory of Abraham Lincoln was practically sacred and provided the nation with "a moral symbol inspiring and guiding American life". During the Great Depression, he argues, Lincoln served "as a means for seeing the world's disappointments, for making its sufferings not so much explicable as meaningful". Franklin D. Roosevelt, preparing America for war, used the words of the Civil War president to clarify the threat posed by Germany and Japan. Americans asked, "What would Lincoln do?" [367] However, Schwartz also finds that since World War II, Lincoln's symbolic power has lost relevance, and this "fading hero is symptomatic of fading confidence in national greatness". He suggested that postmodernism and multiculturalism have diluted greatness as a concept. [368]
The United States Navy Nimitz -class aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln (CVN-72) is named after Lincoln, the second Navy ship to bear his name.

See also
WebPage index: 00054
Criticism of Wikipedia
Criticism of Wikipedia —of its content, procedures, and operations, and of the Wikipedia community —covers many subjects, topics, and themes about the nature of Wikipedia as an open source encyclopedia of subject entries that almost anyone can edit. Wikipedia has been criticized for the uneven handling, acceptance, and retention of articles about controversial subjects. The principal concerns of its critics are the factual reliability of the content; the readability of the prose; and a clear article layout; the existence of systemic bias ; of gender bias ; and of racial bias among the editorial community that is Wikipedia. Further concerns are that the organization allows the participation of anonymous editors (leading to editorial vandalism); the existence of social stratification (allowing cliques); and over-complicated rules (allowing editorial quarrels), the conditions of which permit the misuse of Wikipedia.
Wikipedia is described as unreliable at times. In "Wikipedia: The Dumbing Down of World Knowledge" (2010), Edwin Black characterized the editorial content of articles as a mixture of "truth, half-truth, and some falsehoods". [1] Similarly, in "Wisdom?: More like Dumbness of the Crowds" (2011), Oliver Kamm said that the encyclopedic articles usually are dominated by the editors with the loudest and most persistent editorial voices (talk pages and edit summaries), usually by an interest group with an ideological "axe to grind" on the subject, topic, or theme of the article in question. [2] Politics and ideology entries are also criticized on Wikipedia. In two works published in 2012, "The 'Undue Weight' of Truth on Wikipedia" by Timothy Messer–Kruse, and "You Just Type in What You are Looking for: Undergraduates' Use of Library Resources vs. Wikipedia" by Mónica Colón–Aguirre and Rachel A. Fleming–May, the authors analyzed and criticized the undue-weight policy (relative importance of a given source), and concluded that Wikipedia is not about providing correct and definitive information about a subject, [3] but instead presenting, as editorially dominant, the perspective taken by most authors of the sources for the article. This allegedly uneven application of the undue-weight policy creates omissions (of fact and of interpretation) that might give the reader false impressions about the subject matter, based upon the factually incomplete content of the Wikipedia article. [3] [4] [5]
Wikipedia is also sometimes characterized as having a hostile editing environment. In Common Knowledge?: An Ethnography of Wikipedia (2014), Dariusz Jemielniak , a steward for Wikimedia Foundation projects, stated that the complexity of the rules and laws governing editorial content and editors' behavior is a licence for the "office politics" of disruptive editors and drives away new, potentially constructive editors. [6] [7] In a follow-up article, "The Unbearable Bureaucracy of Wikipedia" (2014), Jemielniak said that abridging and rewriting the editorial rules and laws of Wikipedia for clarity of purpose and simplicity of application would resolve the bureaucratic bottleneck of too many rules. [6] [7] In "The Rise and Decline of an Open Collaboration System: How Wikipedia's Reaction to Popularity is Causing its Decline" (2013), Aaron Halfaker stated that the over-complicated rules and laws of Wikipedia unintentionally provoked the decline in editorial participation that began in 2009—frightening away new editors who otherwise would contribute to Wikipedia. [8]

Criticism of content
Wikipedia is described as unreliable at times. Edwin Black has characterized the editorial content of articles as a mixture of "truth, half-truth, and some falsehoods". [1] and Oliver Kamm has said that articles are usually dominated by the editors with the loudest and most persistent editorial voices (talk pages and edit summaries), usually by an interest group with an ideological "axe to grind" on the subject, topic, or theme of the article in question. [2]
Wikipedia articles on politics and ideology have also been criticized. Two works published in 2012 are critical of the undue-weight policy (relative importance of a given source), and concluded that, because the purpose of Wikipedia is not to provide correct and definitive information about a subject, [3] but to present, as the consensus opinion, the majority opinion advanced by the authors of the entry's sources. The uneven application of the undue-weight policy creates omissions (of fact and of interpretation) that might give the reader false impressions about the subject matter, based upon the incompleteness of the Wikipedia article. [3] [9] [5]
Wikipedia is sometimes characterized as having a hostile editing environment. In Common Knowledge?: An Ethnography of Wikipedia (2014), Dariusz Jemielniak , a steward for Wikimedia Foundation projects, stated that the complexity of the rules and laws governing editorial content and the behavior of the editors is a burden for new editors and a licence for the "office politics" of disruptive editors. [6] [10] In a follow-up article, Jemielniak said that abridging and rewriting the editorial rules and laws of Wikipedia for clarity of purpose and simplicity of application would resolve the bureaucratic bottleneck of too many rules. [10] In The Rise and Decline of an Open Collaboration System: How Wikipedia's Reaction to Popularity is Causing its Decline (2013), Aaron Halfaker stated that the over-complicated rules and laws of Wikipedia unintentionally provoked the decline in editorial participation that began in 2009—frightening away new editors who otherwise would contribute to Wikipedia. [8]
There have also been works that describe the possible misuse of Wikipedia. In "Wikipedia or Wickedpedia?" (2008), the Hoover Institution said that Wikipedia is an unreliable resource for correct knowledge, information, and facts about a subject, because, as an open source website, the editorial content of the articles is readily subjected to manipulation and propaganda . [11] The 2014 edition of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 's official student handbook, Academic Integrity at MIT , informs students that Wikipedia is not a reliable academic source, stating, "the bibliography published at the end of the Wikipedia entry may point you to potential sources. However, do not assume that these sources are reliable—use the same criteria to judge them as you would any other source. Do not consider the Wikipedia bibliography as a replacement for your own research ." [12]

Accuracy of information

Not authoritative
Wikipedia acknowledges that the encyclopedia should not be used as a primary source for research, either academic or informational. The British librarian Philip Bradley said that "the main problem is the lack of authority . With printed publications, the publishers have to ensure that their data are reliable, as their livelihood depends on it. But with something like this, all that goes out the window." [13] Likewise, Robert McHenry , editor-in-chief of Encyclopædia Britannica from 1992 to 1997, said that readers of Wikipedia articles cannot know who wrote the article they are reading—it might have been written by an expert in the subject matter or by an amateur. [14] In November 2015, Wikipedia co-founder Larry Sanger told Zach Schwartz in Vice : "I think Wikipedia never solved the problem of how to organize itself in a way that didn't lead to mob rule" and that since he left the project, "People that I would say are trolls sort of took over. The inmates started running the asylum." [15]

Comparative study of science articles
In "Internet Encyclopaedias Go Head-to-head", a 2005 article published in the Nature scientific journal, the results of a blind experiment (single-blind study), which compared the factual and informational accuracy of entries from Wikipedia and the Encyclopædia Britannica , were reported. The 42-entry sample included science articles and biographies of scientists, which were compared for accuracy by anonymous academic reviewers; they found that the average Wikipedia entry contained four errors and omissions, while the average Encyclopædia Britannica entry contained three errors and omissions. The study concluded that Wikipedia and Britannica were comparable in terms of the accuracy of its science entries". [17] Nevertheless, the reviewers had two principal criticisms of the Wikipedia science entries: (i) thematically confused content, without an intelligible structure (order, presentation, interpretation); and (ii) that undue weight is given to controversial, fringe theories about the subject matter. [18]
The dissatisfaction of the Encyclopædia Britannica editors led to Nature publishing additional survey documentation that substantiated the results of the comparative study. [19] Based upon the additional documents, Encyclopædia Britannica denied the validity of the study, stating it was flawed, because the Britannica extracts were compilations that sometimes included articles written for the youth version of the encyclopedia. [20] In turn, Nature acknowledged that some Britannica articles were compilations, but denied that such editorial details invalidated the conclusions of the comparative study of the science articles. [21]
The editors of Britannica also said that while the Nature study showed that the rate of error between the two encyclopedias was similar, the errors in a Wikipedia article usually were errors of fact, while the errors in a Britannica article were errors of omission. According to the editors of Britannica , Britannica was more accurate than Wikipedia in that respect. [20] Subsequently, Nature magazine rejected the Britannica response with a rebuttal of the editors' specific objections about the research method of the study. [22] [23]

Lack of methodical fact-checking
Inaccurate information that is not obviously false may persist in Wikipedia for a long time before it is challenged. The most prominent cases reported by mainstream media involved biographies of living people.
The Wikipedia Seigenthaler biography incident demonstrated that the subject of a biographical article must sometimes fix blatant lies about his own life. In May 2005, an anonymous user edited the biographical article on American journalist and writer John Seigenthaler so that it contained several false and defamatory statements. [24] [25] The inaccurate claims went unnoticed from May until September 2005 when they were discovered by Victor S. Johnson Jr. , a friend of Seigenthaler. Wikipedia content is often mirrored at sites such as Answers.com , which means that incorrect information can be replicated alongside correct information through a number of web sources. Such information can develop a misleading authority because of its presence at such sites. [26]
In another example, on March 2, 2007, MSNBC.com reported that then- New York Senator and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton had been incorrectly listed for 20 months in her Wikipedia biography as valedictorian of her class of 1969 at Wellesley College , when in fact she was not (though she did speak at commencement ). [27] The article included a link to the Wikipedia edit, [28] where the incorrect information was added on July 9, 2005. The inaccurate information was removed within 24 hours after the MSNBC.com report appeared. [29]
Attempts to perpetrate hoaxes may not be confined to editing existing Wikipedia articles, but can also include creating new articles. In October 2005, Alan Mcilwraith , a former call center worker from Scotland , created a Wikipedia article in which he wrote that he was a highly decorated war hero. The article was quickly identified as a hoax by other users and deleted. [30] [ better source needed ]
There have also been instances of users deliberately inserting false information into Wikipedia in order to test the system and demonstrate its alleged unreliability. Gene Weingarten , a journalist, ran such a test in 2007, in which he inserted false information into his own Wikipedia article; it was removed 27 hours later by a Wikipedia editor. [31] Wikipedia considers the deliberate insertion of false and misleading information to be vandalism . [32]

Neutral point of view and conflicts of interest
Wikipedia regards the concept of a neutral point of view as one of its non-negotiable principles; however, it acknowledges that such a concept has its limitations—its NPOV policy states that articles should be "as far as possible" written "without editorial bias". Mark Glaser, a journalist, also wrote that this may be an impossible ideal due to the inevitable biases of editors. [33]
In August 2007, a tool called WikiScanner—developed by Virgil Griffith, a visiting researcher from the Santa Fe Institute in New Mexico —was released to match edits to the encyclopedia by non-registered users with an extensive database of IP addresses . [34] News stories appeared about IP addresses from various organizations such as the Central Intelligence Agency , the National Republican Congressional Committee , the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee , Diebold, Inc. and the Australian government being used to make edits to Wikipedia articles, sometimes of an opinionated or questionable nature. Another story stated that an IP address from the BBC itself had been used to vandalize the article on George W. Bush . [35] The BBC quoted a Wikipedia spokesperson as praising the tool: "We really value transparency and the scanner really takes this to another level. Wikipedia Scanner may prevent an organisation or individuals from editing articles that they're really not supposed to." [36] Not everyone hailed WikiScanner as a success for Wikipedia. Oliver Kamm , in a column for The Times , argued instead that: [2]
WikiScanner only reveals conflicts of interest when the editor does not have a Wikipedia account and their IP address is used instead. Conflict of interest editing done by editors with accounts is not detected, since those edits are anonymous to everyone except some Wikipedia administrators . [37]

Scientific disputes
The 2005 Nature study also gave two brief examples of challenges that Wikipedian science writers purportedly faced on Wikipedia. The first concerned the addition of a section on violence to the schizophrenia article, which exhibited the view of one of the article's regular editors, neuropsychologist Vaughan Bell , that it was little more than a "rant" about the need to lock people up, and that editing it stimulated him to look up the literature on the topic. [17]
Another dispute involved the climate researcher William Connolley , a Wikipedia editor who was opposed by others. The topic in this second dispute was the greenhouse effect , and The New Yorker reported that this dispute, which was far more protracted, had led to arbitration , which took three months to produce a decision. The outcome of arbitration, as reported by Nature , was a six-month parole for Connolley, during which he was restricted to undoing edits on articles once per day. [38]

Exposure to political operatives and advocates
While Wikipedia policy requires articles to have a neutral point of view, it is not immune from attempts by outsiders (or insiders) with an agenda to place a spin on articles. In January 2006 it was revealed that several staffers of members of the U.S. House of Representatives had embarked on a campaign to cleanse their respective bosses' biographies on Wikipedia, as well as inserting negative remarks on political opponents. References to a campaign promise by Martin Meehan to surrender his seat in 2000 were deleted, and negative comments were inserted into the articles on United States Senator Bill Frist and Eric Cantor , a congressman from Virginia . Numerous other changes were made from an IP address assigned to the House of Representatives. [39] In an interview, Wikipedia de facto leader Jimmy Wales remarked that the changes were "not cool". [40]
Larry Delay and Pablo Bachelet wrote that from their perspective, some articles dealing with Latin American history and groups (such as the Sandinistas and Cuba ) lack political neutrality and are written from a sympathetic Marxist perspective which treats socialist dictatorships favorably at the expense of alternate positions. [41] [42] [43]
In 2008, the pro-Israel group Committee for Accuracy in Middle East Reporting in America (CAMERA) organized an e-mail campaign to encourage readers to correct perceived Israel-related biases and inconsistencies in Wikipedia. [44] CAMERA argued the excerpts were unrepresentative and that it had explicitly campaigned merely "toward encouraging people to learn about and edit the online encyclopedia for accuracy". [45] Defenders of CAMERA and the competing group, Electronic Intifada , went into mediation. [44] Israeli diplomat David Saranga said that Wikipedia is generally fair in regard to Israel. When it was pointed out that the entry on Israel mentioned the word "occupation" nine times, whereas the entry on the Palestinian People mentioned "terror" only once, he responded, "It means only one thing: Israelis should be more active on Wikipedia. Instead of blaming it, they should go on the site much more, and try and change it." [46]
Political commentator Haviv Rettig Gur, reviewing widespread perceptions in Israel of systemic bias in Wikipedia articles, has argued that there are deeper structural problems creating this bias: anonymous editing favors biased results, especially if the editors organize concerted campaigns of defamation as has been done in articles dealing with Arab-Israeli issues, and current Wikipedia policies, while well-meant, have proven ineffective in handling this. [47]
On August 31, 2008, The New York Times ran an article detailing the edits made to the biography of Alaska governor Sarah Palin in the wake of her nomination as the running mate of Arizona Senator John McCain . During the 24 hours before the McCain campaign announcement, 30 edits , many of them flattering details, were made to the article by Wikipedia single-purpose user identity Young_Trigg. [48] This person has later acknowledged working on the McCain campaign, and having several Wikipedia user accounts. [49]
In November 2007, libelous accusations were made against two politicians from southwestern France, Jean-Pierre Grand and Hélène Mandroux-Colas , on their Wikipedia biographies. Jean-Pierre Grand asked the president of the French National Assembly and the Prime Minister of France to reinforce the legislation on the penal responsibility of Internet sites and of authors who peddle false information in order to cause harm. [50] Senator Jean Louis Masson then requested the Minister of Justice to tell him whether it would be possible to increase the criminal responsibilities of hosting providers, site operators, and authors of libelous content; the minister declined to do so, recalling the existing rules in the LCEN law. [51]
On August 25, 2010, the Toronto Star reported that the Canadian "government is now conducting two investigations into federal employees who have taken to Wikipedia to express their opinion on federal policies and bitter political debates." [52]
In 2010, Al Jazeera 's Teymoor Nabili suggested that the article Cyrus Cylinder had been edited for political purposes by "an apparent tussle of opinions in the shadowy world of hard drives and 'independent' editors that comprise the Wikipedia industry." He suggested that after the Iranian presidential election, 2009 and the ensuing "anti-Iranian activities" a "strenuous attempt to portray the cylinder as nothing more than the propaganda tool of an aggressive invader" was visible. The edits following his analysis of the edits during 2009 and 2010, represented "a complete dismissal of the suggestion that the cylinder, or Cyrus' actions, represent concern for human rights or any kind of enlightened intent," in stark contrast to Cyrus ' own reputation as documented in the Old Testament and the people of Babylon. [53]

Commandeering or sanitizing articles
Articles of particular interest to an editor or group of editors are sometimes modified based on these editors' respective points of views. [54] Some companies and organizations—such as Sony , Diebold , Nintendo , Dell , the United States' Central Intelligence Agency , and the Church of Scientology —as well as individuals, such as United States Congressional staffers , were all shown to have modified the Wikipedia pages about themselves in order to present a point of view that describes them positively; these organizations may have editors who revert negative changes as soon as these changes are submitted. [55] [56]

Editing for financial rewards
In January 2007 Rick Jelliffe stated in a story carried by CBS [57] and IDG News Service [58] [59] that Microsoft had offered him compensation in exchange for his future editorial services on Wikipedia's articles related to OOXML (Office Open Extensible Markup Language). A Microsoft spokesperson, quoted by CBS, commented that "Microsoft and the writer, Rick Jelliffe, had not determined a price and no money had changed hands—but they had agreed that the company would not be allowed to review his writing before submission". Also quoted by CBS, Jimmy Wales expressed his disapproval of Microsoft's involvement: "We were very disappointed to hear that Microsoft was taking that approach".

Quality of the presentation

Quality of articles on U.S. history
In the essay, “Can History be Open Source?: Wikipedia and the Future of the Past” (2006), the academic historian Roy Rosenzweig criticized the encyclopedic content and writing style used in Wikipedia, for not distinguishing subjects that are important from subjects that are merely sensational. That Wikipedia is “surprisingly accurate in reporting names, dates, and events in U.S. history”, and that most of the factual errors he found “were small and inconsequential”, some of which “simply repeat widely held, but inaccurate, beliefs”, which are also repeated in the Microsoft Encarta encyclopedia and in the Encyclopædia Britannica ; yet Rosenzweig’s major criticism is that:
Rosenzweig also criticized the “waffling—encouraged by the [neutral point of view] policy—[which] means that it is hard to discern any overall interpretive stance in Wikipedia history [articles]”, and quoted the historical conclusion of the biography of William Clarke Quantrill , a Confederate guerrilla in the United States Civil War, as an example of weasel-word waffling:
In American National Biography Online , the historian James M. McPherson contrasted the content and writing style of Wikipedia's biography of United States President Abraham Lincoln to that of the U.S. Civil War article, and found that each entry was essentially accurate in covering the major episodes of President Lincoln’s life. The "richer contextualization" of McPherson's work, as well as "his artful use of quotations to capture Lincoln’s voice" and "his ability to convey a profound message in a handful of words," were contrasted with Wikipedia's history-article prose. The prose of the Wikipedia articles was "both verbose and dull" and thus difficult to read, because "the skill and confident judgment of a seasoned historian” are absent from the antiquarian writing style of Wikipedia, as opposed to the writing style used by professional historians in the American Heritage magazine. It was also mentioned that while Wikipedia usually provides many references, these are not the most accurate references. [60]

Quality of medical articles
In the article "Wikipedia Cancer Information Accurate," a study of medical articles, Yaacov Lawrence of the Kimmel Cancer Center of Thomas Jefferson University found that the cancer entries were mostly accurate. However, Wikipedia's articles were written in college-level prose, as opposed to in the easier-to-understand ninth-grade-level prose found in the Physician Data Query (PDQ) of the National Cancer Institute . According to Lawrence, "Wikipedia’s lack of readability may reflect its varied origins and haphazard editing.” [61]
In its 2007 article "Fact or Fiction? Wikipedia’s Variety of Contributors is Not Only a Strength," the magazine The Economist stated that the quality of the writing in Wikipedia articles usually indicates the quality of the editorial content: "Inelegant or ranting prose usually reflects muddled thoughts and incomplete information.” [62]

The Wall Street Journal
In the September 12, 2006, edition of The Wall Street Journal , Jimmy Wales debated with Dale Hoiberg , editor-in-chief of Encyclopædia Britannica . [63] Hoiberg focused on a need for expertise and control in an encyclopedia and cited Lewis Mumford that overwhelming information could "bring about a state of intellectual enervation and depletion hardly to be distinguished from massive ignorance." Wales emphasized Wikipedia's differences, and asserted that openness and transparency lead to quality. Hoiberg said that he "had neither the time nor space to respond to [criticisms]" and "could corral any number of links to articles alleging errors in Wikipedia", to which Wales responded: "No problem! Wikipedia to the rescue with a fine article", and included a link to the Wikipedia article about criticism of Wikipedia. [63]

Systemic bias in coverage
Wikipedia has been accused of systemic bias, which is to say its general nature leads, without necessarily any conscious intention, to the propagation of various prejudices. Although many articles in newspapers have concentrated on minor factual errors in Wikipedia articles, there are also concerns about large-scale, presumably unintentional effects from the increasing influence and use of Wikipedia as a research tool at all levels. In an article in the Times Higher Education magazine (London) philosopher Martin Cohen describes Wikipedia as having "become a monopoly" with "all the prejudices and ignorance of its creators," which he calls a "youthful cab-driver's" perspective. [64] Cohen concludes that "[t]o control the reference sources that people use is to control the way people comprehend the world. Wikipedia may have a benign, even trivial face, but underneath may lie a more sinister and subtle threat to freedom of thought ." [64] That freedom is undermined by what he sees as what matters on Wikipedia, "not your sources but the 'support of the community'." [64]
Researchers from Washington University developed a statistical model to measure systematic bias in the behavior of Wikipedia's users regarding controversial topics. The authors focused on behavioral changes of the encyclopedia's administrators after assuming the post, writing that systematic bias occurred after the fact. [65]
Critics also point to the tendency to cover topics in a detail disproportionate to their importance. For example, Stephen Colbert once mockingly praised Wikipedia for having a longer entry on ' lightsabers ' than it does on the ' printing press '. [66] In an interview with The Guardian , Dale Hoiberg, the editor-in-chief of Encyclopædia Britannica , noted: [13]
This critical approach has been satirised as "Wikigroaning", a term coined by Jon Hendren [67] of the website Something Awful . [68] In the game, two articles (preferably with similar names) are compared: one about an acknowledged, serious, or classical subject and the other about a popular or current one. [69] Defenders of a broad inclusion criteria have held that the encyclopedia's coverage of pop culture does not impose space constraints on the coverage of more serious subjects (see " Wiki is not paper "). As Ivor Tossell noted:
In 2014, supporters of holistic healing and energy psychology began a change.org petition asking for "true scientific discourse" on Wikipedia, complaining that "much of the information [on Wikipedia] related to holistic approaches to healing is biased, misleading, out-of-date, or just plain wrong". In response, Jimmy Wales said that Wikipedia only covers works that are published in respectable scientific journals. [71] [72]

Notability of article topics
Wikipedia's notability guidelines , which are used by editors to determine if a subject merits its own article, and the application thereof, are the subject of much criticism. [73] Nicholson Baker considers the notability standards arbitrary and essentially unsolvable: [74]
Criticizing the " deletionists ", Baker then writes: [73]
Another criticism about the deletionists is: "The increasing difficulty of making a successful edit; the exclusion of casual users; slower growth—all are hallmarks of the deletionists approach." [75]
Complaining that his own biography was on the verge of deletion for lack of notability, Timothy Noah argued that:
In the same article, Noah mentions that the Pulitzer Prize-winning writer Stacy Schiff was not considered notable enough for a Wikipedia entry before she wrote an extensive New Yorker article on Wikipedia itself.
A 2014 study found no correlation between characteristics of a given Wikipedia page about an academic and the academic's notability as determined by citation counts. The metrics of each Wikipedia page examined included length, number of links to the page from other articles, and number of edits made to the page. This study also found that Wikipedia did not cover notable ISI highly cited researchers properly. [77]

Partisanship
There have been suggestions that a politically liberal viewpoint is predominant . According to Jimmy Wales: "The Wikipedia community is very diverse, from liberal to conservative to libertarian and beyond. If averages mattered, and due to the nature of the wiki software (no voting) they almost certainly don't, I would say that the Wikipedia community is slightly more liberal than the U.S. population on average, because we are global and the international community of English speakers is slightly more liberal than the U.S. population. There are no data or surveys to back that." [78] Andrew Schlafly created Conservapedia because of his perception that Wikipedia contained a liberal bias. [79] Conservapedia's editors have compiled a list of alleged examples of liberal bias in Wikipedia. [80] In 2007, an article in The Christian Post criticised Wikipedia's coverage of intelligent design , saying that it was biased and hypocritical. [81] Lawrence Solomon of the National Review considered the Wikipedia articles on subjects like global warming , intelligent design , and Roe v. Wade all to be slanted in favor of liberal views. [82]
In a September 2010 issue of the conservative weekly Human Events , Rowan Scarborough presented a critique of Wikipedia's coverage of American politicians prominent in the approaching midterm elections as evidence of systemic liberal bias. [83] Scarborough compares the biographical articles of liberal and conservative opponents in Senate races in the Alaska Republican primary and the Delaware and Nevada general election, emphasizing the quantity of negative coverage of Tea Party -endorsed candidates. He also cites some criticism by Lawrence Solomon and quotes in full the lead section of Wikipedia's article on its rival Conservapedia as evidence of an underlying bias.
Shane Greenstein and Feng Zhu analyzed 2012 era Wikipedia articles on U.S. politics , going back a decade, and wrote a study [84] arguing the more contributors there were to an article, the less biased the article would be, and that — based on a study of frequent collocations — fewer articles "leaned Democrat" than was the case in Wikipedia's early years. [85] [86]

American and corporate bias
In 2008, Tim Anderson, a senior lecturer in political economy at the University of Sydney , said that Wikipedia administrators display an American-focused bias in their interactions with editors and their determinations of which sources are appropriate for use on the site. Anderson was outraged after several of the sources he used in his edits to the Hugo Chávez article, including Venezuela Analysis and Z Magazine , were disallowed as "unusable". Anderson also described Wikipedia's neutral point of view policy to ZDNet Australia as "a facade" and that Wikipedia "hides behind a reliance on corporate media editorials". [87]

Racial bias
Wikipedia has been criticized for having a systemic racial bias in its coverage, due to an under-representation of people of colour within its editor base. [88] The President of Wikimedia D.C. , James Hare, noted that "a lot of black history is left out" of Wikipedia, due to articles predominately being written by white editors. [89] Articles that do exist on African topics are, according to some critics, largely edited by editors from Europe and North America and thus reflect their knowledge and consumption of media, which "tend to perpetuate a negative image" of Africa. [90] Maira Liriano of the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture , has argued that the lack of information regarding black history on Wikipedia "makes it seem like it's not important." [91] San Francisco Poet Laureate Alejandro Murguía has stressed how it is important for Latinos to be part of Wikipedia "because it is a major source of where people get their information." [92]

Gender bias and sexism
Wikipedia has a longstanding controversy concerning gender bias and sexism. [94] [95] [96] [97] [98] [99] Gender bias on Wikipedia refers to the finding that between 84 and 91 percent of Wikipedia editors are male, [100] [101] which allegedly leads to systemic bias . [102] Wikipedia has been criticized [94] by some journalists and academics for lacking not only women contributors but also extensive and in-depth encyclopedic attention to many topics regarding gender. Sue Gardner , the former executive director of the foundation, said that increasing diversity was about making the encyclopedia "as good as it could be". Factors the article cited as possibly discouraging women from editing included the "obsessive fact-loving realm", associations with the "hard-driving hacker crowd", and the necessity to be "open to very difficult, high-conflict people, even misogynists." [95] In 2011, the Wikimedia Foundation set a goal of increasing the proportion of female contributors to 25 percent by 2015. [95] In August 2013, Gardner conceded defeat: "I didn't solve it. We didn't solve it. The Wikimedia Foundation didn't solve it. The solution won't come from the Wikimedia Foundation." [103] In August 2014, Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales acknowledged in a BBC interview the failure of Wikipedia to fix the gender gap and announced the Wikimedia Foundation 's plans for "doubling down" on the issue. Wales said the Foundation would be open to more outreach and more software changes. [104]

Sexual content
Wikipedia has been criticized for allowing graphic sexual content such as images and videos of masturbation and ejaculation as well as photos from hardcore pornographic films found on its articles. Child protection campaigners say graphic sexual content appears on many Wikipedia entries, displayed without any warning or age verification. [105]
The Wikipedia article Virgin Killer —a 1976 album from German heavy metal band Scorpions —features a picture of the album's original cover, which depicts a naked prepubescent girl. In December 2008, the Internet Watch Foundation , a nonprofit, nongovernment-affiliated organization, added the article to its blacklist, criticizing the inclusion of the picture as "distasteful". As a result, access to the article was blocked for four days by most Internet service providers in the United Kingdom. [106]
In April 2010, Larry Sanger , a co-founder of Wikipedia who had left the organization eight years previously, wrote a letter to the Federal Bureau of Investigation , outlining his concerns that two categories of images on Wikimedia Commons contained child pornography, and were in violation of United States federal obscenity law. Sanger also expressed concerns about access to the images on Wikipedia in schools. [107] Sanger later said that it was probably not correct to call it "child pornography", which most people associate with images of real children, and that he should have said "depictions of child sexual abuse". [108] Wikimedia Foundation spokesman Jay Walsh said that Wikipedia doesn't have "material we would deem to be illegal. If we did, we would remove it." [107] Following the complaint by Larry Sanger, Jimmy Wales deleted many sexual images without consulting the community; some were reinstated following discussion. [109] Critics, including Wikipediocracy , noticed that many of the sexual images deleted from Wikipedia since 2010 have reappeared. [110]

Exposure to vandals
As an online encyclopedia which almost anyone can edit, Wikipedia has long had problems with vandalism of articles, which range from "blanking" articles to inserting profanities, hoaxes or nonsense. Wikipedia has a range of tools available to users and administrators in order to fight against vandalism, including blocking and banning of vandals and automated bots that detect and repair vandalism. Supporters of the project argue that the vast majority of vandalism on Wikipedia is reverted within a short time, and a study by Fernanda Viégas of the MIT Media Lab and Martin Wattenberg and Kushal Dave of IBM Research found that most vandal edits were reverted within around five minutes; however they state that "it is essentially impossible to find a crisp definition of vandalism". [111] While most instances of page blanking or the addition of offensive material are soon reverted, less obvious vandalism, or vandalism to a little viewed article, has remained for longer periods.
A 2007 peer-reviewed study [112] that measured the actual number of page views with "damaged" content, concluded:

Privacy concerns
Most privacy concerns refer to cases of government or employer data gathering; or to computer or electronic monitoring; or to trading data between organizations. "The Internet has created conflicts between personal privacy, commercial interests and the interests of society at large" warn James Donnelly and Jenifer Haeckl. [113] Balancing the rights of all concerned as technology alters the social landscape will not be easy. It "is not yet possible to anticipate the path of the common law or governmental regulation" regarding this problem. [113]
The concern in the case of Wikipedia is the right of a private citizen to remain private; to remain a "private citizen" rather than a " public figure " in the eyes of the law. [114] It is somewhat of a battle between the right to be anonymous in cyberspace and the right to be anonymous in real life (" meatspace "). [ citation needed ] Wikipedia Watch argues that "Wikipedia is a potential menace to anyone who values privacy" and that "a greater degree of accountability in the Wikipedia structure" would be "the very first step toward resolving the privacy problem." [115] A particular problem occurs in the case of an individual who is relatively unimportant and for whom there exists a Wikipedia page against their wishes.
In 2005 Agence France-Presse quoted Daniel Brandt, the Wikipedia Watch owner, as saying that "the basic problem is that no one, neither the trustees of Wikimedia Foundation, nor the volunteers who are connected with Wikipedia, consider themselves responsible for the content." [116]
In January 2006, a German court ordered the German Wikipedia shut down within Germany because it stated the full name of Boris Floricic , aka "Tron", a deceased hacker who was formerly with the Chaos Computer Club . More specifically, the court ordered that the URL within the German .de domain ( http://www.wikipedia.de/ ) may no longer redirect to the encyclopedia's servers in Florida at http://de.wikipedia.org although German readers were still able to use the US-based URL directly, and there was virtually no loss of access on their part. The court order arose out of a lawsuit filed by Floricic's parents, demanding that their son's surname be removed from Wikipedia. [ citation needed ] On February 9, 2006, the injunction against Wikimedia Deutschland was overturned, with the court rejecting the notion that Tron's right to privacy or that of his parents were being violated. [117]

Criticism of the community

Role of Jimmy Wales
The community of Wikipedia editors has been criticized for placing an irrational emphasis on Jimmy Wales as a person. Wales's role in personally determining the content of some articles has also been criticized as contrary to the independent spirit that Wikipedia supposedly has gained. [118] [119] In early 2007, Wales dismissed the criticism of the Wikipedia model: "I am unaware of any problems with the quality of discourse on the site. I don't know of any higher-quality discourse anywhere." [120] [121] [122] [123] [124]

Conflict of interest cases
A Business Insider article wrote about a controversy in September 2012 where two Wikimedia Foundation employees were found to have been "running a PR business on the side and editing Wikipedia on behalf of their clients." [125]

Unfair treatment of female contributors
Some female editors have stated that they have been harassed by male editors. [126]
The English Wikipedia Arbitration Committee has been criticized as unfairly targeting female and feminist editors. [126]
In an article for Slate , David Auerbach criticized the decisions made by the Arbitration Committee, in a December 2014 case centered around the site's Gender Gap Task Force . Auerbach was critical of the committee's decision to permanently ban a female editor involved in the case, while not banning her male "chief antagonists", stating "With the Arbitration Committee opting only to ban the one woman in the dispute despite her behavior being no worse than that of the men, it's hard not to see this as a setback to Wikipedia's efforts to rectify its massive gender gap." [127]
In January 2015, The Guardian reported that the Arbitration Committee had banned five feminist editors from gender-related articles on a case related to the Gamergate controversy , while including quotes from a Wikipedia editor alleging unfair treatment. [128] [129] Other commentators, including from Gawker and ThinkProgress , provided additional analysis while sourcing from The Guardian ' s story. [129] [130] [131] [132] [133] Reports in The Washington Post , Slate and Social Text described these articles as "flawed" or factually inaccurate, pointing out that the Arbitration case had not concluded as at the time of publishing; no editor had been banned. [129] [134] [135] After the result was published, Gawker wrote that "ArbCom ruled to punish six editors who could be broadly classified as 'anti-Gamergate' and five who are 'pro-Gamergate'." All of the supposed "Five Horsemen" were among the editors punished, with one of them being the sole editor banned due to this case. [136] An article called "ArbitrationGate" regarding this situation was created (and quickly deleted) on Wikipedia, while The Guardian later issued a correction to their article. [129] The Committee and the Wikimedia Foundation issued press statements that the Gamergate case was in response to the atmosphere of the Gamergate article resembling a "battlefield" due to "various sides of the discussion [having] violated community policies and guidelines on conduct", and that the Committee was fulfilling its role to "uphold a civil, constructive atmosphere" on Wikipedia. The Committee also wrote that it "does not rule on the content of articles, or make judgements on the personal views of parties to the case". [134] [137] Michael Mandiberg , writing in Social Text , remained unconvinced. [135]

Lack of verifiable identities

Scandals involving administrators and arbitrators
David Boothroyd, a Wikipedia editor and a Labour Party ( United Kingdom ) member, created controversy in 2009, when Wikipedia Review contributor "Tarantino" discovered that he committed sockpuppeting , editing under the accounts "Dbiv", "Fys", and "Sam Blacketer", none of which acknowledged his real identity. After earning Administrator status with one account, then losing it for inappropriate use of the administrative tools, Boothroyd regained Administrator status with the Sam Blacketer sockpuppet account in April 2007. [ citation needed ] Later in 2007, Boothroyd's Sam Blacketer account became part of the English Wikipedia's Arbitration Committee. [ citation needed ] Under the Sam Blacketer account, Boothroyd edited many articles related to United Kingdom politics, including that of rival Conservative Party leader David Cameron . [138] [139] Boothroyd then resigned as an administrator and as an arbitrator. [140] [141]

Essjay controversy
In July 2006 The New Yorker ran a feature about Wikipedia by Stacy Schiff about a highly credentialed Wikipedia editor. [142] The initial version of the article included an interview with a Wikipedia administrator known by the pseudonym Essjay, who was described as a tenured professor of theology. [143] Essjay's Wikipedia user page, now removed, said the following:
Essjay also stated that he held four academic degrees: Bachelor of Arts in Religious Studies (B.A.), Master of Arts in Religion (M.A.R.), Doctorate of Philosophy in Theology (Ph.D.), and Doctorate in Canon Law (JCD). Essjay specialized in editing articles about religion on Wikipedia, including subjects such as "the penitential rite, transubstantiation, the papal tiara"; [142] on one occasion he was called in to give some "expert testimony" on the status of Mary in the Roman Catholic Church . [144] In January 2007, Essjay was hired as a manager with Wikia , a wiki-hosting service founded by Wales and Angela Beesley. In February, Wales appointed Essjay as a member of the Wikipedia Arbitration Committee , a group with powers to issue binding rulings in disputes relating to Wikipedia. [145]
In late February 2007 The New Yorker added an editorial note to its article on Wikipedia stating that it had learned that Essjay was Ryan Jordan, a 24-year-old college dropout from Kentucky with no advanced degrees and no teaching experience. [146] Initially Jimmy Wales commented on the issue of Essjay's identity: "I regard it as a pseudonym and I don't really have a problem with it." Larry Sanger , co-founder [147] [148] [149] of Wikipedia, responded to Wales on his Citizendium blog by calling Wales' initial reaction "utterly breathtaking, and ultimately tragic." Sanger said the controversy "reflects directly on the judgment and values of the management of Wikipedia." [150]
Wales later issued a new statement saying he had not previously understood that "EssJay used his false credentials in content disputes." He added: "I have asked EssJay to resign his positions of trust within the [Wikipedia] community." [151] Sanger responded the next day: "It seems Jimmy finds nothing wrong, nothing trust-violating, with the act itself of openly and falsely touting many advanced degrees on Wikipedia. But there most obviously is something wrong with it, and it's just as disturbing for Wikipedia's head to fail to see anything wrong with it." [152]
On March 4, Essjay wrote on his user page that he was leaving Wikipedia, and he also resigned his position with Wikia. [153] A subsequent article in The Courier-Journal ( Louisville ) suggested that the new résumé he had posted at his Wikia page was exaggerated. [154] The March 19, 2007 issue of The New Yorker published a formal apology by Wales to the magazine and Stacy Schiff for Essjay's false statements. [155]
Discussing the incident, the New York Times noted that the Wikipedia community had responded to the affair with "the fury of the crowd", and observed:
The Essjay incident received extensive media coverage, including a national United States television broadcast on ABC's World News with Charles Gibson [157] and the March 7, 2007, Associated Press story. [158] The controversy has led to a proposal that users who say that they possess academic qualifications should have to provide evidence before citing them in Wikipedia content disputes. [159] The proposal was not accepted. [160]

Anonymity
Wikipedia has been criticised for allowing editors to contribute anonymously (without a registered account and using an auto-generated IP -labeled account) or pseudonymously (using a registered account), with critics saying that this leads to a lack of accountability. [124] [161] This also sometimes leads to uncivil conduct in debates between Wikipedians. [124] [161] For privacy reasons, Wikipedia even forbids editors to reveal information about an anonymous editor on Wikipedia. [ citation needed ]

Editorial process

Level of debate, edit wars and harassment
The standard of debate on Wikipedia has been called into question by persons who have noted that contributors can make a long list of salient points and pull in a wide range of empirical observations to back up their arguments, only to have them ignored completely on the site. [162] An academic study of Wikipedia articles found that the level of debate among Wikipedia editors on controversial topics often degenerated into counterproductive squabbling:
In 2008, a team from the Palo Alto Research Center found that for editors that make between two and nine edits a month, the percentage of their edits being reverted had gone from 5% in 2004 to about 15%, and people who only make one edit a month were being reverted at a 25% rate. [164] According to The Economist magazine (2008), "The behaviour of Wikipedia's self-appointed deletionist guardians, who excise anything that does not meet their standards, justifying their actions with a blizzard of acronyms, is now known as "wiki-lawyering". [165] In regards to the decline in the number of Wikipedia editors since the 2007 policy changes, another study stated this was partly down to the way "in which newcomers are rudely greeted by automated quality control systems and are overwhelmed by the complexity of the rule system." [166]
Another complaint about Wikipedia focuses on the efforts of contributors with idiosyncratic beliefs , who push their point of view in an effort to dominate articles, especially controversial ones. [167] [168] This sometimes results in revert wars and pages being locked down. In response, an Arbitration Committee has been formed on the English Wikipedia that deals with the worst alleged offenders—though a conflict resolution strategy is actively encouraged before going to this extent. Also, to stop the continuous reverting of pages, Jimmy Wales introduced a "three-revert rule", whereby those users who reverse the effect of others' contributions to one article more than three times in a 24-hour period may be blocked. [ citation needed ]
In a 2008 article in The Brooklyn Rail , Wikipedia contributor David Shankbone contended that he had been harassed and stalked because of his work on Wikipedia, had received no support from the authorities or the Wikimedia Foundation, and only mixed support from the Wikipedia community. Shankbone wrote, "If you become a target on Wikipedia, do not expect a supportive community." [169]
David Auerbach , writing in Slate magazine, said:

Consensus and the "hive mind"
Oliver Kamm , in an article for The Times , said that Wikipedia's reliance on consensus in forming its content was dubious: [2]
Wikimedia advisor Benjamin Mako Hill also talked about Wikipedia's disproportional representation of viewpoints, saying:
Wikimedia steward Dariusz Jemielniak says:
In his article, " Digital Maoism: The Hazards of the New Online Collectivism " (first published online by Edge: The Third Culture , May 30, 2006), computer scientist and digital theorist Jaron Lanier describes Wikipedia as a "hive mind" that is "for the most part stupid and boring", and asks, rhetorically, "why pay attention to it?" His thesis says:
Lanier also says the economic trend to reward entities that aggregate information, rather than those that actually generate content. [ incomprehensible ] In the absence of "new business models", the popular demand for content will be sated by mediocrity, thus reducing or even eliminating any monetary incentives for the production of new knowledge. [173]
Lanier's opinions produced some strong disagreement. Internet consultant Clay Shirky noted that Wikipedia has many internal controls in place and is not a mere mass of unintelligent collective effort:

Excessive rule-making
Various figures involved with the Wikimedia Foundation have argued that Wikipedia's increasingly complex policies and guidelines are driving away new contributors to the site . Former chair Kat Walsh has criticized the project in recent years, saying, "It was easier when I joined in 2004... Everything was a little less complicated.... It's harder and harder for new people to adjust." [175] Top Wikipedia administrator Oliver Moran also views "policy creep" as the major barrier, writing that "the loose collective running the site today, estimated to be 90 percent male, operates a crushing bureaucracy with an often abrasive atmosphere that deters newcomers who might increase participation in Wikipedia and broaden its coverage". [176]
In his 2014 book, Common Knowledge?: An Ethnography of Wikipedia , Jemielniak, the Wikimedia steward, states similarly that the sheer complexity of the rules and laws governing content and editor behavior has become excessive and creates a learning burden for new editors. [6] [7] In a 2013 study, Aaron Halfaker of the University of Minnesota concluded the same thing. [8] Jemielniak suggests actively abridging and rewriting the rules and laws to fall within a fixed and reasonable limit of size and complexity to remedy their excessive complexity and size. [6] [7]

Social stratification
Despite the perception that the Wikipedia process is democratic, "a small number of people are running the show", [177] including administrators, bureaucrats, stewards, checkusers, mediators, arbitrators, and oversighters. [10] In an article on Wikipedia conflicts in 2007, The Guardian discussed "a backlash among some editors, who say that blocking users compromises the supposedly open nature of the project and the imbalance of power between users and administrators may even be a reason some users choose to vandalize in the first place" based on the experiences of one editor who became a vandal after his edits were reverted and he was blocked for edit warring. [178]

See also
WebPage index: 00055
China
China , officially the People's Republic of China ( PRC ), is a unitary sovereign state in East Asia and the world's most populous country , with a population of over 1.381 billion . [17] Covering approximately 9.6 million square kilometres (3.7 million square miles), China is the world's second-largest state by land area [18] and third- or fourth-largest by total area . [i] Governed by the Communist Party of China , [19] it exercises jurisdiction over 22 provinces , five autonomous regions , four direct-controlled municipalities (Beijing, Tianjin , Shanghai and Chongqing ) and the Special Administrative Regions Hong Kong and Macau , also claiming sovereignty over Taiwan . China is a great power and a major regional power within Asia, and has been characterized as a potential superpower . [20] [21]
China emerged as one of the world's earliest civilizations in the fertile basin of the Yellow River in the North China Plain . For millennia, China's political system was based on hereditary monarchies, or dynasties , beginning with the legendary Xia dynasty (c. 2070 BCE ). Since 221 BCE , when the Qin dynasty conquered the other largest six states to form the first unified Chinese empire, China has then expanded, fractured and re-unified numerous times in the following millennia. In 1912, the Republic of China (ROC) replaced the last dynasty and ruled the Chinese mainland until 1949, when it was defeated by the communist People's Liberation Army in the Chinese Civil War . The Communist Party established the People's Republic of China in Beijing on 1 October 1949, while the ROC government relocated to Taiwan with its present de facto temporary capital in Taipei . Both the ROC and PRC continue to claim to be the legitimate government of all China, though the latter has more recognition in the world and controls more territory.
China has had the largest economy in the world for much of the last two thousand years, during which it has seen cycles of prosperity and decline. Since the introduction of economic reforms in 1978 , China has become one of the world's fastest-growing major economies. As of 2016 [update] , it is the world's second-largest economy by nominal GDP and largest by purchasing power parity (PPP). China is also the world's largest exporter and second-largest importer of goods. [22] China is a recognized nuclear weapons state and has the world's largest standing army and second-largest defense budget . [23] [24] The PRC is a member of the United Nations , as it replaced the ROC as a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council in 1971. China is also a member of numerous formal and informal multilateral organizations, including the WTO , APEC , BRICS , the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), the BCIM and the G-20 .

Names
The English name "China" is first attested in Richard Eden 's 1555 translation [j] of the 1516 journal of the Portuguese explorer Duarte Barbosa . [k] [30] The demonym , that is, the name for the people, and adjectival form "Chinese" developed later on the model of Portuguese chinês and French chinois . [31] [l] Portuguese China is thought to derive from Persian Chīn ( چین ), and perhaps ultimately from Sanskrit Cīna ( चीन ). [33] Cīna was first used in early Hindu scripture, including the Mahābhārata (5th century BCE ) and the Laws of Manu (2nd century BCE ). [34] The traditional theory, proposed in the 17th century by Martino Martini [35] and supported by many later scholars, is that the word "China" and its earlier related forms are ultimately derived from the state of Qin ( 秦 , Old Chinese : * Dzin ), [36] the westernmost of the Chinese states during the Zhou dynasty which unified China to form the Qin dynasty . [37] There are, however, other suggestions for the derivation of "China". [34]
The official name of the modern state is the "People's Republic of China" ( Chinese : 中华人民共和国 ; pinyin : Zhōnghuá Rénmín Gònghéguó ). The shorter form is "China" Zhōngguó ( 中国 ), from zhōng ("central" or "middle") and guó ("state, nation-state"), [25] [m] a term which developed under the Zhou Dynasty in reference to its royal demesne . [n] It was then applied to the area around Luoyi (present-day Luoyang) during the Eastern Zhou and then to China's Central Plain before being used as an occasional synonym for the state under the Qing . [38] It was often used as a cultural concept to distinguish the Huaxia tribes from perceived "barbarians" [38] and was the source of the English name "Middle Kingdom". [40] [41] A more literary or inclusive name, alluding to the "land of Chinese civilization", is Zhōnghuá ( 中华 ). [42] It developed during the Wei and Jin dynasties as a contraction of "the central state of the Huaxia ". [38] During the 1950s and 1960s, after the defeat of the Kuomingtang in the Chinese Civil War , it was also referred to as "Communist China" or "Red China", to be differentiated from "Nationalist China" or " Free China ". [43]

History

Prehistory
Archaeological evidence suggests that early hominids inhabited China between 2.24 million and 250,000 years ago. [44] The hominid fossils of Peking Man , a Homo erectus who used fire , [45] were discovered in a cave at Zhoukoudian near Beijing ; they have been dated to between 680,000 and 780,000 years ago . [46] The fossilized teeth of Homo sapiens (dated to 125,000–80,000 years ago ) have been discovered in Fuyan Cave in Dao County , Hunan . [47] Chinese proto-writing existed in Jiahu around 7000 BCE , [48] Damaidi around 6000 BCE , [49] Dadiwan from 5800–5400 BCE , and Banpo dating from the 5th millennium BCE . Some scholars have suggested that the Jiahu symbols (7th millennium BCE ) constituted the earliest Chinese writing system. [48]

Early dynastic rule
According to Chinese tradition, the first dynasty was the Xia , which emerged around 2100 BCE . [50] The dynasty was considered mythical by historians until scientific excavations found early Bronze Age sites at Erlitou , Henan in 1959. [51] It remains unclear whether these sites are the remains of the Xia dynasty or of another culture from the same period. [52] The succeeding Shang dynasty is the earliest to be confirmed by contemporary records. [53] The Shang ruled the plain of the Yellow River in eastern China from the 17th to the 11th century BCE . [54] Their oracle bone script (from c. 1500 BCE ) [55] [56] represents the oldest form of Chinese writing yet found, [57] and is a direct ancestor of modern Chinese characters . [58]
The Shang were conquered by the Zhou , who ruled between the 11th and 5th centuries BCE , though centralized authority was slowly eroded by feudal warlords. Many independent states eventually emerged from the weakened Zhou state and continually waged war with each other in the 300-year Spring and Autumn period , only occasionally deferring to the Zhou king. By the time of the Warring States period of the 5th–3rd centuries BCE , there were seven powerful sovereign states in what is now China, each with its own king, ministry and army.

Imperial China
The Warring States period ended in 221 BCE after the state of Qin conquered the other six kingdoms and established the first unified Chinese state. Its King Zheng proclaimed himself the First Emperor of the Qin dynasty ( Qín Shǐhuáng or Shǐ Huángdì ). He enacted Qin's legalist reforms throughout China, notably the forced standardization of Chinese characters , measurements , road widths (i.e., cart axles' length), and currency . His dynasty also conquered the Yue tribes in Guangxi , Guangdong , and Vietnam . [59] The Qin dynasty lasted only fifteen years, falling soon after the First Emperor's death, as his harsh authoritarian policies led to widespread rebellion. [60] [61]
Following a widespread civil war during which the imperial library at Xianyang was burned , [o] the Han dynasty emerged to rule China between 206 BCE and CE 220, creating a cultural identity among its populace still remembered in the ethnonym of the Han Chinese . [60] [61] The Han expanded the empire's territory considerably , with military campaigns reaching Central Asia, Mongolia , South Korea , and Yunnan , and the recovery of Guangdong and northern Vietnam from Nanyue . Han involvement in Central Asia and Sogdia helped establish the land route of the Silk Road , replacing the earlier path over the Himalayas to India. Han China gradually became the largest economy of the ancient world. [63] Despite the Han's initial decentralization and the official abandonment of the Qin philosophy of Legalism in favor of Confucianism , Qin's legalist institutions and policies continued to be employed by the Han government and its successors. [64]
After the collapse of Han , a period of strife known as Three Kingdoms followed, [65] whose central figures were later immortalized in one of the Four Classics of Chinese literature . At its end, Wei was swiftly overthrown by the Jin dynasty . The Jin fell to civil war upon the ascension of a developmentally-disabled emperor ; the Five Barbarians then invaded and ruled northern China as the Sixteen Kingdoms . The Xianbei unified them as the Northern Wei , whose Emperor Xiaowen reversed his predecessors' apartheid policies and enforced a drastic sinification on his subjects , largely integrating them into Chinese culture. In the south, the general Liu Yu secured the abdication of the Jin in favor of the Liu Song . The various successors of these states became known as the Northern and Southern dynasties , with the two areas finally reunited by the Sui in 581. The Sui restored the Han to power through China, reformed its agriculture and economy, constructed the Grand Canal , and patronized Buddhism . However, they fell quickly when their conscription for public works and a failed war with Korea provoked widespread unrest. [66] [67]
Under the succeeding Tang and Song dynasties, Chinese economy, technology, and culture entered a golden age. [68] The Tang Empire returned control of the Western Regions and the Silk Road, [69] and made the capital Chang'an a cosmopolitan urban center. However, it was devastated and weakened by the An Shi Rebellion in the 8th century. [70] In 907, the Tang disintegrated completely when the local military governors became ungovernable. The Song Dynasty ended the separatist situation in 960, leading to a balance of power between the Song and Khitan Liao . The Song was the first government in world history to issue paper money and the first Chinese polity to establish a permanent standing navy which was supported by the developed shipbuilding industry along with the sea trade. [71] Between the 10th and 11th centuries, the population of China doubled in size to around 100 million people, mostly because of the expansion of rice cultivation in central and southern China, and the production of abundant food surpluses. The Song dynasty also saw a revival of Confucianism , in response to the growth of Buddhism during the Tang, [72] and a flourishing of philosophy and the arts, as landscape art and porcelain were brought to new levels of maturity and complexity. [73] [74] However, the military weakness of the Song army was observed by the Jurchen Jin dynasty . In 1127, Emperor Huizong of Song and the capital Bianjing were captured during the Jin–Song Wars . The remnants of the Song retreated to southern China . [75]
In the 13th century, China was gradually conquered by the Mongol Empire . In 1271, the Mongol leader Kublai Khan established the Yuan dynasty ; the Yuan conquered the last remnant of the Song dynasty in 1279. Before the Mongol invasion, the population of Song China was 120 million citizens; this was reduced to 60 million by the time of the census in 1300. [76] A peasant named Zhu Yuanzhang overthrew the Yuan Dynasty in 1368 and founded the Ming dynasty . Under the Ming Dynasty, China enjoyed another golden age, developing one of the strongest navies in the world and a rich and prosperous economy amid a flourishing of art and culture. It was during this period that Zheng He led voyages throughout the world, reaching as far as Africa . [77] In the early years of the Ming Dynasty, China's capital was moved from Nanjing to Beijing. With the budding of capitalism, philosophers such as Wang Yangming further critiqued and expanded Neo-Confucianism with concepts of individualism and equality of four occupations . [78] The scholar-official stratum became a supporting force of industry and commerce in the tax boycott movements, which, together with the famines and the wars against Japanese invasions of Korea and Manchu invasions , led to an exhausted treasury. [79]
In 1644, Beijing was captured by a coalition of peasant rebel forces led by Li Zicheng . The last Ming Chongzhen Emperor committed suicide when the city fell. The Manchu Qing dynasty , then allied with Ming dynasty general Wu Sangui , overthrew Li's short-lived Shun dynasty and subsequently seized control of Beijing, which became the new capital of the Qing dynasty.

End of dynastic rule
The Qing dynasty , which lasted from 1644 until 1912, was the last imperial dynasty of China. Its conquest of the Ming (1618–1683) cost 25 million lives and the economy of China shrank drastically . [80] After the Southern Ming ended, the further conquest of the Dzungar Khanate added Mongolia, Tibet and Xinjiang to the empire. [81] The centralized autocracy was strengthened to crack down on anti-Qing sentiment with the policy of valuing agriculture and restraining commerce, the Haijin ("sea ban"), and ideological control as represented by the literary inquisition , causing social and technological stagnation. [82] [83] In the mid-19th century, the dynasty experienced Western imperialism in the Opium Wars with Britain and France. China was forced to pay compensation, open treaty ports, allow extraterritoriality for foreign nationals, and cede Hong Kong to the British [84] under the 1842 Treaty of Nanking , the first of the Unequal Treaties . The First Sino-Japanese War (1894–95) resulted in Qing China's loss of influence in the Korean Peninsula , as well as the cession of Taiwan to Japan . [85]
The Qing dynasty also began experiencing internal unrest in which tens of millions of people died, especially in the failed Taiping Rebellion that ravaged southern China in the 1850s and 1860s and the Dungan Revolt (1862–77) in the northwest. The initial success of the Self-Strengthening Movement of the 1860s was frustrated by a series of military defeats in the 1880s and 1890s.
In the 19th century, the great Chinese diaspora began. Losses due to emigration were added to by conflicts and catastrophes such as the Northern Chinese Famine of 1876–79 , in which between 9 and 13 million people died. [86] The Guangxu Emperor drafted a reform plan in 1898 to establish a modern constitutional monarchy , but these plans were thwarted by the Empress Dowager Cixi . The ill-fated anti-foreign Boxer Rebellion of 1899–1901 further weakened the dynasty. Although Cixi sponsored a program of reforms, the Xinhai Revolution of 1911–12 brought an end to the Qing dynasty and established the Republic of China .

Republic of China (1912–1949)
On 1 January 1912, the Republic of China was established, and Sun Yat-sen of the Kuomintang (the KMT or Nationalist Party) was proclaimed provisional president. [87] However, the presidency was later given to Yuan Shikai , a former Qing general who in 1915 proclaimed himself Emperor of China . In the face of popular condemnation and opposition from his own Beiyang Army , he was forced to abdicate and re-establish the republic. [88]
After Yuan Shikai's death in 1916, China was politically fragmented. Its Beijing-based government was internationally recognized but virtually powerless; regional warlords controlled most of its territory. [89] [90] In the late 1920s, the Kuomintang, under Chiang Kai-shek , the then Principal of the Republic of China Military Academy , was able to reunify the country under its own control with a series of deft military and political manoeuvrings, known collectively as the Northern Expedition . [91] [92] The Kuomintang moved the nation's capital to Nanjing and implemented "political tutelage", an intermediate stage of political development outlined in Sun Yat-sen's San-min program for transforming China into a modern democratic state. [93] [94] The political division in China made it difficult for Chiang to battle the Communist , People's Liberation Army (PLA) against whom the Kuomintang had been warring since 1927 in the Chinese Civil War . This war continued successfully for the Kuomintang, especially after the PLA retreated in the Long March , until Japanese aggression and the 1936 Xi'an Incident forced Chiang to confront Imperial Japan . [95]
The Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945), a theater of World War II , forced an uneasy alliance between the Kuomintang and the PLA. Japanese forces committed numerous war atrocities against the civilian population; in all, as many as 20 million Chinese civilians died. [96] An estimated 200,000 Chinese were massacred in the city of Nanjing alone during the Japanese occupation. [97] During the war, China, along with the UK, the US and the Soviet Union, were referred to as "trusteeship of the powerful" [98] and were recognized as the Allied " Big Four " in the Declaration by United Nations . [99] [100] Along with the other three great powers, China was one of the four major Allies of World War II , and was later considered one of the primary victors in the war. [101] [102] After the surrender of Japan in 1945, Taiwan, including the Pescadores , was returned to Chinese control. China emerged victorious but war-ravaged and financially drained. The continued distrust between the Kuomintang and the Communists led to the resumption of civil war. Constitutional rule was established in 1947, but because of the ongoing unrest, many provisions of the ROC constitution were never implemented in mainland China. [103]

People's Republic of China (1949–present)
Major combat in the Chinese Civil War ended in 1949 with the Communist Party in control of most of mainland China , and the Kuomintang retreating offshore, reducing the ROC's territory to only Taiwan , Hainan , and their surrounding islands. On 1 October 1949, Communist Party Chairman Mao Zedong proclaimed the establishment of the People's Republic of China. [104] In 1950, the People's Liberation Army succeeded in capturing Hainan from the ROC [105] and incorporating Tibet . [106] However, remaining Kuomintang forces continued to wage an insurgency in western China throughout the 1950s. [107]
The regime consolidated its popularity among the peasants through land reform, which saw between 1 and 2 million landlords executed. [108] Under its leadership, China developed an independent industrial system and its own nuclear weapons. [109] The Chinese population almost doubled from around 550 million to over 900 million. [110] However, the Great Leap Forward , a large-scale economic and social reform project, resulted in an estimated 45 million deaths between 1958 and 1961, mostly from starvation. [111] In 1966, Mao and his allies launched the Cultural Revolution , sparking a decade of political recrimination and social upheaval which lasted until Mao's death in 1976. In October 1971, the PRC replaced the Republic of China in the United Nations, and took its seat as a permanent member of the Security Council. [112]
After Mao's death, the Gang of Four was quickly arrested and held responsible for the excesses of the Cultural Revolution. Deng Xiaoping took power in 1978, and instituted significant economic reforms . The Communist Party loosened governmental control over citizens' personal lives, and the communes were gradually disbanded in favor of private land leases. This marked China's transition from a planned economy to a mixed economy with an increasingly open-market environment . [113] China adopted its current constitution on 4 December 1982. In 1989, the violent suppression of student protests in Tiananmen Square brought condemnation and sanctions against the Chinese government from various countries. [114]
Jiang Zemin , Li Peng and Zhu Rongji led the nation in the 1990s. Under their administration, China's economic performance pulled an estimated 150 million peasants out of poverty and sustained an average annual gross domestic product growth rate of 11.2%. [115] [116] The country formally joined the World Trade Organization in 2001, and maintained its high rate of economic growth under Hu Jintao and Wen Jiabao 's leadership in the 2000s. However, rapid growth also severely impacted the country's resources and environment, [117] [118] and caused major social displacement . [119] [120] Living standards continued to improve rapidly despite the late-2000s recession , but centralized political control remained tight. [121]
Preparations for a decadal Communist Party leadership change in 2012 were marked by factional disputes and political scandals . [122] During China's 18th National Communist Party Congress in November 2012, Hu Jintao was replaced as General Secretary of the Communist Party by Xi Jinping . [123] [124] Under Xi, the Chinese government began large-scale efforts to reform its economy, [125] [126] which has suffered from structural instabilities and slowing growth. [127] [128] [129] [130] The Xi–Li Administration also announced major reforms to the one-child policy and prison system. [131]

Geography
China's landscape is vast and diverse, ranging from the Gobi and Taklamakan Deserts in the arid north to subtropical forests in the wetter south. The Himalaya , Karakoram , Pamir and Tian Shan mountain ranges separate China from much of South and Central Asia . The Yangtze and Yellow Rivers , the third- and sixth-longest in the world, respectively, run from the Tibetan Plateau to the densely populated eastern seaboard. China's coastline along the Pacific Ocean is 14,500 kilometers (9,000 mi) long and is bounded by the Bohai , Yellow , East China and South China seas.

Political geography
The People's Republic of China is the second-largest country in the world by land area [132] after Russia , and is either the third- or fourth-largest by total area, after Russia, Canada and, depending on the definition of total area, the United States. [p] China's total area is generally stated as being approximately 9,600,000 km 2 (3,700,000 sq mi). [133] Specific area figures range from 9,572,900 km 2 (3,696,100 sq mi) according to the Encyclopædia Britannica , [134] 9,596,961 km 2 (3,705,407 sq mi) according to the UN Demographic Yearbook, [8] to 9,596,961 km 2 (3,705,407 sq mi) according to the CIA World Factbook . [10]
China has the longest combined land border in the world , measuring 22,117 km (13,743 mi) from the mouth of the Yalu River to the Gulf of Tonkin . [10] China borders 14 nations , more than any other country except Russia, which also borders 14. [135] China extends across much of East Asia, bordering Vietnam , Laos , and Myanmar (Burma) in Southeast Asia; India , Bhutan , Nepal , Afghanistan , and Pakistan [q] in South Asia; Tajikistan , Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan in Central Asia; and Russia , Mongolia , and North Korea in Inner Asia and Northeast Asia . Additionally, China shares maritime boundaries with South Korea , Japan, Vietnam, and the Philippines .

Landscape and climate
The territory of China lies between latitudes 18° and 54° N , and longitudes 73° and 135° E . China's landscapes vary significantly across its vast width. In the east, along the shores of the Yellow Sea and the East China Sea , there are extensive and densely populated alluvial plains , while on the edges of the Inner Mongolian plateau in the north, broad grasslands predominate. Southern China is dominated by hills and low mountain ranges, while the central-east hosts the deltas of China's two major rivers, the Yellow River and the Yangtze River . Other major rivers include the Xi , Mekong , Brahmaputra and Amur . To the west sit major mountain ranges, most notably the Himalayas. High plateaus feature among the more arid landscapes of the north, such as the Taklamakan and the Gobi Desert . The world's highest point, Mount Everest (8,848m), lies on the Sino-Nepalese border. [136] The country's lowest point, and the world's third-lowest, is the dried lake bed of Ayding Lake (−154m) in the Turpan Depression . [137]
China's climate is mainly dominated by dry seasons and wet monsoons , which lead to pronounced temperature differences between winter and summer. In the winter, northern winds coming from high-latitude areas are cold and dry; in summer, southern winds from coastal areas at lower latitudes are warm and moist. [138] The climate in China differs from region to region because of the country's highly complex topography .
A major environmental issue in China is the continued expansion of its deserts , particularly the Gobi Desert. [139] [140] Although barrier tree lines planted since the 1970s have reduced the frequency of sandstorms , prolonged drought and poor agricultural practices have resulted in dust storms plaguing northern China each spring, which then spread to other parts of east Asia, including Korea and Japan. China's environmental watchdog, SEPA , stated in 2007 that China is losing 4,000 km 2 (1,500 sq mi) per year to desertification. [141] Water quality, erosion , and pollution control have become important issues in China's relations with other countries. Melting glaciers in the Himalayas could potentially lead to water shortages for hundreds of millions of people. [142]

Biodiversity
China is one of 17 megadiverse countries , [143] lying in two of the world's major ecozones : the Palearctic and the Indomalaya . By one measure, China has over 34,687 species of animals and vascular plants, making it the third-most biodiverse country in the world, after Brazil and Colombia . [144] The country signed the Rio de Janeiro Convention on Biological Diversity on 11 June 1992, and became a party to the convention on 5 January 1993. [145] It later produced a National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan , with one revision that was received by the convention on 21 September 2010. [146]
China is home to at least 551 species of mammals (the third-highest such number in the world), [147] 1,221 species of birds (eighth), [148] 424 species of reptiles (seventh) [149] and 333 species of amphibians (seventh). [150] China is the most biodiverse country in each category outside the tropics. Wildlife in China share habitat with and bear acute pressure from the world's largest population of homo sapiens . At least 840 animal species are threatened, vulnerable or in danger of local extinction in China, due mainly to human activity such as habitat destruction, pollution and poaching for food, fur and ingredients for traditional Chinese medicine . [151] Endangered wildlife is protected by law, and as of 2005 [update] , the country has over 2,349 nature reserves , covering a total area of 149.95 million hectares, 15 percent of China's total land area. [152]
China has over 32,000 species of vascular plants, [153] and is home to a variety of forest types. Cold coniferous forests predominate in the north of the country, supporting animal species such as moose and Asian black bear , along with over 120 bird species. [154] The understorey of moist conifer forests may contain thickets of bamboo . In higher montane stands of juniper and yew , the bamboo is replaced by rhododendrons . Subtropical forests, which are predominate in central and southern China, support as many as 146,000 species of flora. [154] Tropical and seasonal rainforests , though confined to Yunnan and Hainan Island , contain a quarter of all the animal and plant species found in China. [154] China has over 10,000 recorded species of fungi , [155] and of them, nearly 6,000 are higher fungi . [156]

Environmental issues
In recent decades, China has suffered from severe environmental deterioration and pollution . [157] [158] While regulations such as the 1979 Environmental Protection Law are fairly stringent, they are poorly enforced, as they are frequently disregarded by local communities and government officials in favor of rapid economic development. [159] Urban air pollution is a severe health issue in the country; the World Bank estimated in 2013 that 16 of the world's 20 most-polluted cities are located in China. [160] China is the world's largest carbon dioxide emitter. [161] The country also has significant water pollution problems: 40% of China's rivers had been polluted by industrial and agricultural waste by late 2011. [162] In 2014, the internal freshwater resources per capita of China reduced to 2,062m 3 , and it was below 500m 3 in the North China Plain , while 5,920m 3 in the world. [163] [164] [165]
However, China is the world's leading investor in renewable energy commercialization , with $ 52 billion invested in 2011 alone; [166] [167] [168] it is a major manufacturer of renewable energy technologies and invests heavily in local-scale renewable energy projects. [169] [170] By 2009, over 17% of China's energy was derived from renewable sources – most notably hydroelectric power plants, of which China has a total installed capacity of 197 GW. [171] In 2011, the Chinese government announced plans to invest four trillion yuan (US$619 billion) in water infrastructure and desalination projects over a ten-year period, and to complete construction of a flood prevention and anti-drought system by 2020. [164] [172] In 2013, China began a five-year, US$277 billion effort to reduce air pollution, particularly in the north of the country. [173]

Politics
China's constitution states that The People's Republic of China "is a socialist state under the people's democratic dictatorship led by the working class and based on the alliance of workers and peasants," and that the state organs "apply the principle of democratic centralism." [174] The PRC is one of the world's few remaining socialist states openly endorsing communism (see Ideology of the Communist Party of China ). The Chinese government has been variously described as communist and socialist, but also as authoritarian and corporatist , [175] with heavy restrictions in many areas, most notably against free access to the Internet , freedom of the press , freedom of assembly , the right to have children , free formation of social organizations and freedom of religion . [176] Its current political, ideological and economic system has been termed by its leaders as the " people's democratic dictatorship ", " socialism with Chinese characteristics " (which is Marxism adapted to Chinese circumstances) and the " socialist market economy " respectively. [177]

Communist Party
China's constitution declares that the country is ruled "under the leadership" of the Communist Party of China (CPC). [178] The electoral system is pyramidal. Local People's Congresses are directly elected , and higher levels of People's Congresses up to the National People's Congress (NPC) are indirectly elected by the People's Congress of the level immediately below. [179] The political system is decentralized, and provincial and sub-provincial leaders have a significant amount of autonomy. [180] Other political parties , referred to as democratic parties, have representatives in the National People's Congress and the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC). [181] China supports the Leninist principle of " democratic centralism ", [182] but critics describe the elected National People's Congress as a " rubber stamp " body. [183]

Government
The President of China is the titular head of state , serving as the ceremonial figurehead under National People's Congress . The Premier of China is the head of government , presiding over the State Council composed of four vice premiers and the heads of ministries and commissions. The incumbent president is Xi Jinping , who is also the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China and the Chairman of the Central Military Commission , making him China's paramount leader . [123] The incumbent premier is Li Keqiang , who is also a senior member of the CPC Politburo Standing Committee , China's de facto top decision-making body. [184]
There have been some moves toward political liberalization, in that open contested elections are now held at the village and town levels. [185] [186] However, the Party retains effective control over government appointments: in the absence of meaningful opposition, the CPC wins by default most of the time. Political concerns in China include the growing gap between rich and poor and government corruption. [187] [188] Nonetheless, the level of public support for the government and its management of the nation is high, with 80–95% of Chinese citizens expressing satisfaction with the central government, according to a 2011 survey. [189]

Administrative divisions
The People's Republic of China is divided into 22 provinces , five autonomous regions , each with a designated minority group; four municipalities ; and two Special Administrative Regions (SARs) which enjoy a degree of political autonomy. These 31 provincial-level divisions can be collectively referred to as " mainland China ", a term which usually excludes two SARs of Hong Kong and Macau . Geographically, all 31 provincial divisions can be grouped into six regions, including North China , Northeast China , East China , South Central China , Southwest China and Northwest China .
China considers Taiwan to be its 23rd province , although Taiwan is governed by the Republic of China, which disputes the PRC's claim. [190] None of the divisions are recognized by the ROC government, which claims the entirety of the PRC's territory.

Foreign relations
The PRC has diplomatic relations with 174 countries and maintains embassies in 162 . Its legitimacy is disputed by the Republic of China and a few other countries; it is thus the largest and most populous state with limited recognition . In 1971, the PRC replaced the Republic of China as the sole representative of China in the United Nations and as one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council . [191] China was also a former member and leader of the Non-Aligned Movement , and still considers itself an advocate for developing countries . [192] Along with Brazil, Russia, India and South Africa, China is a member of the BRICS group of emerging major economies and hosted the group's third official summit at Sanya , Hainan in April 2011. [193]
Under its interpretation of the One-China policy , Beijing has made it a precondition to establishing diplomatic relations that the other country acknowledges its claim to Taiwan and severs official ties with the government of the Republic of China. Chinese officials have protested on numerous occasions when foreign countries have made diplomatic overtures to Taiwan, [194] especially in the matter of armament sales. [195]
Much of current Chinese foreign policy is reportedly based on Premier Zhou Enlai 's Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence , and is also driven by the concept of "harmony without uniformity", which encourages diplomatic relations between states despite ideological differences. [196] This policy may have led China to support states that are regarded as dangerous or repressive by Western nations, such as Zimbabwe , North Korea and Iran . [197] China has a close economic and military relationship with Russia, [198] and the two states often vote in unison in the UN Security Council. [199] [200] [201]

Trade relations
In recent decades, China has played an increasing role in calling for free trade areas and security pacts amongst its Asia-Pacific neighbours. China became a member of the World Trade Organization (WTO) on 11 December 2001. In 2004, it proposed an entirely new East Asia Summit (EAS) framework as a forum for regional security issues. [202] The EAS, which includes ASEAN Plus Three , India, Australia and New Zealand, held its inaugural summit in 2005. China is also a founding member of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), along with Russia and the Central Asian republics.
In 2000, the United States Congress approved "permanent normal trade relations" (PNTR) with China, allowing Chinese exports in at the same low tariffs as goods from most other countries. [203] China has a significant trade surplus with the United States, its most important export market. [204] In the early 2010s, US politicians argued that the Chinese yuan was significantly undervalued, giving China an unfair trade advantage. [205] [206] [207] In recent decades, China has followed a policy of engaging with African nations for trade and bilateral co-operation; [208] [209] [210] in 2012, Sino-African trade totalled over US$160 billion. [211] China has furthermore strengthened its ties with major South American economies, becoming the largest trading partner of Brazil and building strategic links with Argentina . [212] [213]

Territorial disputes
Ever since its establishment after the second Chinese Civil War , the PRC has claimed the territories governed by the Republic of China (ROC), a separate political entity today commonly known as Taiwan, as a part of its territory. It regards the island of Taiwan as its Taiwan Province , Kinmen and Matsu as a part of Fujian Province and islands the ROC controls in the South China Sea as a part of Hainan Province and Guangdong Province . These claims are controversial because of the complicated Cross-Strait relations , with the PRC treating the One-China policy as one of its most important diplomatic principles. [214]
In addition to Taiwan, China is also involved in other international territorial disputes. Since the 1990s, China has been involved in negotiations to resolve its disputed land borders, including a disputed border with India and an undefined border with Bhutan . China is additionally involved in multilateral disputes over the ownership of several small islands in the East and South China Seas, such as the Senkaku Islands and the Scarborough Shoal . [215] [216] On 21 May 2014 Xi Jinping , speaking at a conference in Shanghai, pledged to settle China's territorial disputes peacefully. "China stays committed to seeking peaceful settlement of disputes with other countries over territorial sovereignty and maritime rights and interests", he said. [217]

Emerging superpower status
China is regularly hailed as a potential new superpower , with certain commentators citing its rapid economic progress, growing military might, very large population, and increasing international influence as signs that it will play a prominent global role in the 21st century. [21] [218] Others, however, warn that economic bubbles and demographic imbalances could slow or even halt China's growth as the century progresses. [219] [220] Some authors also question the definition of "superpower", arguing that China's large economy alone would not qualify it as a superpower, and noting that it lacks the military power and cultural influence of the United States. [221]

Sociopolitical issues, human rights and reform
The Chinese democracy movement , social activists, and some members of the Communist Party of China have all identified the need for social and political reform. While economic and social controls have been significantly relaxed in China since the 1970s, political freedom is still tightly restricted. The Constitution of the People's Republic of China states that the "fundamental rights" of citizens include freedom of speech , freedom of the press , the right to a fair trial , freedom of religion , universal suffrage , and property rights . However, in practice, these provisions do not afford significant protection against criminal prosecution by the state. [222] [223] Although some criticisms of government policies and the ruling Communist Party are tolerated, censorship of political speech and information, most notably on the Internet, [224] [225] are routinely used to prevent collective action. [226] In 2005, Reporters Without Borders ranked China 159th out of 167 states in its Annual World Press Freedom Index, indicating a very low level of press freedom. [227] In 2014, China ranked 175th out of 180 countries. [228]
Rural migrants to China's cities often find themselves treated as second-class citizens by the hukou household registration system, which controls access to state benefits . [229] [230] Property rights are often poorly protected, [229] and taxation disproportionately affects poorer citizens. [230] However, a number of rural taxes have been reduced or abolished since the early 2000s, and additional social services provided to rural dwellers. [231] [232]
A number of foreign governments, foreign press agencies and NGOs also routinely criticize China's human rights record , alleging widespread civil rights violations such as detention without trial, forced abortions , [233] forced confessions, torture , restrictions of fundamental rights, [176] [234] and excessive use of the death penalty . [235] [236] The government has suppressed popular protests and demonstrations that it considers a potential threat to "social stability", as was the case with the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 .
Falun Gong was first taught publicly in 1992. In 1999, when there were 70 million practitioners, [237] the persecution of Falun Gong began, resulting in mass arrests, extralegal detention, and reports of torture and deaths in custody. [238] [239] The Chinese state is regularly accused of large-scale repression and human rights abuses in Tibet and Xinjiang , including violent police crackdowns and religious suppression . [240] [241]
The Chinese government has responded to foreign criticism by arguing that the right to subsistence and economic development is a prerequisite to other types of human rights, and that the notion of human rights should take into account a country's present level of economic development . [242] It emphasizes the rise in the Chinese standard of living , literacy rate and average life expectancy since the 1970s, as well as improvements in workplace safety and efforts to combat natural disasters such as the perennial Yangtze River floods. [242] [243] [244] Furthermore, some Chinese politicians have spoken out in support of democratization, although others remain more conservative . [245] Some major reform efforts have been conducted; for an instance in November 2013, the government announced plans to relax the one-child policy and abolish the much-criticized re-education through labour program, [131] though human rights groups note that reforms to the latter have been largely cosmetic. [238] During the 2000s and early 2010s, the Chinese government was increasingly tolerant of NGOs that offer practical, efficient solutions to social problems, but such "third sector" activity remained heavily regulated. [246] [247]

Military
With 2.3 million active troops, the People's Liberation Army (PLA) is the largest standing military force in the world, commanded by the Central Military Commission (CMC). [248] The PLA consists of the Ground Force (PLAGF), the Navy (PLAN), the Air Force (PLAAF), and the People's Liberation Army Rocket Force (PLARF). According to the Chinese government, China's military budget for 2014 totalled US$132 billion, constituting the world's second-largest military budget . [24] However, many authorities – including SIPRI and the U.S. Office of the Secretary of Defense – argue that China does not report its real level of military spending, which is allegedly much higher than the official budget. [24] [249]
As a recognized nuclear weapons state, China is considered both a major regional military power and a potential military superpower . [250] According to a 2013 report by the US Department of Defense , China fields between 50 and 75 nuclear ICBMs , along with a number of SRBMs . [23] However, compared with the other four UN Security Council Permanent Members, China has relatively limited power projection capabilities. [251] To offset this, it has developed numerous power projection assets since the early 2000s – its first aircraft carrier entered service in 2012, [252] [253] [254] and it maintains a substantial fleet of submarines , including several nuclear-powered attack and ballistic missile submarines. [255] China has furthermore established a network of foreign military relationships along critical sea lanes . [256]
China has made significant progress in modernising its air force in recent decades, purchasing Russian fighter jets such as the Sukhoi Su-30 , and also manufacturing its own modern fighters, most notably the Chengdu J-10 , J-20 and the Shenyang J-11 , J-15 , J-16 , and J-31 . [252] [257] China is furthermore engaged in developing an indigenous stealth aircraft and numerous combat drones . [258] [259] [260] Air and Sea denial weaponry advances have increased the regional threat from the perspective of Japan as well as Washington. [261] [262] China has also updated its ground forces, replacing its ageing Soviet -derived tank inventory with numerous variants of the modern Type 99 tank , and upgrading its battlefield C3I and C4I systems to enhance its network-centric warfare capabilities. [263] In addition, China has developed or acquired numerous advanced missile systems, [264] [265] including anti-satellite missiles , [266] cruise missiles [267] and submarine-launched nuclear ICBMs. [268] According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute 's data, China became the world's third largest exporter of major arms in 2010–14, an increase of 143 per cent from the period 2005–09. [269]

Economy
China had the largest economy in the world for most of the past two thousand years, during which it has seen cycles of prosperity and decline. [272] [273] As of 2014 [update] , China has the world's second-largest economy in terms of nominal GDP, totalling approximately US$10.380 trillion according to the International Monetary Fund . [14] If purchasing power parity (PPP) is taken into account, China's economy is the largest in the world, with a 2014 PPP GDP of US$17.617 trillion. [14] In 2013, its PPP GDP per capita was US$12,880, while its nominal GDP per capita was US$7,589. Both cases put China behind around eighty countries (out of 183 countries on the IMF list) in global GDP per capita rankings. [274]

Economic history and growth
From its founding in 1949 until late 1978, the People's Republic of China was a Soviet-style centrally planned economy . Following Mao's death in 1976 and the consequent end of the Cultural Revolution , Deng Xiaoping and the new Chinese leadership began to reform the economy and move towards a more market-oriented mixed economy under one-party rule. Agricultural collectivization was dismantled and farmlands privatized, while foreign trade became a major new focus, leading to the creation of Special Economic Zones (SEZs). Inefficient state-owned enterprises (SOEs) were restructured and unprofitable ones were closed outright, resulting in massive job losses. Modern-day China is mainly characterized as having a market economy based on private property ownership, [275] and is one of the leading examples of state capitalism . [276] [277] The state still dominates in strategic "pillar" sectors such as energy production and heavy industries , but private enterprise has expanded enormously, with around 30 million private businesses recorded in 2008. [278] [279] [280] [281]
Since economic liberalization began in 1978, China has been among the world's fastest-growing economies, [282] relying largely on investment- and export-led growth. [283] According to the IMF, China's annual average GDP growth between 2001 and 2010 was 10.5%. Between 2007 and 2011, China's economic growth rate was equivalent to all of the G7 countries' growth combined. [284] According to the Global Growth Generators index announced by Citigroup in February 2011, China has a very high 3G growth rating. [285] Its high productivity, low labor costs and relatively good infrastructure have made it a global leader in manufacturing. However, the Chinese economy is highly energy-intensive and inefficient; [286] China became the world's largest energy consumer in 2010, [287] relies on coal to supply over 70% of its energy needs, and surpassed the US to become the world's largest oil importer in September 2013. [288] [289] In the early 2010s, China's economic growth rate began to slow amid domestic credit troubles, weakening international demand for Chinese exports and fragility in the global economy. [290] [291] [292]
In the online realm, China's e-commerce industry has grown more slowly than the EU and the US, with a significant period of development occurring from around 2009 onwards. According to Credit Suisse , the total value of online transactions in China grew from an insignificant size in 2008 to around RMB 4 trillion (US$660 billion) in 2012. The Chinese online payment market is dominated by major firms such as Alipay , Tenpay and China UnionPay . [293]

China in the global economy
China is a member of the WTO and is the world's largest trading power, with a total international trade value of US$3.87 trillion in 2012. [22] Its foreign exchange reserves reached US$2.85 trillion by the end of 2010, an increase of 18.7% over the previous year, making its reserves by far the world's largest. [294] [295] In 2012, China was the world's largest recipient of inward foreign direct investment (FDI), attracting $253 billion. [296] In 2014, China's foreign exchange remittances were $US64 billion making it the second largest recipient of remittances in the world. [297] China also invests abroad, with a total outward FDI of $62.4 billion in 2012, [296] and a number of major takeovers of foreign firms by Chinese companies. [298] In 2009, China owned an estimated $1.6 trillion of US securities , [299] and was also the largest foreign holder of US public debt , owning over $1.16 trillion in US Treasury bonds . [300] [301] China's undervalued exchange rate has caused friction with other major economies, [206] [302] [303] and it has also been widely criticized for manufacturing large quantities of counterfeit goods. [304] [305] According to consulting firm McKinsey , total outstanding debt in China increased from $7.4 trillion in 2007 to $28.2 trillion in 2014, which reflects 228% of China's GDP, a percentage higher than that of some G20 nations. [306]
China ranked 29th in the Global Competitiveness Index in 2009, [308] although it is only ranked 136th among the 179 countries measured in the 2011 Index of Economic Freedom . [309] In 2014, Fortune' s Global 500 list of the world's largest corporations included 95 Chinese companies , with combined revenues of US$ 5.8 trillion. [310] The same year, Forbes reported that five of the world's ten largest public companies were Chinese, including the world's largest bank by total assets , the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China . [311]

Class and income equality
China's middle-class population (if defined as those with annual income of between US$10,000 and US$60,000) had reached more than 300 million by 2012. [312] According to the Hurun Report , the number of US dollar billionaires in China increased from 130 in 2009 to 251 in 2012, giving China the world's second-highest number of billionaires. [313] [314] China's domestic retail market was worth over 20 trillion yuan (US$3.2 trillion) in 2012 [315] and is growing at over 12% annually as of 2013 [update] , [316] while the country's luxury goods market has expanded immensely, with 27.5% of the global share. [317] However, in recent years, China's rapid economic growth has contributed to severe consumer inflation, [318] [319] leading to increased government regulation. [320] China has a high level of economic inequality, [321] which has increased in the past few decades. [322] In 2012, China's official Gini coefficient was 0.474. [323] A study conducted by Southwestern University of Finance and Economics showed that China’s Gini coefficient actually had reached 0.61 in 2012, and top 1% Chinese held more than 25% of China’s wealth. [324]

Internationalization of the renminbi
Since 2008 global financial crisis, China realized the dependency of US Dollar and the weakness of the international monetary system. [325] The RMB Internationalization accelerated in 2009 when China established dim sum bond market and expanded the Cross-Border Trade RMB Settlement Pilot Project, which helps establish pools of offshore RMB liquidity. [326] [327] In November 2010, Russia began using the Chinese renminbi in its bilateral trade with China. [328] This was soon followed by Japan , [329] Australia , [330] Singapore , [331] the United Kingdom , [332] and Canada . [333] As a result of the rapid internationalization of the renminbi, it became the eighth-most-traded currency in the world in 2013. [334]

Science and technology

Historical
China was a world leader in science and technology until the Ming Dynasty . Ancient Chinese discoveries and inventions , such as papermaking , printing , the compass , and gunpowder (the Four Great Inventions ), later became widespread in Asia and Europe. Chinese mathematicians were the first to use negative numbers . [335] [336] However, by the 17th century, the Western world had surpassed China in scientific and technological development. [337] The causes of this Great Divergence continue to be debated. [338]
After repeated military defeats by Western nations in the 19th century, Chinese reformers began promoting modern science and technology as part of the Self-Strengthening Movement . After the Communists came to power in 1949, efforts were made to organize science and technology based on the model of the Soviet Union , in which scientific research was part of central planning. [339] After Mao's death in 1976, science and technology was established as one of the Four Modernizations , [340] and the Soviet-inspired academic system was gradually reformed. [341]

Modern era
Since the end of the Cultural Revolution, China has made significant investments in scientific research, [342] with $163 billion spent on scientific research and development in 2012. [343] Science and technology are seen as vital for achieving China's economic and political goals, and are held as a source of national pride to a degree sometimes described as "techno-nationalism". [344] Nonetheless, China's investment in basic and applied scientific research remains behind that of leading technological powers such as the United States and Japan. [342] [343] Chinese-born scientists have won the Nobel Prize in Physics four times, the Nobel Prize in Chemistry and Physiology or Medicine once respectively, though most of these scientists conducted their Nobel-winning research in western nations. [r]
China is developing its education system with an emphasis on science, mathematics and engineering ; in 2009, China graduated over 10,000 Ph.D. engineers, and as many as 500,000 BSc graduates, more than any other country. [350] China is also the world's second-largest publisher of scientific papers , producing 121,500 in 2010 alone, including 5,200 in leading international scientific journals. [351] Chinese technology companies such as Huawei and Lenovo have become world leaders in telecommunications and personal computing, [352] [353] [354] and Chinese supercomputers are consistently ranked among the world's most powerful . [355] [356] China is also expanding its use of industrial robots ; from 2008 to 2011, the installation of multi-role robots in Chinese factories rose by 136 percent. [357]
The Chinese space program is one of the world's most active, and is a major source of national pride. [358] [359] In 1970, China launched its first satellite, Dong Fang Hong I , becoming the fifth country to do so independently. [360] In 2003, China became the third country to independently send humans into space, with Yang Liwei 's spaceflight aboard Shenzhou 5 ; as of 2015 [update] , ten Chinese nationals have journeyed into space, including two women. In 2011, China's first space station module, Tiangong-1 , was launched, marking the first step in a project to assemble a large manned station by the early 2020s. [361] In 2013, China successfully landed the Chang'e 3 probe and Yutu rover onto the Moon; China plans to collect lunar soil samples by 2017. [362]

Infrastructure

Telecommunications
China currently has the largest number of active cellphones of any country in the world, with over 1 billion users by February 2012. [363] It also has the world's largest number of internet and broadband users , [364] with over 688 million internet users as of 2016 [update] , equivalent to around half of its population. [365] The national average broadband connection speed is 9.46 MB/s, ranking China 91st in the world in terms of internet speed. [365] As of July 2013, China accounts for 24% of the world's internet-connected devices. [366] Since 2011 China is the nation with the most installed telecommunication bandwidth in the world. By 2014, China hosts more than twice as much national bandwidth potential than the U.S., the historical leader in terms of installed telecommunication bandwidth (China: 29% versus US:13% of the global total). [367]
China Telecom and China Unicom , the world's two largest broadband providers, accounted for 20% of global broadband subscribers. China Telecom alone serves more than 50 million broadband subscribers, while China Unicom serves more than 40 million. [368] Several Chinese telecommunications companies, most notably Huawei and ZTE , have been accused of spying for the Chinese military. [369]
China is developing its own satellite navigation system, dubbed Beidou , which began offering commercial navigation services across Asia in 2012, [370] and is planned to offer global coverage by 2020. [371]

Transport
Since the late 1990s, China's national road network has been significantly expanded through the creation of a network of national highways and expressways . In 2011 China's highways had reached a total length of 85,000 km (53,000 mi), making it the longest highway system in the world . [372] In 1991, there were only six bridges across the main stretch of the Yangtze River, which bisects the country into northern and southern halves. By October 2014, there were 81 such bridges and tunnels .
China has the world's largest market for automobiles, having surpassed the United States in both auto sales and production . Auto sales in 2009 exceeded 13.6 million [373] and may reach 40 million by 2020. [374] A side-effect of the rapid growth of China's road network has been a significant rise in traffic accidents, [375] with poorly enforced traffic laws cited as a possible cause—in 2011 alone, around 62,000 Chinese died in road accidents. [376] In urban areas, bicycles remain a common mode of transport, despite the increasing prevalence of automobiles – as of 2012 [update] , there are approximately 470 million bicycles in China. [377]
China's railways , which are state-owned , are among the busiest in the world , handling a quarter of the world's rail traffic volume on only 6 percent of the world's tracks in 2006. [378] [379] As of 2013 [update] , the country had 103,144 km (64,091 mi) of railways, the third longest network in the world . [380] All provinces and regions are connected to the rail network except Macau . The railways strain to meet enormous demand particularly during the Chinese New Year holiday, when the world's largest annual human migration takes place. [379] In 2013, Chinese railways delivered 2.106 billion passenger trips, generating 1,059.56 billion passenger-kilometers and carried 3.967 billion tons of freight, generating 2,917.4 billion cargo tons-kilometers. [380]
China's high-speed rail (HSR) system started construction in the early 2000s. Today it has over 19,000 kilometers (11,806 miles) of dedicated lines alone, a length that exceeds rest of the world's high-speed rail tracks combined, [381] making it the longest HSR network in the world . [382] With an annual ridership of over 1.1 billion passengers in 2015 it is the world's busiest. [383] The network includes the Beijing–Guangzhou–Shenzhen High-Speed Railway , the single longest HSR line in the world, and the Beijing–Shanghai High-Speed Railway , which has three of longest railroad bridges in the world . [384] The HSR track network is set to reach approximately 16,000 km (9,900 mi) by 2020. [385] The Shanghai Maglev Train , which reaches 431 km/h (268 mph), is the fastest commercial train service in the world. [386]
Since 2000, the growth of rapid transit systems in Chinese cities has accelerated. As of January 2016, 26 Chinese cities have urban mass transit systems in operation and 39 more have metro systems approved [387] with a dozen more to join them by 2020. [388] The Shanghai Metro , Beijing Subway , Guangzhou Metro , Hong Kong MTR and Shenzhen Metro are among the longest and busiest in the world.
There were 182 commercial airports in China in 2012. With 82 new airports planned to open by 2015, more than two-thirds of the airports under construction worldwide in 2013 were in China, [389] and Boeing expects that China's fleet of active commercial aircraft in China will grow from 1,910 in 2011 to 5,980 in 2031. [389] With rapid expansion in civil aviation , the largest airports in China have also joined the ranks of the busiest in the world . In 2013, Beijing's Capital Airport ranked second in the world by passenger traffic (it was 26th in 2002). Since 2010, the Hong Kong International Airport and Shanghai Pudong International Airport have ranked first and third in air cargo tonnage .
Some 80% of China's airspace remains restricted for military use , and Chinese airlines made up eight of the 10 worst-performing Asian airlines in terms of delays. [390] China has over 2,000 river and seaports , about 130 of which are open to foreign shipping. In 2012, the Ports of Shanghai , Hong Kong , Shenzhen , Ningbo-Zhoushan , Guangzhou , Qingdao , Tianjin , Dalian ranked in the top in the world in container traffic and cargo tonnage . [391]

Water supply and sanitation
Water supply and sanitation infrastructure in China is facing challenges such as rapid urbanization, as well as water scarcity, contamination, and pollution . [392] According to data presented by the Joint Monitoring Program for Water Supply and Sanitation of WHO and UNICEF in 2015, about 36% of the rural population in China still did not have access to improved sanitation . [393] In June 2010, there were 1,519 sewage treatment plants in China and 18 plants were added each week. [394] The ongoing South–North Water Transfer Project intends to abate water shortage in the north. [395]

Demographics
The national census of 2010 recorded the population of the People's Republic of China as approximately 1,370,536,875. About 16.60% of the population were 14 years old or younger, 70.14% were between 15 and 59 years old, and 13.26% were over 60 years old. [396] The population growth rate for 2013 is estimated to be 0.46%. [397]
Although a middle-income country by Western standards, China's rapid growth has pulled hundreds of millions of its people out of poverty since 1978. Today, about 10% of the Chinese population lives below the poverty line of US$1 per day, down from 64% in 1978. In 2014, the urban unemployment rate of China was about 4.1%. [398] [399]
With a population of over 1.3 billion and dwindling natural resources, the government of China is very concerned about its population growth rate and has attempted since 1979, with mixed results, [400] to implement a strict family planning policy, known as the " one-child policy ." Before 2013, this policy sought to restrict families to one child each, with exceptions for ethnic minorities and a degree of flexibility in rural areas. A major loosening of the policy was enacted in December 2013, allowing families to have two children if one parent is an only child. [401] In 2016, the one-child policy was replaced in favor of a two-child policy . [402] Data from the 2010 census implies that the total fertility rate may be around 1.4. [403]
The policy, along with traditional preference for boys, may be contributing to an imbalance in the sex ratio at birth. [404] [405] According to the 2010 census, the sex ratio at birth was 118.06 boys for every 100 girls, [406] which is beyond the normal range of around 105 boys for every 100 girls. [407] The 2010 census found that males accounted for 51.27 percent of the total population. [406] However, China's sex ratio is more balanced than it was in 1953, when males accounted for 51.82 percent of the total population. [406]

Ethnic groups
China officially recognizes 56 distinct ethnic groups, the largest of which are the Han Chinese , who constitute about 91.51% of the total population. [12] The Han Chinese – the world's largest single ethnic group [408] – outnumber other ethnic groups in every provincial-level division except Tibet and Xinjiang . [409] Ethnic minorities account for about 8.49% of the population of China, according to the 2010 census. [12] Compared with the 2000 population census, the Han population increased by 66,537,177 persons, or 5.74%, while the population of the 55 national minorities combined increased by 7,362,627 persons, or 6.92%. [12] The 2010 census recorded a total of 593,832 foreign citizens living in China. The largest such groups were from South Korea (120,750), the United States (71,493) and Japan (66,159). [410]

Languages
There are as many as 292 living languages in China. [411] The languages most commonly spoken belong to the Sinitic branch of the Sino-Tibetan language family, which contains Mandarin (spoken natively by 70% of the population), [412] and other Chinese varieties : Yue (including Cantonese and Taishanese ), Wu (including Shanghainese and Suzhounese ), Min (including Fuzhounese , Hokkien and Teochew ), Xiang , Gan and Hakka . Languages of the Tibeto-Burman branch , including Tibetan , Qiang , Naxi and Yi , are spoken across the Tibetan and Yunnan–Guizhou Plateau . Other ethnic minority languages in southwest China include Zhuang , Thai , Dong and Sui of the Tai-Kadai family , Miao and Yao of the Hmong–Mien family , and Wa of the Austroasiatic family . Across northeastern and northwestern China , minority ethnic groups speak Altaic languages including Manchu , Mongolian and several Turkic languages : Uyghur , Kazakh , Kyrgyz , Salar and Western Yugur . Korean is spoken natively along the border with North Korea . Sarikoli , the language of Tajiks in western Xinjiang , is an Indo-European language . Taiwanese aborigines , including a small population on the mainland, speak Austronesian languages . [413]
Standard Mandarin , a variety of Mandarin based on the Beijing dialect , is the official national language of China and is used as a lingua franca in the country between people of different linguistic backgrounds. [414]
Chinese characters have been used as the written script for the Sinitic languages for thousands of years. They allow speakers of mutually unintelligible Chinese varieties to communicate with each other through writing. In 1956, the government introduced simplified characters , which have supplanted the older traditional characters in mainland China. Chinese characters are romanized using the Pinyin system . Tibetan uses an alphabet based on an Indic script . Uyghur is most commonly written in a Perseo-Arabic script . The Mongolian script used in China and the Manchu script are both derived from the Old Uyghur alphabet . Modern Zhuang uses the Latin alphabet .

Urbanization
China has urbanized significantly in recent decades. The percent of the country's population living in urban areas increased from 20% in 1980 to over 50% in 2014. [415] [416] [417] It is estimated that China's urban population will reach one billion by 2030, potentially equivalent to one-eighth of the world population. [415] [416] As of 2012 [update] , there are more than 262 million migrant workers in China, mostly rural migrants seeking work in cities. [418]
China has over 160 cities with a population of over one million, [419] including the seven megacities (cities with a population of over 10 million) of Chongqing, Shanghai, Beijing, Guangzhou, Tianjin, Shenzhen, and Wuhan. [420] [421] [422] By 2025, it is estimated that the country will be home to 221 cities with over a million inhabitants. [415] The figures in the table below are from the 2010 census, [4] and are only estimates of the urban populations within administrative city limits; a different ranking exists when considering the total municipal populations (which includes suburban and rural populations). The large " floating populations " of migrant workers make conducting censuses in urban areas difficult; [423] the figures below include only long-term residents.

Education
Since 1986, compulsory education in China comprises primary and junior secondary school , which together last for nine years. [425] In 2010, about 82.5 percent of students continued their education at a three-year senior secondary school. [426] The Gaokao , China's national university entrance exam, is a prerequisite for entrance into most higher education institutions. In 2010, 27 percent of secondary school graduates are enrolled in higher education. [427] Vocational education is available to students at the secondary and tertiary level. [428]
In February 2006, the government pledged to provide completely free nine-year education, including textbooks and fees. [429] Annual education investment went from less than US$50 billion in 2003 to more than US$250 billion in 2011. [430] However, there remains an inequality in education spending. In 2010, the annual education expenditure per secondary school student in Beijing totalled ¥20,023, while in Guizhou , one of the poorest provinces in China , only totalled ¥3,204. [431] Free compulsory education in China consists of primary school and junior secondary school between the ages of 6 and 15. In 2011, around 81.4% of Chinese have received secondary education. [432] By 2007, there were 396,567 primary schools, 94,116 secondary schools, and 2,236 higher education institutions in China. [433]
As of 2010 [update] , 94% of the population over age 15 are literate, [434] compared to only 20% in 1950. [435] In 2009, Chinese students from Shanghai achieved the world's best results in mathematics, science and literacy, as tested by the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), a worldwide evaluation of 15-year-old school pupils' scholastic performance. [436] Despite the high results, Chinese education has also faced both native and international criticism for its emphasis on rote memorization and its gap in quality from rural to urban areas.

Health
The National Health and Family Planning Commission , together with its counterparts in the local commissions, oversees the health needs of the Chinese population. [437] An emphasis on public health and preventive medicine has characterized Chinese health policy since the early 1950s. At that time, the Communist Party started the Patriotic Health Campaign , which was aimed at improving sanitation and hygiene, as well as treating and preventing several diseases. Diseases such as cholera , typhoid and scarlet fever , which were previously rife in China, were nearly eradicated by the campaign. After Deng Xiaoping began instituting economic reforms in 1978, the health of the Chinese public improved rapidly because of better nutrition, although many of the free public health services provided in the countryside disappeared along with the People's Communes. Healthcare in China became mostly privatized , and experienced a significant rise in quality. In 2009, the government began a 3-year large-scale healthcare provision initiative worth US$124 billion. [438] By 2011, the campaign resulted in 95% of China's population having basic health insurance coverage. [439] In 2011, China was estimated to be the world's third-largest supplier of pharmaceuticals , but its population has suffered from the development and distribution of counterfeit medications . [440]
As of 2012 [update] , the average life expectancy at birth in China is 75 years, [441] and the infant mortality rate is 12 per thousand. [442] Both have improved significantly since the 1950s. [s] Rates of stunting , a condition caused by malnutrition , have declined from 33.1% in 1990 to 9.9% in 2010. [445] Despite significant improvements in health and the construction of advanced medical facilities, China has several emerging public health problems, such as respiratory illnesses caused by widespread air pollution , [446] hundreds of millions of cigarette smokers , [447] and an increase in obesity among urban youths. [448] [449] China's large population and densely populated cities have led to serious disease outbreaks in recent years, such as the 2003 outbreak of SARS , although this has since been largely contained. [450] In 2010, air pollution caused 1.2 million premature deaths in China. [451]

Religion
Freedom of religion is guaranteed by China's constitution, although religious organizations that lack official approval can be subject to state persecution. [234] [452] The government of the People's Republic of China is officially atheist . Religious affairs and issues in the country are overseen by the State Administration for Religious Affairs . [453]
Over the millennia, Chinese civilization has been influenced by various religious movements. The " three teachings ", including Confucianism , Taoism , and Buddhism ( Chinese Buddhism ), historically have a significant role in shaping Chinese culture, [454] [455] Chinese folk religion, which contains elements of the three teachings, [456] consists in allegiance to the shen (神), a character that signifies the " energies of generation ", who can be deities of the natural environment or ancestral principles of human groups, concepts of civility, culture heroes , many of whom feature in Chinese mythology and history. [457] Among the most popular folk cults are those of Mazu (goddess of the seas), [458] [459] Huangdi (one of the two divine patriarchs of the Chinese race), [458] [460] Guandi (god of war and business), Caishen (god of prosperity and richness), Pangu and many others. China is home to many of the world's tallest religious statues , including the tallest of all, the Spring Temple Buddha in Henan .
Clear data on religious affiliation in China is difficult to gather due to varying definitions on "religion" and the unorganized nature of Chinese religious traditions. Scholars note that in China there is no clear boundary between religions, especially Buddhism, Taoism and local folk religious practice. [454] A 2015 poll conducted by Gallup International found that 61% of Chinese people self-identified as "convinced atheist". [461] According to one study from 2012, about 90% of the Chinese population are either nonreligious or practice some form of Chinese folk religions, Taoism and Confucianism. [462] Approximately 6% are Buddhists, 2% are Christians, and 1% are Muslims. [462] In addition to Han people's local religious practices, there are also various ethnic minority groups in China who maintain their traditional autochthone religions . Various sects of indigenous origin comprise 2—3% of the population, while Confucianism as a religious self-designation is popular among intellectuals. Significant faiths specifically connected to certain ethnic groups include Tibetan Buddhism and the Islamic religion of the Hui and Uyghur peoples .

Culture
Since ancient times, Chinese culture has been heavily influenced by Confucianism and conservative philosophies. For much of the country's dynastic era, opportunities for social advancement could be provided by high performance in the prestigious imperial examinations , which have their origins in the Han Dynasty . [465] The literary emphasis of the exams affected the general perception of cultural refinement in China, such as the belief that calligraphy , poetry and painting were higher forms of art than dancing or drama. Chinese culture has long emphasized a sense of deep history and a largely inward-looking national perspective. [21] Examinations and a culture of merit remain greatly valued in China today. [466]
The first leaders of the People's Republic of China were born into the traditional imperial order, but were influenced by the May Fourth Movement and reformist ideals. They sought to change some traditional aspects of Chinese culture, such as rural land tenure, sexism , and the Confucian system of education, while preserving others, such as the family structure and culture of obedience to the state. Some observers see the period following the establishment of the PRC in 1949 as a continuation of traditional Chinese dynastic history, while others claim that the Communist Party's rule has damaged the foundations of Chinese culture, especially through political movements such as the Cultural Revolution of the 1960s, where many aspects of traditional culture were destroyed, having been denounced as "regressive and harmful" or "vestiges of feudalism ". Many important aspects of traditional Chinese morals and culture, such as Confucianism, art, literature, and performing arts like Peking opera , [467] were altered to conform to government policies and propaganda at the time. Access to foreign media remains heavily restricted. [468]
Today, the Chinese government has accepted numerous elements of traditional Chinese culture as being integral to Chinese society. With the rise of Chinese nationalism and the end of the Cultural Revolution, various forms of traditional Chinese art, literature, music, film, fashion and architecture have seen a vigorous revival, [469] [470] and folk and variety art in particular have sparked interest nationally and even worldwide. [471] China is now the third-most-visited country in the world , [472] with 55.7 million inbound international visitors in 2010. [473] It also experiences an enormous volume of domestic tourism ; an estimated 740 million Chinese holidaymakers travelled within the country in October 2012 alone. [474]

Literature
Chinese literature is based on the literature of the Zhou dynasty . [475] Concepts covered within the Chinese classic texts present a wide range of thoughts and subjects including calendar , military , astrology , herbology , geography and many others. [476] Some of the most important early texts include the I Ching and the Shujing within the Four Books and Five Classics which served as the Confucian authoritative books for the state-sponsored curriculum in dynastic era. [477] Inherited from the Classic of Poetry , classical Chinese poetry developed to its floruit during the Tang dynasty. Li Bai and Du Fu opened the forking ways for the poetic circles through romanticism and realism respectively. [478] Chinese historiography began with the Shiji , the overall scope of the historiographical tradition in China is termed the Twenty-Four Histories , which set a vast stage for Chinese fictions along with Chinese mythology and folklore . [479] Pushed by a burgeoning citizen class in the Ming dynasty , Chinese classical fiction rose to a boom of the historical, town and gods and demons fictions as represented by the Four Great Classical Novels which include Water Margin , Romance of the Three Kingdoms , Journey to the West and Dream of the Red Chamber . [480] Along with the wuxia fictions of Jin Yong and Liang Yusheng , [481] it remains an enduring source of popular culture in the East Asian cultural sphere . [482]
In the wake of the New Culture Movement after the end of the Qing dynasty, Chinese literature embarked on a new era with written vernacular Chinese for ordinary citizens. Hu Shih and Lu Xun were pioneers in modern literature. [483] Various literary genres, such as misty poetry , scar literature , young adult fiction and the xungen literature , which is influenced by magic realism , [484] emerged following the Cultural Revolution. Mo Yan , a xungen literature author, was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 2012. [485]

Cuisine
Chinese cuisine is highly diverse, drawing on several millennia of culinary history and geographical variety, in which the most influential are known as the "Eight Major Cuisines", including Sichuan , Cantonese , Jiangsu , Shandong , Fujian , Hunan , Anhui , and Zhejiang cuisines. [487] All of them are featured by the precise skills of shaping, heating, colorway and flavoring. [488] Chinese cuisine is also known for its width of cooking methods and ingredients, [489] as well as food therapy that is emphasized by traditional Chinese medicine . [490] Generally, China's staple food is rice in the south, wheat based breads and noodles in the north. The diet of the common people in pre-modern times was largely grain and simple vegetables, with meat reserved for special occasions. And the bean products, such as tofu and soy milk , remain as a popular source of protein. [491] Pork is now the most popular meat in China, accounting for about three-fourths of the country's total meat consumption. [492] While there is also a Buddhist cuisine and an Islamic cuisine . [493] Southern cuisine, due to the area's proximity to the ocean and milder climate, has a wide variety of seafood and vegetables; it differs in many respects from the wheat-based diets across dry northern China. Numerous offshoots of Chinese food, such as Hong Kong cuisine and American Chinese food , have emerged in the nations that play host to the Chinese diaspora .

Sports
China has become a prime sports destination worldwide. The country gained the hosting rights for several major global sports tournaments including the 2008 Summer Olympics , the 2015 World Championships in Athletics and the upcoming 2019 FIBA Basketball World Cup .
China has one of the oldest sporting cultures in the world. There is evidence that archery ( shèjiàn ) was practiced during the Western Zhou Dynasty . Swordplay ( jiànshù ) and cuju , a sport loosely related to association football [494] date back to China's early dynasties as well. [495]
Physical fitness is widely emphasized in Chinese culture, with morning exercises such as qigong and t'ai chi ch'uan widely practiced, [496] and commercial gyms and fitness clubs gaining popularity in the country. [497] Basketball is currently the most popular spectator sport in China. [498] The Chinese Basketball Association and the American National Basketball Association have a huge following among the people, with native or ethnic Chinese players such as Yao Ming and Yi Jianlian held in high esteem. [499] China's professional football league, now known as Chinese Super League , was established in 1994, it is the largest football market in Asia. [500] Other popular sports in the country include martial arts , table tennis, badminton, swimming and snooker . Board games such as go (known as wéiqí in Chinese), xiangqi , mahjong , and more recently chess , are also played at a professional level. [501] In addition, China is home to a huge number of cyclists , with an estimated 470 million bicycles as of 2012 [update] . [377] Many more traditional sports, such as dragon boat racing, Mongolian-style wrestling and horse racing are also popular. [502]
China has participated in the Olympic Games since 1932, although it has only participated as the PRC since 1952 . China hosted the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing, where its athletes received 51 gold medals – the highest number of gold medals of any participating nation that year. [503] China also won the most medals of any nation at the 2012 Summer Paralympics , with 231 overall, including 95 gold medals. [504] [505] In 2011, Shenzhen in Guangdong, China hosted the 2011 Summer Universiade . China hosted the 2013 East Asian Games in Tianjin and the 2014 Summer Youth Olympics in Nanjing .

See also

Footnotes
WebPage index: 00056
Africa
Africa is the world's second-largest and second-most-populous continent . At about 30.3 million km 2 (11.7 million square miles) including adjacent islands, it covers 6% of Earth 's total surface area and 20.4% of its total land area. [2] With 1.2 billion people as of 2016, it accounts for about 16% of the world's human population . [1] The continent is surrounded by the Mediterranean Sea to the north, both the Suez Canal and the Red Sea along the Sinai Peninsula to the northeast, the Indian Ocean to the southeast, and the Atlantic Ocean to the west. The continent includes Madagascar and various archipelagos . It contains 54 fully recognized sovereign states ( countries ), nine territories and two de facto independent states with limited or no recognition . [3]
Africa's population is the youngest amongst all the continents; [4] [5] the median age in 2012 was 19.7, when the worldwide median age was 30.4. [6] Algeria is Africa's largest country by area, and Nigeria by population. Africa, particularly central Eastern Africa , is widely accepted as the place of origin of humans and the Hominidae clade ( great apes ), as evidenced by the discovery of the earliest hominids and their ancestors, as well as later ones that have been dated to around seven million years ago, including Sahelanthropus tchadensis , Australopithecus africanus , A. afarensis , Homo erectus , H. habilis and H. ergaster – with the earliest Homo sapiens (modern human) found in Ethiopia being dated to circa 200,000 years ago. [7] Africa straddles the equator and encompasses numerous climate areas; it is the only continent to stretch from the northern temperate to southern temperate zones. [8]
Africa hosts a large diversity of ethnicities, cultures and languages. In the late 19th century European countries colonized most of Africa . Africa also varies greatly with regard to environments, economics, historical ties and government systems. However, most present states in Africa originate from a process of decolonization in the 20th century. African nations have attempted to cooperate through the establishment of the African Union , which is headquartered in Addis Ababa .

Etymology
Afri was a Latin name used to refer to the inhabitants of Africa, which in its widest sense referred to all lands south of the Mediterranean ( Ancient Libya ). [9] [10] This name seems to have originally referred to a native Libyan tribe; see Terence for discussion. The name is usually connected with Hebrew or Phoenician ʿafar 'dust', but a 1981 hypothesis [11] has asserted that it stems from the Berber ifri (plural ifran ) "cave", in reference to cave dwellers. [12] The same word [12] may be found in the name of the Banu Ifran from Algeria and Tripolitania , a Berber tribe originally from Yafran (also known as Ifrane ) in northwestern Libya. [13]
Under Roman rule, Carthage became the capital of the province of Africa Proconsularis , which also included the coastal part of modern Libya . [14] The Latin suffix -ica can sometimes be used to denote a land (e.g., in Celtica from Celtae , as used by Julius Caesar ). The later Muslim kingdom of Ifriqiya , modern-day Tunisia, also preserved a form of the name.
According to the Romans, Africa lay to the west of Egypt, while "Asia" was used to refer to Anatolia and lands to the east. A definite line was drawn between the two continents by the geographer Ptolemy (85–165 AD), indicating Alexandria along the Prime Meridian and making the isthmus of Suez and the Red Sea the boundary between Asia and Africa. As Europeans came to understand the real extent of the continent, the idea of "Africa" expanded with their knowledge.
Other etymological hypotheses have been postulated for the ancient name "Africa":

History

Prehistory
Africa is considered by most paleoanthropologists to be the oldest inhabited territory on Earth , with the human species originating from the continent. [18] [19] During the mid-20th century, anthropologists discovered many fossils and evidence of human occupation perhaps as early as 7 million years ago (BP=before present). Fossil remains of several species of early apelike humans thought to have evolved into modern man, such as Australopithecus afarensis ( radiometrically dated to approximately 3.9–3.0 million years BP, [20] Paranthropus boisei (c. 2.3–1.4 million years BP) [21] and Homo ergaster (c. 1.9 million–600,000 years BP) have been discovered. [2]
After the evolution of Homo sapiens sapiens approximately 150,000 to 100,000 years BP in Africa, the continent was mainly populated by groups of hunter-gatherers . [22] [23] [24] These first modern humans left Africa and populated the rest of the globe during the Out of Africa II migration dated to approximately 50,000 years BP, exiting the continent either across Bab-el-Mandeb over the Red Sea , [25] [26] the Strait of Gibraltar in Morocco, [27] or the Isthmus of Suez in Egypt. [28]
Other migrations of modern humans within the African continent have been dated to that time, with evidence of early human settlement found in Southern Africa , Southeast Africa , North Africa , and the Sahara . [29]
The size of the Sahara has historically been extremely variable, with its area rapidly fluctuating and at times disappearing depending on global climatic conditions. [30] At the end of the Ice ages , estimated to have been around 10,500 BC, the Sahara had again become a green fertile valley, and its African populations returned from the interior and coastal highlands in Sub-Saharan Africa , with rock art paintings depicting a fertile Sahara and large populations discovered in Tassili n'Ajjer dating back perhaps 10 millennia. [31] However, the warming and drying climate meant that by 5000 BC, the Sahara region was becoming increasingly dry and hostile. Around 3500 BC, due to a tilt in the earth's orbit, the Sahara experienced a period of rapid desertification. [32] The population trekked out of the Sahara region towards the Nile Valley below the Second Cataract where they made permanent or semi-permanent settlements. A major climatic recession occurred, lessening the heavy and persistent rains in Central and Eastern Africa . Since this time, dry conditions have prevailed in Eastern Africa and, increasingly during the last 200 years, in Ethiopia .
The domestication of cattle in Africa preceded agriculture and seems to have existed alongside hunter-gatherer cultures. It is speculated that by 6000 BC, cattle were domesticated in North Africa. [33] In the Sahara-Nile complex, people domesticated many animals, including the donkey and a small screw-horned goat which was common from Algeria to Nubia .
Around 4000 BC, the Saharan climate started to become drier at an exceedingly fast pace. [34] This climate change caused lakes and rivers to shrink significantly and caused increasing desertification . This, in turn, decreased the amount of land conducive to settlements and helped to cause migrations of farming communities to the more tropical climate of West Africa . [34]
By the first millennium BC, ironworking had been introduced in Northern Africa and quickly spread across the Sahara into the northern parts of sub-Saharan Africa, [35] and by 500 BC, metalworking began to become commonplace in West Africa. Ironworking was fully established by roughly 500 BC in many areas of East and West Africa, although other regions didn't begin ironworking until the early centuries AD. Copper objects from Egypt , North Africa, Nubia, and Ethiopia dating from around 500 BC have been excavated in West Africa, suggesting that Trans-Saharan trade networks had been established by this date. [34]

Early civilizations
At about 3300 BC, the historical record opens in Northern Africa with the rise of literacy in the Pharaonic civilization of Ancient Egypt . [36] One of the world's earliest and longest-lasting civilizations, the Egyptian state continued, with varying levels of influence over other areas, until 343 BC. [37] [38] Egyptian influence reached deep into modern-day Libya and Nubia , and, according to Martin Bernal, as far north as Crete. [39]
An independent centre of civilization with trading links to Phoenicia was established by Phoenicians from Tyre on the north-west African coast at Carthage . [40] [41] [42]
European exploration of Africa began with Ancient Greeks and Romans . [ citation needed ] In 332 BC, Alexander the Great was welcomed as a liberator in Persian-occupied Egypt . He founded Alexandria in Egypt, which would become the prosperous capital of the Ptolemaic dynasty after his death. [43]
Following the conquest of North Africa's Mediterranean coastline by the Roman Empire , the area was integrated economically and culturally into the Roman system. Roman settlement occurred in modern Tunisia and elsewhere along the coast. The first Roman emperor native to North Africa was Septimius Severus , born in Leptis Magna in present-day Libya—his mother was Italian Roman and his father was Punic . [44]
Christianity spread across these areas at an early date, from Judaea via Egypt and beyond the borders of the Roman world into Nubia; [45] by AD 340 at the latest, it had become the state religion of the Aksumite Empire . Syro-Greek missionaries , who arrived by way of the Red Sea, were responsible for this theological development. [46]
In the early 7th century, the newly formed Arabian Islamic Caliphate expanded into Egypt, and then into North Africa. In a short while, the local Berber elite had been integrated into Muslim Arab tribes. When the Umayyad capital Damascus fell in the 8th century, the Islamic centre of the Mediterranean shifted from Syria to Qayrawan in North Africa. Islamic North Africa had become diverse, and a hub for mystics, scholars, jurists, and philosophers. During the above-mentioned period, Islam spread to sub-Saharan Africa, mainly through trade routes and migration. [47]

Ninth to eighteenth centuries
Pre-colonial Africa possessed perhaps as many as 10,000 different states and polities [49] characterized by many different sorts of political organization and rule. These included small family groups of hunter-gatherers such as the San people of southern Africa; larger, more structured groups such as the family clan groupings of the Bantu-speaking peoples of central, southern, and eastern Africa; heavily structured clan groups in the Horn of Africa ; the large Sahelian kingdoms ; and autonomous city-states and kingdoms such as those of the Akan ; Edo , Yoruba , and Igbo people in West Africa ; and the Swahili coastal trading towns of Southeast Africa .
By the ninth century AD, a string of dynastic states, including the earliest Hausa states, stretched across the sub-Saharan savannah from the western regions to central Sudan. The most powerful of these states were Ghana , Gao , and the Kanem-Bornu Empire . Ghana declined in the eleventh century, but was succeeded by the Mali Empire which consolidated much of western Sudan in the thirteenth century. Kanem accepted Islam in the eleventh century.
In the forested regions of the West African coast, independent kingdoms grew with little influence from the Muslim north. The Kingdom of Nri was established around the ninth century and was one of the first. It is also one of the oldest kingdoms in present-day Nigeria and was ruled by the Eze Nri . The Nri kingdom is famous for its elaborate bronzes , found at the town of Igbo-Ukwu . The bronzes have been dated from as far back as the ninth century. [50]
The Kingdom of Ife , historically the first of these Yoruba city-states or kingdoms, established government under a priestly oba ('king' or 'ruler' in the Yoruba language ), called the Ooni of Ife . Ife was noted as a major religious and cultural centre in West Africa, and for its unique naturalistic tradition of bronze sculpture. The Ife model of government was adapted at the Oyo Empire , where its obas or kings, called the Alaafins of Oyo , once controlled a large number of other Yoruba and non-Yoruba city-states and kingdoms; the Fon Kingdom of Dahomey was one of the non-Yoruba domains under Oyo control.
The Almoravids were a Berber dynasty from the Sahara that spread over a wide area of northwestern Africa and the Iberian peninsula during the eleventh century. [51] The Banu Hilal and Banu Ma'qil were a collection of Arab Bedouin tribes from the Arabian Peninsula who migrated westwards via Egypt between the eleventh and thirteenth centuries. Their migration resulted in the fusion of the Arabs and Berbers, where the locals were Arabized , [52] and Arab culture absorbed elements of the local culture, under the unifying framework of Islam. [53]
Following the breakup of Mali, a local leader named Sonni Ali (1464–1492) founded the Songhai Empire in the region of middle Niger and the western Sudan and took control of the trans-Saharan trade. Sonni Ali seized Timbuktu in 1468 and Jenne in 1473, building his regime on trade revenues and the cooperation of Muslim merchants. His successor Askia Mohammad I (1493–1528) made Islam the official religion, built mosques, and brought to Gao Muslim scholars, including al-Maghili (d.1504), the founder of an important tradition of Sudanic African Muslim scholarship. [54] By the eleventh century, some Hausa states – such as Kano , jigawa , Katsina , and Gobir – had developed into walled towns engaging in trade, servicing caravans , and the manufacture of goods. Until the fifteenth century, these small states were on the periphery of the major Sudanic empires of the era, paying tribute to Songhai to the west and Kanem-Borno to the east.

Height of slave trade
Slavery had long been practised in Africa. [55] [56] Between the 7th and 20th centuries, Arab slave trade (also known as slavery in the East) took 18 million slaves from Africa via trans-Saharan and Indian Ocean routes. Between the 15th and the 19th centuries (500 years), the Atlantic slave trade took an estimated 7–12 million slaves to the New World. [57] [58] [59] More than 1 million Europeans were captured by Barbary pirates and sold as slaves in North Africa between the 16th and 19th centuries. [60]
In West Africa , the decline of the Atlantic slave trade in the 1820s caused dramatic economic shifts in local polities. The gradual decline of slave-trading, prompted by a lack of demand for slaves in the New World , increasing anti-slavery legislation in Europe and America, and the British Royal Navy's increasing presence off the West African coast, obliged African states to adopt new economies. Between 1808 and 1860, the British West Africa Squadron seized approximately 1,600 slave ships and freed 150,000 Africans who were aboard. [61]
Action was also taken against African leaders who refused to agree to British treaties to outlaw the trade, for example against "the usurping King of Lagos ", deposed in 1851. Anti-slavery treaties were signed with over 50 African rulers. [62] The largest powers of West Africa (the Asante Confederacy , the Kingdom of Dahomey , and the Oyo Empire ) adopted different ways of adapting to the shift. Asante and Dahomey concentrated on the development of "legitimate commerce" in the form of palm oil , cocoa , timber and gold , forming the bedrock of West Africa's modern export trade. The Oyo Empire, unable to adapt, collapsed into civil wars. [63]

Colonialism and the "Scramble for Africa"
In the late 19th century, the European imperial powers engaged in a major territorial scramble and occupied most of the continent, creating many colonial territories, and leaving only two fully independent states: Ethiopia (known to Europeans as "Abyssinia"), and Liberia . Egypt and Sudan were never formally incorporated into any European colonial empire; however, after the British occupation of 1882, Egypt was effectively under British administration until 1922 .

Berlin Conference
The Berlin Conference held in 1884–85 was an important event in the political future of African ethnic groups. It was convened by King Leopold II of Belgium , and attended by the European powers that laid claim to African territories. It sought to end the European powers' Scramble for Africa, by agreeing on political division and spheres of influence. They set up the political divisions of the continent, by spheres of interest, that exist in Africa today.

Independence struggles
Imperial rule by Europeans would continue until after the conclusion of World War II , when almost all remaining colonial territories gradually obtained formal independence. Independence movements in Africa gained momentum following World War II, which left the major European powers weakened. In 1951, Libya , a former Italian colony, gained independence. In 1956, Tunisia and Morocco won their independence from France. [64] Ghana followed suit the next year (March 1957), [65] becoming the first of the sub-Saharan colonies to be granted independence. Most of the rest of the continent became independent over the next decade.
Portugal's overseas presence in Sub-Saharan Africa (most notably in Angola , Cape Verde, Mozambique , Guinea-Bissau and São Tomé and Príncipe) lasted from the 16th century to 1975, after the Estado Novo regime was overthrown in a military coup in Lisbon . Rhodesia unilaterally declared independence from the United Kingdom in 1965, under the white minority government of Ian Smith , but was not internationally recognized as an independent state (as Zimbabwe ) until 1980, when black nationalists gained power after a bitter guerrilla war . Although South Africa was one of the first African countries to gain independence, the state remained under the control of the country's white minority through a system of racial segregation known as apartheid until 1994.

Post-colonial Africa
Today, Africa contains 54 sovereign countries, most of which have borders that were drawn during the era of European colonialism. Since colonialism, African states have frequently been hampered by instability, corruption, violence, and authoritarianism . The vast majority of African states are republics that operate under some form of the presidential system of rule. However, few of them have been able to sustain democratic governments on a permanent basis, and many have instead cycled through a series of coups , producing military dictatorships .
Great instability was mainly the result of marginalization of ethnic groups , and graft under these leaders . For political gain , many leaders fanned ethnic conflicts, some of which had been exacerbated, or even created, by colonial rule. In many countries, the military was perceived as being the only group that could effectively maintain order, and it ruled many nations in Africa during the 1970s and early 1980s. During the period from the early 1960s to the late 1980s, Africa had more than 70 coups and 13 presidential assassinations . Border and territorial disputes were also common, with the European-imposed borders of many nations being widely contested through armed conflicts.
Cold War conflicts between the United States and the Soviet Union , as well as the policies of the International Monetary Fund , [ citation needed ] also played a role in instability. When a country became independent for the first time, it was often expected to align with one of the two superpowers . Many countries in Northern Africa received Soviet military aid, while others in Central and Southern Africa were supported by the United States, France or both. The 1970s saw an escalation of Cold War intrigues, as newly independent Angola and Mozambique aligned themselves with the Soviet Union, and the West and South Africa sought to contain Soviet influence by supporting friendly regimes or insurgency movements. In Rhodesia , Soviet and Chinese-backed leftist guerrillas of the Zimbabwe Patriotic Front waged a brutal guerrilla war against the country's white government. There was a major famine in Ethiopia , when hundreds of thousands of people starved. Some claimed that Marxist economic policies made the situation worse. [66] [67] [68] The most devastating military conflict in modern independent Africa has been the Second Congo War ; this conflict and its aftermath has killed an estimated 5.5 million people. [69] Since 2003 there has been an ongoing conflict in Darfur which has become a humanitarian disaster. Another notable tragic event is the 1994 Rwandan Genocide in which an estimated 800,000 people were murdered. AIDS in post-colonial Africa has also been a prevalent issue.
In the 21st century, however, the number of armed conflicts in Africa has steadily declined. For instance, the civil war in Angola came to an end in 2002 after nearly 30 years. This has coincided with many countries abandoning communist-style command economies and opening up for market reforms. The improved stability and economic reforms have led to a great increase in foreign investment into many African nations, mainly from China , [70] which has spurred quick economic growth in many countries, seemingly ending decades of stagnation and decline. Several African economies are among the world's fastest growing as of 2016. A significant part of this growth, which is sometimes referred to as Africa Rising , can also be attributed to the facilitated diffusion of information technologies and specifically the mobile telephone. [71]

Geography
Africa is the largest of the three great southward projections from the largest landmass of the Earth. Separated from Europe by the Mediterranean Sea , it is joined to Asia at its northeast extremity by the Isthmus of Suez (transected by the Suez Canal ), 163 km (101 mi) wide. [72] ( Geopolitically , Egypt 's Sinai Peninsula east of the Suez Canal is often considered part of Africa, as well.) [73]
From the most northerly point, Ras ben Sakka in Tunisia (37°21' N), to the most southerly point, Cape Agulhas in South Africa (34°51'15" S), is a distance of approximately 8,000 km (5,000 mi); [74] from Cape Verde , 17°33'22" W, the westernmost point, to Ras Hafun in Somalia , 51°27'52" E, the most easterly projection, is a distance of approximately 7,400 km (4,600 mi). [75] The coastline is 26,000 km (16,000 mi) long, and the absence of deep indentations of the shore is illustrated by the fact that Europe, which covers only 10,400,000 km 2 (4,000,000 sq mi) – about a third of the surface of Africa – has a coastline of 32,000 km (20,000 mi). [75]
Africa's largest country is Algeria , and its smallest country is Seychelles , an archipelago off the east coast. [76] The smallest nation on the continental mainland is The Gambia .
Geologically, Africa includes the Arabian Peninsula ; the Zagros Mountains of Iran and the Anatolian Plateau of Turkey mark where the African Plate collided with Eurasia. The Afrotropic ecozone and the Saharo-Arabian desert to its north unite the region biogeographically, and the Afro-Asiatic language family unites the north linguistically.

Climate
The climate of Africa ranges from tropical to subarctic on its highest peaks. Its northern half is primarily desert , or arid , while its central and southern areas contain both savanna plains and dense jungle ( rainforest ) regions. In between, there is a convergence, where vegetation patterns such as sahel and steppe dominate. Africa is the hottest continent on earth and 60% of the entire land surface consists of drylands and deserts. [77] The record for the highest-ever recorded temperature, in Libya in 1922 (58 °C (136 °F)), was discredited in 2013. [78] [79]

Fauna
Africa boasts perhaps the world's largest combination of density and "range of freedom" of wild animal populations and diversity, with wild populations of large carnivores (such as lions , hyenas , and cheetahs ) and herbivores (such as buffalo , elephants , camels , and giraffes ) ranging freely on primarily open non-private plains. It is also home to a variety of "jungle" animals including snakes and primates and aquatic life such as crocodiles and amphibians . In addition, Africa has the largest number of megafauna species, as it was least affected by the extinction of the Pleistocene megafauna .

Ecology and biodiversity
Africa has over 3,000 protected areas , with 198 marine protected areas, 50 biosphere reserves, and 80 wetlands reserves. Significant habitat destruction, increases in human population and poaching are reducing Africa's biological diversity and arable land . Human encroachment, civil unrest and the introduction of non-native species threaten biodiversity in Africa. This has been exacerbated by administrative problems, inadequate personnel and funding problems. [77]
Deforestation is affecting Africa at twice the world rate, according to the United Nations Environment Programme ( UNEP ). [80] According to the University of Pennsylvania African Studies Center, 31% of Africa's pasture lands and 19% of its forests and woodlands are classified as degraded, and Africa is losing over four million hectares of forest per year, which is twice the average deforestation rate for the rest of the world. [77] Some sources claim that approximately 90% of the original, virgin forests in West Africa have been destroyed. [81] Over 90% of Madagascar 's original forests have been destroyed since the arrival of humans 2000 years ago. [82] About 65% of Africa's agricultural land suffers from soil degradation. [83]

Politics
There are clear signs of increased networking among African organizations and states. For example, in the civil war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (former Zaire ), rather than rich, non-African countries intervening, neighbouring African countries became involved (see also Second Congo War ). Since the conflict began in 1998, the estimated death toll has reached 5 million.

The African Union
The African Union (AU) is a 55-member federation consisting of all of Africa's states. The union was formed, with Addis Ababa , Ethiopia , as its headquarters, on 26 June 2001. The union was officially established on 9 July 2002 [84] as a successor to the Organisation of African Unity (OAU). In July 2004, the African Union's Pan-African Parliament (PAP) was relocated to Midrand , in South Africa, but the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights remained in Addis Ababa. There is a policy in effect to decentralize the African Federation's institutions so that they are shared by all the states.
The African Union, not to be confused with the AU Commission, is formed by the Constitutive Act of the African Union , which aims to transform the African Economic Community , a federated commonwealth, into a state under established international conventions. The African Union has a parliamentary government, known as the African Union Government , consisting of legislative, judicial and executive organs. It is led by the African Union President and Head of State, who is also the President of the Pan-African Parliament . A person becomes AU President by being elected to the PAP, and subsequently gaining majority support in the PAP. The powers and authority of the President of the African Parliament derive from the Constitutive Act and the Protocol of the Pan-African Parliament , as well as the inheritance of presidential authority stipulated by African treaties and by international treaties, including those subordinating the Secretary General of the OAU Secretariat (AU Commission) to the PAP. The government of the AU consists of all-union (federal), regional, state, and municipal authorities, as well as hundreds of institutions, that together manage the day-to-day affairs of the institution.
Political associations such as the African Union offer hope for greater co-operation and peace between the continent's many countries. Extensive human rights abuses still occur in several parts of Africa, often under the oversight of the state. Most of such violations occur for political reasons, often as a side effect of civil war. Countries where major human rights violations have been reported in recent times include the Democratic Republic of the Congo , Sierra Leone , Liberia , Sudan , Zimbabwe , and Côte d'Ivoire .

Economy
Although it has abundant natural resources , Africa remains the world's poorest and most underdeveloped continent, the result of a variety of causes that may include corrupt governments that have often committed serious human rights violations , failed central planning , high levels of illiteracy , lack of access to foreign capital, and frequent tribal and military conflict (ranging from guerrilla warfare to genocide ). [85] According to the United Nations ' Human Development Report in 2003, the bottom 24 ranked nations (151st to 175th) were all African. [86]
Poverty , illiteracy, malnutrition and inadequate water supply and sanitation, as well as poor health, affect a large proportion of the people who reside in the African continent. In August 2008, the World Bank [87] announced revised global poverty estimates based on a new international poverty line of $1.25 per day (versus the previous measure of $1.00). 80.5% of the Sub-Saharan Africa population was living on less than $2.50 (PPP) per day in 2005, compared with 85.7% for India . [88]
Sub-Saharan Africa is the least successful region of the world in reducing poverty ($1.25 per day); some 50% of the population living in poverty in 1981 (200 million people), a figure that rose to 58% in 1996 before dropping to 50% in 2005 (380 million people). The average poor person in sub-Saharan Africa is estimated to live on only 70 cents per day, and was poorer in 2003 than in 1973, [89] indicating increasing poverty in some areas. Some of it is attributed to unsuccessful economic liberalization programmes spearheaded by foreign companies and governments, but other studies have cited bad domestic government policies more than external factors. [90] [91] [92]
From 1995 to 2005, Africa's rate of economic growth increased, averaging 5% in 2005. Some countries experienced still higher growth rates, notably Angola , Sudan and Equatorial Guinea , all of which had recently begun extracting their petroleum reserves or had expanded their oil extraction capacity. The continent is believed to hold 90% of the world's cobalt , 90% of its platinum , 50% of its gold , 98% of its chromium , 70% of its tantalite , [93] 64% of its manganese and one-third of its uranium . [94] The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) has 70% of the world's coltan , a mineral used in the production of tantalum capacitors for electronic devices such as cell phones. The DRC also has more than 30% of the world's diamond reserves. [95] Guinea is the world's largest exporter of bauxite . [96] As the growth in Africa has been driven mainly by services and not manufacturing or agriculture, it has been growth without jobs and without reduction in poverty levels. In fact, the food security crisis of 2008 which took place on the heels of the global financial crisis has pushed back 100 million people into food insecurity. [97]
In recent years, the People's Republic of China has built increasingly stronger ties with African nations and is Africa's largest trading partner. In 2007, Chinese companies invested a total of US$1 billion in Africa. [70]
A Harvard University study led by professor Calestous Juma showed that Africa could feed itself by making the transition from importer to self-sufficiency. "African agriculture is at the crossroads; we have come to the end of a century of policies that favoured Africa's export of raw materials and importation of food. Africa is starting to focus on agricultural innovation as its new engine for regional trade and prosperity." [98]
During US President Barack Obama's visit to Africa in July 2013, he announced a US$ 7 billion plan to further develop infrastructure and work more intensively with African heads of state. He also announced a new programme named Trade Africa, designed to boost trade within the continent as well as between Africa and the US. [99]

Demographics
Africa's population has rapidly increased over the last 40 years, and consequently, it is relatively young. In some African states, more than half the population is under 25 years of age. [100] The total number of people in Africa increased from 229 million in 1950 to 630 million in 1990. [101] As of 2014, the population of Africa is estimated at 1.2 billion. [102] Africa's total population surpassing other continents is fairly recent; African population surpassed Europe in the 1990s, while the Americas was overtaken sometime around the year 2000; Africa's rapid population growth is expected to overtake the only two nations currently larger than its population, at roughly the same time - India and China's 1.4 billion people each will swap ranking around the year 2022. [103]
Speakers of Bantu languages (part of the Niger–Congo family) are the majority in southern, central and southeast Africa. The Bantu-speaking peoples from The Sahel progressively expanded over most of Sub-Saharan Africa. [104] But there are also several Nilotic groups in South Sudan and East Africa, the mixed Swahili people on the Swahili Coast , and a few remaining indigenous Khoisan (" San" or "Bushmen") and Pygmy peoples in southern and central Africa, respectively. Bantu-speaking Africans also predominate in Gabon and Equatorial Guinea, and are found in parts of southern Cameroon. In the Kalahari Desert of Southern Africa, the distinct people known as the Bushmen (also "San", closely related to, but distinct from " Hottentots ") have long been present. The San are physically distinct from other Africans and are the indigenous people of southern Africa. Pygmies are the pre-Bantu indigenous peoples of central Africa. [105]
The peoples of West Africa primarily speak Niger–Congo languages , belonging mostly to its non-Bantu branches, though some Nilo-Saharan and Afro-Asiatic speaking groups are also found. The Niger–Congo-speaking Yoruba , Igbo , Fulani , Akan and Wolof ethnic groups are the largest and most influential. In the central Sahara, Mandinka or Mande groups are most significant. Chadic-speaking groups, including the Hausa , are found in more northerly parts of the region nearest to the Sahara, and Nilo-Saharan communities, such as the Songhai , Kanuri and Zarma , are found in the eastern parts of West Africa bordering Central Africa .
The peoples of North Africa consist of three main indigenous groups: Berbers in the northwest, Egyptians in the northeast, and Nilo-Saharan-speaking peoples in the east. The Arabs who arrived in the 7th century AD introduced the Arabic language and Islam to North Africa. The Semitic Phoenicians (who founded Carthage ) and Hyksos , the Indo-Iranian Alans , the Indo- European Greeks , Romans , and Vandals settled in North Africa as well. Significant Berber communities remain within Morocco and Algeria in the 21st century, while, to a lesser extent, Berber speakers are also present in some regions of Tunisia and Libya. [106] The Berber-speaking Tuareg and other often- nomadic peoples are the principal inhabitants of the Saharan interior of North Africa. In Mauritania, there is a small but near-extinct Berber community in the north and Niger–Congo-speaking peoples in the south, though in both regions Arabic and Arab culture predominates. In Sudan, although Arabic and Arab culture predominate, it is mostly inhabited by groups that originally spoke Nilo-Saharan, such as the Nubians, Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa, who, over the centuries, have variously intermixed with migrants from the Arabian peninsula. Small communities of Afro-Asiatic-speaking Beja nomads can also be found in Egypt and Sudan. [ citation needed ]
In the Horn of Africa , some Ethiopian and Eritrean groups (like the Amhara and Tigrayans , collectively known as Habesha ) speak languages from the Semitic branch of the Afro-Asiatic language family, while the Oromo and Somali speak languages from the Cushitic branch of Afro-Asiatic.
Prior to the decolonization movements of the post- World War II era, Europeans were represented in every part of Africa. [107] Decolonization during the 1960s and 1970s often resulted in the mass emigration of white settlers – especially from Algeria and Morocco (1.6 million pieds-noirs in North Africa), [108] Kenya, Congo, [109] Rhodesia, Mozambique and Angola. [110] Between 1975 and 1977, over a million colonials returned to Portugal alone. [111] Nevertheless, white Africans remain an important minority in many African states, particularly Zimbabwe , Namibia , Réunion , and the Republic of South Africa . [112] The country with the largest white African population is South Africa. [113] Dutch and British diasporas represent the largest communities of European ancestry on the continent today. [114]
European colonization also brought sizable groups of Asians , particularly from the Indian subcontinent , to British colonies. Large Indian communities are found in South Africa, and smaller ones are present in Kenya, Tanzania, and some other southern and southeast African countries. The large Indian community in Uganda was expelled by the dictator Idi Amin in 1972, though many have since returned. The islands in the Indian Ocean are also populated primarily by people of Asian origin, often mixed with Africans and Europeans. The Malagasy people of Madagascar are an Austronesian people , but those along the coast are generally mixed with Bantu, Arab, Indian and European origins. Malay and Indian ancestries are also important components in the group of people known in South Africa as Cape Coloureds (people with origins in two or more races and continents). During the 20th century, small but economically important communities of Lebanese and Chinese [70] have also developed in the larger coastal cities of West and East Africa , respectively. [115]

Languages
By most estimates, well over a thousand languages ( UNESCO has estimated around two thousand) are spoken in Africa. [116] Most are of African origin, though some are of European or Asian origin. Africa is the most multilingual continent in the world, and it is not rare for individuals to fluently speak not only multiple African languages, but one or more European ones as well. There are four major language families indigenous to Africa:
Following the end of colonialism , nearly all African countries adopted official languages that originated outside the continent, although several countries also granted legal recognition to indigenous languages (such as Swahili , Yoruba , Igbo and Hausa ). In numerous countries, English and French ( see African French ) are used for communication in the public sphere such as government, commerce, education and the media. Arabic , Portuguese , Afrikaans and Spanish are examples of languages that trace their origin to outside of Africa, and that are used by millions of Africans today, both in the public and private spheres. Italian is spoken by some in former Italian colonies in Africa. German is spoken in Namibia , as it was a former German protectorate.

Culture
Some aspects of traditional African cultures have become less practised in recent years as a result of neglect and suppression by colonial and post-colonial regimes. For example, African customs were discouraged, and African languages were prohibited in mission schools. [118] Leopold II of Belgium attempted to "civilize" Africans by discouraging polygamy and witchcraft. [118]
Obidoh Freeborn posits that colonialism is one element that has created the character of modern African art. [119] According to authors Douglas Fraser and Herbert M. Cole, "The precipitous alterations in the power structure wrought by colonialism were quickly followed by drastic iconographic changes in the art." [120] Fraser and Cole assert that, in Igboland, some art objects "lack the vigor and careful craftsmanship of the earlier art objects that served traditional functions. [120] Author Chika Okeke-Agulu states that "the racist infrastructure of British imperial enterprise forced upon the political and cultural guardians of empire a denial and suppression of an emergent sovereign Africa and modernist art." [121] In Soweto, the West Rand Administrative Board established a Cultural Section to collect, read, and review scripts before performances could occur. [122] Editors F. Abiola Irele and Simon Gikandi comment that the current identity of African literature had its genesis in the "traumatic encounter between Africa and Europe." [123] On the other hand, Mhoze Chikowero believes that Africans deployed music, dance, spirituality, and other performative cultures to (re)asset themselves as active agents and indigenous intellectuals, to unmake their colonial marginalization and reshape their own destinies." [124]
There is now a resurgence in the attempts to rediscover and revalue African traditional cultures, under such movements as the African Renaissance , led by Thabo Mbeki , Afrocentrism , led by a group of scholars, including Molefi Asante , as well as the increasing recognition of traditional spiritualism through decriminalization of Vodou and other forms of spirituality.

Visual art and architecture
African art and architecture reflect the diversity of African cultures. The region's oldest known beads were made from Nassarius shells and worn as personal ornaments 72,000 years ago. [125] The Great Pyramid of Giza in Egypt was the world's tallest structure for 4,000 years, until the completion of Lincoln Cathedral around the year 1300. The stone ruins of Great Zimbabwe are also noteworthy for their architecture, as are the monolithic churches at Lalibela , Ethiopia, such as the Church of Saint George .

Music and dance
Egypt has long been a cultural focus of the Arab world , while remembrance of the rhythms of sub-Saharan Africa, in particular West Africa, was transmitted through the Atlantic slave trade to modern samba , blues , jazz , reggae , hip hop , and rock . The 1950s through the 1970s saw a conglomeration of these various styles with the popularization of Afrobeat and Highlife music. Modern music of the continent includes the highly complex choral singing of southern Africa and the dance rhythms of the musical genre of soukous , dominated by the music of the Democratic Republic of Congo . Indigenous musical and dance traditions of Africa are maintained by oral traditions, and they are distinct from the music and dance styles of North Africa and Southern Africa . Arab influences are visible in North African music and dance and, in Southern Africa, Western influences are apparent due to colonization .

Sports
Fifty-four African countries have football (soccer) teams in the Confederation of African Football . Egypt has won the African Cup seven times, and a record-making three times in a row. Cameroon, Nigeria, Senegal, Ghana, and Algeria have advanced to the knockout stage of recent FIFA World Cups . South Africa hosted the 2010 World Cup tournament , becoming the first African country to do so.
Cricket is popular in some African nations. South Africa and Zimbabwe have Test status, while Kenya is the leading non-test team and previously had One-Day International cricket (ODI) status (from 10 October 1997 , until 30 January 2014 ). The three countries jointly hosted the 2003 Cricket World Cup . Namibia is the other African country to have played in a World Cup. Morocco in northern Africa has also hosted the 2002 Morocco Cup , but the national team has never qualified for a major tournament. Rugby is a popular sport in South Africa, Namibia, and Zimbabwe.

Religion
Africans profess a wide variety of religious beliefs, and statistics on religious affiliation are difficult to come by since they are often a sensitive a topic for governments with mixed religious populations. [126] [127] According to the World Book Encyclopedia , Islam is the largest religion in Africa, followed by Christianity . According to Encyclopædia Britannica , 45% of the population are Christians , 40% are Muslims , and 10% follow traditional religions . A small number of Africans are Hindu , Buddhist , Confucianist , Baha'i , or Jewish . There is also a minority of Africans who are irreligious .

Territories and regions
The countries in this table are categorized according to the scheme for geographic subregions used by the United Nations, and data included are per sources in cross-referenced articles. Where they differ, provisos are clearly indicated.

See also
WebPage index: 00057
University of Oxford
Coordinates : 51°45′40″N 1°15′12″W ﻿ / ﻿ 51.7611°N 1.2534°W ﻿ / 51.7611; -1.2534
The University of Oxford (informally Oxford University or simply Oxford ) is a collegiate research university located in Oxford, England . It has no known date of foundation, but there is evidence of teaching as far back as 1096, [1] making it the oldest university in the English-speaking world and the world's second-oldest university in continuous operation . [1] [11] It grew rapidly from 1167 when Henry II banned English students from attending the University of Paris . [1] After disputes between students and Oxford townsfolk in 1209, some academics fled north-east to Cambridge where they established what became the University of Cambridge . [12] The two " ancient universities " are frequently jointly referred to as " Oxbridge ".
The university is made up of a variety of institutions, including 38 constituent colleges and a full range of academic departments which are organised into four divisions. [13] All the colleges are self-governing institutions within the university, each controlling its own membership and with its own internal structure and activities. [14] Being a city university, it does not have a main campus; instead, its buildings and facilities are scattered throughout the city centre. Most undergraduate teaching at Oxford is organised around weekly tutorials at the colleges and halls, supported by classes, lectures and laboratory work provided by university faculties and departments.
Oxford is the home of the Rhodes Scholarship , one of the world's oldest and most prestigious scholarships, which has brought graduate students to study at the university for more than a century. [15] The university operates the world's oldest university museum , as well as the largest university press in the world [16] and the largest academic library system in Britain. [17] Oxford has educated many notable alumni, including 28 Nobel laureates , 27 Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom , and many heads of state and government around the world. [18]

History

Founding
The University of Oxford has no known foundation date. [19] Teaching at Oxford existed in some form as early as 1096, but it is unclear when a university came into being. [1] It grew quickly in 1167 when English students returned from the University of Paris . [1] The historian Gerald of Wales lectured to such scholars in 1188 and the first known foreign scholar, Emo of Friesland , arrived in 1190. The head of the university had the title of chancellor from at least 1201, and the masters were recognised as a universitas or corporation in 1231. The university was granted a royal charter in 1248 during the reign of King Henry III . [20]
After disputes between students and Oxford townsfolk in 1209, some academics fled from the violence to Cambridge , later forming the University of Cambridge . [12] [21]
The students associated together on the basis of geographical origins, into two " nations ", representing the North ( northerners or Boreales , who included the English people from north of the River Trent and the Scots ) and the South ( southerners or Australes , who included English people from south of the Trent, the Irish and the Welsh ). [22] [23] In later centuries, geographical origins continued to influence many students' affiliations when membership of a college or hall became customary in Oxford. In addition, members of many religious orders , including Dominicans , Franciscans , Carmelites and Augustinians , settled in Oxford in the mid-13th century, gained influence and maintained houses or halls for students. [24] At about the same time, private benefactors established colleges as self-contained scholarly communities. Among the earliest such founders were William of Durham , who in 1249 endowed University College , [24] and John Balliol , father of a future King of Scots ; Balliol College bears his name. [22] Another founder, Walter de Merton , a Lord Chancellor of England and afterwards Bishop of Rochester , devised a series of regulations for college life; [25] [26] Merton College thereby became the model for such establishments at Oxford, [27] as well as at the University of Cambridge. Thereafter, an increasing number of students lived in colleges rather than in halls and religious houses. [24]
In 1333–34, an attempt by some dissatisfied Oxford scholars to found a new university at Stamford, Lincolnshire was blocked by the universities of Oxford and Cambridge petitioning King Edward III . [28] Thereafter, until the 1820s, no new universities were allowed to be founded in England, even in London; thus, Oxford and Cambridge had a duopoly, which was unusual in western European countries. [29] [30]

Renaissance period
The new learning of the Renaissance greatly influenced Oxford from the late 15th century onwards. Among university scholars of the period were William Grocyn , who contributed to the revival of Greek language studies, and John Colet , the noted biblical scholar .
With the English Reformation and the breaking of communion with the Roman Catholic Church, recusant scholars from Oxford fled to continental Europe, settling especially at the University of Douai . [31] The method of teaching at Oxford was transformed from the medieval scholastic method to Renaissance education, although institutions associated with the university suffered losses of land and revenues. As a centre of learning and scholarship, Oxford's reputation declined in the Age of Enlightenment ; enrolments fell and teaching was neglected.
In 1637, [ citation needed ] William Laud , the chancellor and Archbishop of Canterbury , codified the university's statutes. These, to a large extent, remained its governing regulations until the mid-19th century. Laud was also responsible for the granting of a charter securing privileges for the University Press , and he made significant contributions to the Bodleian Library , the main library of the university. From the beginnings of the Church of England as the established church until 1866, membership of the church was a requirement to receive the BA degree from the university and " dissenters " were only permitted to receive the MA in 1871. [32]
The university was a centre of the Royalist party during the English Civil War (1642–1649), while the town favoured the opposing Parliamentarian cause. [33] From the mid-18th century onwards, however, the University of Oxford took little part in political conflicts.
Wadham College , founded in 1610, was the undergraduate college of Sir Christopher Wren . Wren was part of a brilliant group of experimental scientists at Oxford in the 1650s, the Oxford Philosophical Club , which included Robert Boyle and Robert Hooke . This group held regular meetings at Wadham under the guidance of the College's Warden, John Wilkins , and the group formed the nucleus which went on to found the Royal Society .

Modern period

Students
The curriculum at Oxford before the reforms was notoriously narrow and impractical. Sir Spencer Walpole , a historian of contemporary Britain and a senior government official, had not attended any university. He says, "few medical men, few solicitors, few persons intended for commerce or trade, ever dreamed of passing through a university career." He quotes the Oxford University Commissioners in 1852 stating: "The education imparted at Oxford was not such as to conduce to the advancement in life of many persons, except those intended for the ministry." [34] Nevertheless, Walpole argued:
Out of the students who matriculated in 1840, 65% were sons of professionals (34% were Anglican ministers). After graduation 87% became professionals (59% as Anglican clergy). Out of the students who matriculated in 1870, 59% were sons of professionals (25% were Anglican ministers). After graduation 87% became professionals (42% as Anglican clergy). [36] [37]
M.C. Curthoys and H.S. Jones argue that the rise of organised sport was one of the most remarkable and distinctive features of the history of the universities of Oxford and Cambridge in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. It was carried over from the athleticism prevalent at the public schools such as Eton and Harrow. [38]
At the start of 1914 the university housed about 3000 undergraduates and about 100 postgraduate students. During the First World War many undergraduates and Fellows joined the armed forces. By 1918 virtually all Fellows were in uniform, and the student population in residence was reduced to 12 per cent [ of what? ] . [39] The University Roll of Service records that, in total, 14,792 members of the university served in the war, with 2,716 (18.36%) killed. [40] During the war years the university buildings became hospitals, cadet schools and military training camps. [39]

Reforms
Two high-powered parliamentary commissions in 1852 issued recommendations for Oxford and Cambridge. Archibald Campbell Tait , former headmaster of Rugby School, was a key member of the Oxford Commission; he wanted Oxford to follow the German and Scottish model in which the professorship was paramount. The Commission's report envisioned a centralised university run predominantly by professors and faculties, with a much stronger emphasis on research. The professional staff should be strengthened and better paid. For students, restrictions on entry should be dropped, and more opportunity given to poorer families. It called for an enlargement of the curriculum, with honours to be awarded in many new fields. Undergraduate scholarships should be open to all Britons. Graduate fellowships should be opened up to all members of the University. It recommended that Fellows be released from an obligation for ordination. Students were to be allowed to save money by boarding in the city, instead of in a college. [41] [42]
The system of separate honour schools for different subjects began in 1802, with Mathematics and Literae Humaniores . [43] Schools of "Natural Sciences" and "Law, and Modern History" were added in 1853. [43] By 1872, the last of these had split into "Jurisprudence" and "Modern History". Theology became the sixth honour school. [44] In addition to these B.A. Honours degrees, the postgraduate Bachelor of Civil Law (B.C.L.) was, and still is, offered. [45]
The mid-19th century saw the impact of the Oxford Movement (1833–1845), led among others by the future Cardinal Newman . The influence of the reformed model of German universities reached Oxford via key scholars such as Edward Bouverie Pusey , Benjamin Jowett and Max Müller .
Administrative reforms during the 19th century included the replacement of oral examinations with written entrance tests, greater tolerance for religious dissent , and the establishment of four women's colleges. Privy Council decisions in the 20th century (e.g. the abolition of compulsory daily worship, dissociation of the Regius Professorship of Hebrew from clerical status, diversion of colleges' theological bequests to other purposes) loosened the link with traditional belief and practice. Furthermore, although the university's emphasis had historically been on classical knowledge, its curriculum expanded during the 19th century to include scientific and medical studies. Knowledge of Ancient Greek was required for admission until 1920, and Latin until 1960.
The University of Oxford began to award doctorates in the first third of the 20th century. The first Oxford DPhil in mathematics was awarded in 1921. [46]
The mid-20th century saw many distinguished continental scholars, displaced by Nazism and communism, relocating to Oxford.
The list of distinguished scholars at the University of Oxford is long and includes many who have made major contributions to politics, the sciences, medicine, and literature. More than 50 Nobel laureates and more than 50 world leaders have been affiliated with the University of Oxford. [18]

Women's education
The university passed a statute in 1875 allowing examinations for women at roughly undergraduate level; [47] for a brief period in the early 1900s, this allowed the " steamboat ladies " to receive ad eundem degrees from the University of Dublin . [48] The first four women's colleges were established through the efforts of the Association for Promoting the Higher Education of Women (AEW). Lady Margaret Hall (1878) [49] was followed by Somerville College in 1879; [50] the first 21 students from Somerville and Lady Margaret Hall attended lectures in rooms above an Oxford baker's shop. [47] The first two colleges for women were followed by St Hugh's (1886), [51] St Hilda's (1893) [52] and St Anne's College (1952). [53] In the early 20th century, Oxford and Cambridge were widely perceived to be bastions of male privilege , [54] however the integration of women into Oxford moved forward during the First World War. In 1916 women were admitted as medical students on a par with men, and in 1917 the university accepted financial responsibility for women's examinations. [39] On 7 October 1920 women became eligible for admission as full members of the university and were given the right to take degrees. [55] In 1927 the university's dons created a quota that limited the number of female students to a quarter that of men, a ruling which was not abolished until 1957. [47] However, before the 1970s all Oxford colleges were for men or women only, so that the number of women was limited by the capacity of the women's colleges to admit students. It was not until 1959 that the women's colleges were given full collegiate status.
In 1974, Brasenose , Jesus , Wadham , Hertford and St Catherine's became the first previously all-male colleges to admit women. [56] [57]
In 2008, the last single-sex college, St Hilda's, admitted its first men, so that all colleges are now co-residential. By 1988, 40% of undergraduates at Oxford were female; [58] the ratio was about 46%:54% in men's favour for the 2012 undergraduate admission. [59]
The detective novel Gaudy Night by Dorothy L. Sayers , herself one of the first women to gain an academic degree from Oxford, is largely set in a (fictional) women's college at Oxford, and the issue of women's education is central to its plot.

Buildings and sites

Main sites
The university is a "city university" in that it does not have a main campus; instead, colleges, departments, accommodation, and other facilities are scattered throughout the city centre. The Science Area , in which most science departments are located, is the area that bears closest resemblance to a campus. The ten-acre (4 hectare) Radcliffe Observatory Quarter in the northwest of the city is currently under development. However, the larger colleges' sites are of similar size to these areas.
Iconic university buildings include the Radcliffe Camera , the Sheldonian Theatre used for music concerts, lectures, and university ceremonies, and the Examination Schools , where examinations and some lectures take place. The University Church of St Mary the Virgin was used for university ceremonies before the construction of the Sheldonian. Christ Church Cathedral uniquely serves as both a college chapel and as a cathedral.
In 2012–13, the university built the controversial one-hectare (400m × 25m) Castle Mill development of 4–5-storey blocks of student flats overlooking Cripley Meadow and the historic Port Meadow , blocking views of the spires in the city centre. [60] The development has been likened to building a "skyscraper beside Stonehenge ". [61]

Parks
The University Parks are a 70-acre (28 ha) parkland area in the northeast of the city. It is open to the public during daylight hours. As well as providing gardens and exotic plants, the Parks contains numerous sports fields, used for official and unofficial fixtures, and also contains sites of special interest including the Genetic Garden, an experimental garden to elucidate and investigate evolutionary processes.
The Botanic Garden on the High Street is the oldest botanic garden in the UK. It contains over 8,000 different plant species on 1.8 ha ( 4 1 ⁄ 2 acres). It is one of the most diverse yet compact major collections of plants in the world and includes representatives of over 90% of the higher plant families. The Harcourt Arboretum is a 130-acre (53 ha) site six miles (10 km) south of the city that includes native woodland and 67 acres (27 hectares) of meadow. The 1,000-acre (4.0 km 2 ) Wytham Woods are owned by the university and used for research in zoology and climate change .
There are also various collegiate-owned open spaces open to the public, including Bagley Wood and most notably Christ Church Meadow . [62]

Organisation
As a collegiate university , Oxford's structure can be confusing to those unfamiliar with it. The university is a federation, comprising over forty self-governing colleges and halls , along with a central administration headed by the Vice-Chancellor .
Academic departments are located centrally within the structure of the federation; they are not affiliated with any particular college. Departments provide facilities for teaching and research, determine the syllabi and guidelines for the teaching of students, perform research, and deliver lectures and seminars.
Colleges arrange the tutorial teaching for their undergraduates, and the members of an academic department are spread around many colleges. Though certain colleges do have subject alignments (e.g., Nuffield College as a centre for the social sciences), these are exceptions, and most colleges will have a broad mix of academics and students from a diverse range of subjects. Facilities such as libraries are provided on all these levels: by the central university (the Bodleian ), by the departments (individual departmental libraries, such as the English Faculty Library), and by colleges (each of which maintains a multi-discipline library for the use of its members).

Central governance
The university's formal head is the Chancellor , currently Lord Patten of Barnes , though as at most British universities, the Chancellor is a titular figure, and is not involved with the day-to-day running of the university. The Chancellor is elected by the members of Convocation , a body comprising all graduates of the university, and holds office until death. [63]
The Vice-Chancellor , currently Louise Richardson , [5] [6] is the de facto head of the university. Five pro-vice-chancellors have specific responsibilities for education; research; planning and resources; development and external affairs; and personnel and equal opportunities. The University Council is the executive policy-forming body, which consists of the vice-chancellor as well as heads of departments and other members elected by Congregation , in addition to observers from the students' union . Congregation, the "parliament of the dons", comprises over 3,700 members of the university's academic and administrative staff, and has ultimate responsibility for legislative matters: it discusses and pronounces on policies proposed by the University Council.
Two university proctors , elected annually on a rotating basis from two of the colleges, are the internal ombudsmen who make sure that the university and its members adhere to its statutes. This role incorporates student welfare and discipline, as well as oversight of the university's proceedings. The university's professors are collectively referred to as the "Statutory Professors of the University of Oxford". They are particularly influential in the running of the university's graduate programmes. Examples of statutory professors are the Chichele Professorships and the Drummond Professor of Political Economy. The various academic faculties, departments, and institutes are organised into four divisions, each with its own head and elected board. They are the Humanities division ; the Social Sciences Division; the Mathematical, Physical and Life Sciences Division; and the Medical Sciences Division .
The University of Oxford is a "public university" in the sense that it receives some public money from the government, but it is a "private university" in the sense that it is entirely self-governing and, in theory, could choose to become entirely private by rejecting public funds. [64]

Colleges
To be a member of the university, all students, and most academic staff, must also be a member of a college or hall. There are 38 colleges of the University of Oxford and six Permanent Private Halls , each controlling its membership and with its own internal structure and activities. [14] Not all colleges offer all courses, but they generally cover a broad range of subjects.
The colleges are:
The Permanent Private Halls were founded by different Christian denominations. One difference between a college and a PPH is that whereas colleges are governed by the fellows of the college, the governance of a PPH resides, at least in part, with the corresponding Christian denomination. The six current PPHs are:
The PPHs and colleges join together as the Conference of Colleges, which represents the common concerns of the several colleges of the university, and to discuss policy and to deal with the central university administration. [65] [66] The Conference of Colleges was established as a recommendation of the Franks Commission in 1965. [67]
Teaching members of the colleges (i.e. fellows and tutors) are collectively and familiarly known as dons , although the term is rarely used by the university itself. In addition to residential and dining facilities, the colleges provide social, cultural, and recreational activities for their members. Colleges have responsibility for admitting undergraduates and organising their tuition; for graduates, this responsibility falls upon the departments. There is no common title for the heads of colleges: the titles used include Warden, Provost, Principal, President, Rector, Master and Dean.

Finances
In 2014/15, the university had an income of £1,429m; key sources were research grants (£522.9m) and academic fees (£258.3m). [68] The colleges had a total income of £415m, [69]
While the university has a larger annual income and operating budget, the colleges have a larger aggregate endowment: over £3.8bn compared to the university's £834m. [70] The Central University's endowment, along with some of the colleges', is managed by the university's wholly owned endowment management office, Oxford University Endowment Management, formed in 2007. [71] The university has substantial investments in fossil fuel companies, and in 2014 began consultations on whether it should follow some US universities which have committed to sell off their fossil fuel investments. [72]
The University was one of the first in the UK to raise money through a major public fundraising campaign, The Campaign for Oxford . The current campaign, its second, was launched in May 2008 and is entitled "Oxford Thinking – The Campaign for the University of Oxford". [73] This is looking to support three areas: academic posts and programmes, student support, and buildings and infrastructure; [74] having passed its original target of £1.25 billion in March 2012, the target has now been raised to £3 billion. [68] The university has raised £2 billion so far in 2015. [75]

Affiliations
Oxford is a member of the Russell Group of research-led British universities , the G5 , the League of European Research Universities , and the International Alliance of Research Universities . It is also a core member of the Europaeum and forms part of the " golden triangle " of highly research intensive and elite English universities. [76]

Academic profile

Admission
In common with most British universities, prospective students apply through the UCAS application system, but prospective applicants for the University of Oxford, along with those for medicine, dentistry, and University of Cambridge applicants, must observe an earlier deadline of 15 October. [83]
To allow a more personalised judgement of students, who might otherwise apply for both, undergraduate applicants are not permitted to apply to both Oxford and Cambridge in the same year. The only exceptions are applicants for organ scholarships [84] and those applying to read for a second undergraduate degree. [85]
Most applicants choose to apply to one of the individual colleges, which work with each other to ensure that the best students gain a place somewhere at the university regardless of their college preferences. [86] Shortlisting is based on achieved and predicted exam results, school references, and, in some subjects, written admission tests or candidate-submitted written work. Approximately 60% of applicants are shortlisted, although this varies by subject. If a large number of shortlisted applicants for a subject choose one college, then students who named that college may be reallocated randomly to under-subscribed colleges for the subject. The colleges then invite shortlisted candidates for interview, where they are provided with food and accommodation for around three days in December. Most applicants will be individually interviewed by academics at more than one college. Students from outside Europe can be interviewed remotely, for example, over the Internet.
Offers are sent out in early January, with each offer usually being from a specific college. One in four successful candidates receives an offer from a college that they did not apply to. Some courses may make "open offers" to some candidates, who are not assigned to a particular college until A Level results day in August. [87] [88]

Teaching and degrees
Undergraduate teaching is centred on the tutorial, where 1–4 students spend an hour with an academic discussing their week's work, usually an essay (humanities, most social sciences, some mathematical, physical, and life sciences) or problem sheet (most mathematical, physical, and life sciences, and some social sciences). The university itself is responsible for conducting examinations and conferring degrees. Undergraduate teaching takes place during three eight-week academic terms: Michaelmas , Hilary and Trinity . [89] (These are officially known as 'Full Term': 'Term' is a lengthier period with little practical significance.) Internally, the weeks in a term begin on Sundays, and are referred to numerically, with the initial week known as "first week", the last as "eighth week" and with the numbering extended to refer to weeks before and after term (for example "-1st week" and "0th week" precede term). Undergraduates must be in residence from Thursday of 0th week. These teaching terms are shorter than those of most other British universities, [90] and their total duration amounts to less than half the year. However, undergraduates are also expected to do some academic work during the three holidays (known as the Christmas, Easter, and Long Vacations).
Research degrees at the master's and doctoral level are conferred in all subjects studied at graduate level at the university.

Scholarships and financial support
There are many opportunities for students at Oxford to receive financial help during their studies. The Oxford Opportunity Bursaries, introduced in 2006, are university-wide means-based bursaries available to any British undergraduate. With a total possible grant of £10,235 over a 3-year degree, it is the most generous bursary scheme offered by any British university. [91] In addition, individual colleges also offer bursaries and funds to help their students. For graduate study, there are many scholarships attached to the university, available to students from all sorts of backgrounds, from Rhodes Scholarships to the relatively new Weidenfeld Scholarships. [92] Oxford also offers the Clarendon Scholarship which is open to graduate applicants of all nationalities. [93] The Clarendon Scholarship is principally funded by Oxford University Press in association with colleges and other partnership awards. [94] [95] In 2016, Oxford University announced that it is to run its first free online economics course as part of a “ massive open online course " (Mooc) scheme, in partnership with a US online university network. [96] The course available is called ‘From Poverty to Prosperity: Understanding Economic Development’.
Students successful in early examinations are rewarded by their colleges with scholarships and exhibitions , normally the result of a long-standing endowment, although since the introduction of tuition fees the amounts of money available are purely nominal. Scholars, and exhibitioners in some colleges, are entitled to wear a more voluminous undergraduate gown; "commoners" (originally those who had to pay for their "commons", or food and lodging) are restricted to a short, sleeveless garment. The term "scholar" in relation to Oxford therefore had a specific meaning as well as the more general meaning of someone of outstanding academic ability. In previous times, there were "noblemen commoners" and "gentlemen commoners", but these ranks were abolished in the 19th century. "Closed" scholarships, available only to candidates who fitted specific conditions such as coming from specific schools, now exist only in name.

Libraries
The university maintains the largest university library system in the UK, [17] and, with over 11 million volumes housed on 120 miles (190 km) of shelving, the Bodleian group is the second-largest library in the UK, after the British Library . The Bodleian is a legal deposit library, which means that it is entitled to request a free copy of every book published in the UK. As such, its collection is growing at a rate of over three miles (five kilometres) of shelving every year. [97]
The buildings referred to as the university's main research library, The Bodleian , consist of the original Bodleian Library in the Old Schools Quadrangle, founded by Sir Thomas Bodley in 1598 and opened in 1602, [98] the Radcliffe Camera , the Clarendon Building , and the New Bodleian Building. A tunnel underneath Broad Street connects these buildings, with the Gladstone Link connecting the Old Bodleian and Radcliffe Camera opening to readers in 2011.
The Bodleian Libraries group was formed in 2000, bringing the Bodleian Library and some of the subject libraries together. [99] It now comprises 28 [100] libraries, a number of which have been created by bringing previously separate collections together, including the Sackler Library , Social Science Library and Radcliffe Science Library . [99] Another major product of this collaboration has been a joint integrated library system, OLIS ( O xford L ibraries I nformation S ystem), [101] and its public interface, SOLO ( S earch O xford L ibraries O nline), which provides an electronic catalogue covering all member libraries, as well as the libraries of individual colleges and other faculty libraries, which are not members of the group but do share cataloguing information. [102]
A new book depository opened in South Marston , Swindon in October 2010, [103] and current building projects include the remodelling of the New Bodleian building, which will be renamed the Weston Library when it reopens in 2014–15. [104] The renovation is designed to better showcase the library's various treasures (which include a Shakespeare First Folio and a Gutenberg Bible ) as well as temporary exhibitions.
The Bodleian engaged in a mass-digitisation project with Google in 2004. [105] [106]

Museums
Oxford maintains a number of museums and galleries, open for free to the public. The Ashmolean Museum , founded in 1683, is the oldest museum in the UK, and the oldest university museum in the world. [107] It holds significant collections of art and archaeology, including works by Michelangelo , Leonardo da Vinci , Turner , and Picasso , as well as treasures such as the Scorpion Macehead , the Parian Marble and the Alfred Jewel . It also contains " The Messiah ", a pristine Stradivarius violin, regarded by some as one of the finest examples in existence.
The University Museum of Natural History holds the university's zoological, entomological and geological specimens. It is housed in a large neo-Gothic building on Parks Road , in the university's Science Area . [108] [109] Among its collection are the skeletons of a Tyrannosaurus rex and Triceratops , and the most complete remains of a dodo found anywhere in the world. It also hosts the Simonyi Professorship of the Public Understanding of Science , currently held by Marcus du Sautoy .
Adjoining the Museum of Natural History is the Pitt Rivers Museum , founded in 1884, which displays the university's archaeological and anthropological collections, currently holding over 500,000 items. It recently built a new research annexe; its staff have been involved with the teaching of anthropology at Oxford since its foundation, when as part of his donation General Augustus Pitt Rivers stipulated that the university establish a lectureship in anthropology.
The Museum of the History of Science is housed on Broad St in the world's oldest-surviving purpose-built museum building. [110] It contains 15,000 artefacts, from antiquity to the 20th century, representing almost all aspects of the history of science . In the Faculty of Music on St Aldate's is the Bate Collection of Musical Instruments, a collection mostly of instruments from Western classical music, from the medieval period onwards. Christ Church Picture Gallery holds a collection of over 200 old master paintings.

Publishing
The Oxford University Press is the world's second oldest and currently the largest university press by the number of publications. [16] More than 6,000 new books are published annually, [111] including many reference, professional, and academic works (such as the Oxford English Dictionary , the Concise Oxford English Dictionary , the Oxford World's Classics , the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , and the Concise Dictionary of National Biography ).

Rankings and reputation
Oxford is regularly ranked within the top 10 universities in the world and is currently ranked first in the world in the Times Higher Education World University Rankings , as well as the Forbes 's World University Rankings. [117] It held the number one position in the Times Good University Guide for eleven consecutive years, [118] and the medical school has also maintained first place in the "Clinical, Pre-Clinical & Health" table of the THE World University Rankings for the past five consecutive years. [119] THE has also recognised Oxford as one of the world's "six super brands" on its World Reputation Rankings . [120] Its Saïd Business School came 23rd in the world in Financial Times Global MBA Ranking . [121]
Oxford is ranked 5th best university worldwide and 1st in Britain for forming CEO s according to the Professional Ranking World Universities . [122] It is ranked first in the UK for the quality of its graduates as chosen by the recruiters of the UK's major companies. [123]
In the 2018 Complete University Guide , all 38 subjects offered by Oxford rank within the top 10 nationally meaning Oxford was one of only two multi-faculty universities (along with Cambridge ) in the UK to have 100% of their subjects in the top 10. [124] Computer Science, Medicine, Philosophy, Politics and Psychology were ranked first in the UK by the guide. [125]
According to the QS World University Rankings by Subject, the University of Oxford also ranks as number one in the world for four Humanities disciplines: English Language and Literature, Modern Languages , Geography , and History . It also ranks 2nd globally for Anthropology, Archaeology, Law, Medicine, Politics & International Studies, and Psychology. [126]

Student life

Traditions
Academic dress is required for examinations, matriculation, disciplinary hearings, and when visiting university officers. A referendum held amongst the Oxford student body in 2015 showed 76% against making it voluntary in examinations – 8671 students voted, with the 40.2% turnout the highest ever for a UK student union referendum. [127] This was widely interpreted by students as being a vote on not so much making subfusc voluntary, but rather, in effect, abolishing it by default, in that if a minority of people came to exams without subfusc, the rest would soon follow. [128] In July 2012 the regulations regarding academic dress were modified to be more inclusive to transgender people. [129]
Other traditions and customs vary by college. For example, some colleges have formal hall six times a week, but in others this only happens occasionally. At most colleges these formal meals require gowns to be worn, and a Latin grace is said.
Balls are major events held by colleges; the largest, held triennially in 9th week of Trinity Term, are called Commemoration balls ; the dress code is usually white tie . Many other colleges hold smaller events during the year that they call summer balls or parties. These are usually held on an annual or irregular basis, and are usually black tie .
Punting is a common summer leisure activity.
There are several more or less quirky traditions peculiar to individual colleges, for example the All Souls mallard song .

Clubs and societies
Sport is played between college teams, in tournaments known as cuppers (the term is also used for some non-sporting competitions). In addition to these there are higher standard university wide groups . Significant focus is given to annual varsity matches played against Cambridge, the most famous of which is The Boat Race , watched by a TV audience of between five and ten million viewers. This outside interest reflects the importance of rowing to many of those within the university. Much attention is given to the termly intercollegiate rowing regattas: Christ Church Regatta, Torpids and Summer Eights . A blue is an award given to those who compete at the university team level in certain sports. As well as traditional sports, there are teams for activities such as Octopush and quidditch .
There are two weekly student newspapers: the independent Cherwell and OUSU's The Oxford Student . Other publications include the Isis magazine , The Owl Journal , the satirical Oxymoron , and the graduate Oxonian Review . The student radio station is Oxide Radio . Most colleges have chapel choirs. Music, drama, and other arts societies exist both at collegiate level and as university-wide groups. Unlike most other collegiate societies, musical ensembles actively encourage players from other colleges.
Most academic areas have student societies of some form which are open to all students, regardless of course, for example the Scientific Society . There are groups for almost all faiths, political parties, countries and cultures.
The Oxford Union (not to be confused with the Oxford University Student Union) hosts weekly debates and high-profile speakers. There have historically been elite invite-only societies such as the Bullingdon Club .

OUSU and common rooms
The Oxford University Student Union , better known by its acronym OUSU, exists to represent students in the university's decision-making, to act as the voice for students in the national higher education policy debate, and to provide direct services to the student body. Reflecting the collegiate nature of the University of Oxford itself, OUSU is both an association of Oxford's more than 21,000 individual students and a federation of the affiliated college common rooms, and other affiliated organisations that represent subsets of the undergraduate and graduate students. The OUSU Executive Committee includes six full-time salaried sabbatical officers, who generally serve in the year following completion of their Final Examinations.
The importance of collegiate life is such that for many students their college JCR (Junior Common Room, for undergraduates) or MCR (Middle Common Room, for graduates) is seen as more important than OUSU. JCRs and MCRs each have a committee, with a president and other elected students representing their peers to college authorities. Additionally, they organise events and often have significant budgets to spend as they wish (money coming from their colleges and sometimes other sources such as student-run bars). (It is worth noting that JCR and MCR are terms that are used to refer to rooms for use by members, as well as the student bodies.) Not all colleges use this JCR/MCR structure, for example Wadham College's entire student population is represented by a combined Students' Union and purely graduate colleges have different arrangements.

Notable alumni
Throughout its history, a sizeable number of Oxford alumni, known as Oxonians, have become notable in many varied fields, both academic and otherwise, ranging from T. E. Lawrence , British Army officer known better as Lawrence of Arabia [130] to the explorer, courtier, and man of letters, Sir Walter Raleigh , (who attended Oriel College but left without taking a degree); [131] and the Australian media mogul, Rupert Murdoch . [132] Moreover, 58 Nobel prize-winners have studied or taught at Oxford, with prizes won in all six categories. [18] More information on famous senior and junior members of the university can be found in the individual college articles. An individual may be associated with two or more colleges, as an undergraduate, postgraduate and/or member of staff.

Politics
27 British prime ministers have attended Oxford, including William Gladstone , H. H. Asquith , Clement Attlee , Harold Macmillan , Edward Heath , Harold Wilson , Margaret Thatcher , Tony Blair , David Cameron and most recently Theresa May . Of all the post-war prime ministers, only Gordon Brown was educated at a university other than Oxford, while James Callaghan and John Major never attended a university. [133]
Over 100 Oxford alumni were elected to the House of Commons in 2010. [133] This includes former Leader of the Opposition , Ed Miliband , and numerous members of the cabinet and shadow cabinet . Additionally, over 140 Oxonians sit in the House of Lords . [18]
At least 30 other international leaders have been educated at Oxford [18] This number includes Harald V of Norway , [134] Abdullah II of Jordan , [18] five Prime Ministers of Australia ( John Gorton , Malcolm Fraser , Bob Hawke , Tony Abbott , and Malcolm Turnbull ) [135] [136] [137] five Prime Ministers of Pakistan ( Liaquat Ali Khan , Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy , Sir Feroz Khan Noon , Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto , and Benazir Bhutto ), [18] two Prime Ministers of Canada ( Lester B. Pearson and John Turner ), [18] [138] two Prime Ministers of India ( Manmohan Singh and Indira Gandhi (although she did not finish her degree)), [18] [139] S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike (former Prime Minister of Ceylon ), Norman Washington Manley of Jamaica, [140] Eric Williams (Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago), Pedro Pablo Kuczynski (current President of Peru), Abhisit Vejjajiva (former Prime Minister of Thailand) and Bill Clinton (the first President of the United States to have attended Oxford; he attended as a Rhodes Scholar ). [18] [141] Arthur Mutambara (Deputy Prime Minister of Zimbabwe ), was a Rhodes Scholar in 1991. Seretse Khama , first president of Botswana, spent a year at Balliol College. Festus Mogae (former president of Botswana ) was a student at University College . The Burmese democracy activist and Nobel laureate , Aung San Suu Kyi , was a student of St. Hugh's College. [142] Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck , the current reigning Druk Gyalpo (Dragon King) of Bhutan , was a member of St Peter's College . [143]

Law
Oxford has produced a large number of distinguished jurists , judges and lawyers around the world. Lords Bingham and Denning , commonly recognised as two of the most influential English judges in the history of the common law , [144] [145] [146] [147] both studied at Oxford. Within the United Kingdom, five of the eleven current Justices of the Supreme Court are Oxford-educated: David Neuberger (President of the Supreme Court), Jonathan Sumption , Jonathan Mance , Nicholas Wilson and Robert Reed ; [148] retired Justices include Alan Rodger , Mark Saville, John Dyson and Simon Brown . The twelve Lord Chancellors and nine Lord Chief Justices that have been educated at Oxford include Thomas Bingham , [144] Stanley Buckmaster, Thomas More , [149] Thomas Wolsey , [150] Gavin Simonds ; [151] The twenty-two Law Lords count amongst them Leonard Hoffmann , Kenneth Diplock , Richard Wilberforce , James Atkin , Simon Brown , Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson , Robert Goff , Brian Hutton , Jonathan Mance , Alan Rodger , Mark Saville , Leslie Scarman , Johan Steyn ; [152] Master of the Rolls include Alfred Denning ; [147] Lord Justices of Appeal include John Laws , John Mummery . The British Government's Attorneys General have included Dominic Grieve , Nicholas Lyell , Patrick Mayhew , John Hobson , Reginald Manningham-Buller , Lionel Heald , Frank Soskice , David Maxwell Fyfe , Donald Somervell , William Jowitt ; Director of Public Prosecutions include Sir Thomas Hetherington QC, Dame Barbara Mills QC and Sir Keir Starmer QC.
In the United States , three of the nine incumbent Justices of the Supreme Court are Oxonians, namely Stephen Breyer (who was a Marshall Scholar ), [153] Elena Kagan , [154] and Neil Gorsuch ; [155] retired Justices include John Marshall Harlan II , [156] David Souter [157] and Byron White . [158] Internationally, Oxonians Sir Humphrey Waldock [159] served in the International Court of Justice ; Sir Nicolas Bratza [160] and Paul Mahoney sat in the European Court of Human Rights ; Kenneth Hayne , [161] Dyson Heydon , as well as Patrick Keane sat in the High Court of Australia ; both Kailas Nath Wanchoo , A. N. Ray served as Chief Justices of the Supreme Court of India ; Aarif Barma currently serves in the Court of Appeal (Hong Kong) ; [162] six puisne justices of the Supreme Court of Canada and a chief justice of the now defunct Federal Court of Canada were also educated at Oxford.
The list of noted legal scholar s includes H. L. A. Hart , [163] Ronald Dworkin , [163] A. V. Dicey , William Blackstone , John Gardner , Timothy Endicott , Peter Birks , John Finnis , Andrew Ashworth , Joseph Raz , Leslie Green , Tony Honoré , Neil MacCormick , Hugh Collins . Other distinguished practitioners who have attended Oxford include Lord Pannick QC , [164] Geoffrey Robertson QC, Amal Clooney , [165] Lord Faulks QC, Dinah Rose QC, Ben Emmerson QC.

Mathematics and sciences
Three Oxford mathematicians, Michael Atiyah , Daniel Quillen and Simon Donaldson , have won Fields Medals , often called the "Nobel Prize for mathematics". Andrew Wiles , who proved Fermat's Last Theorem , was educated at Oxford and is currently a Royal Society Research Professor at Oxford. Marcus du Sautoy and Roger Penrose are both currently mathematics professors, and Jackie Stedall is a former professor of the university. Stephen Wolfram , chief designer of Mathematica and Wolfram Alpha studied at the university, along with Tim Berners-Lee , [18] inventor of the World Wide Web , [166] Edgar F. Codd , inventor of the relational model of data , [167] and Tony Hoare , programming languages pioneer and inventor of Quicksort .
The university is associated with eleven winners of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry , five in physics and sixteen in medicine . [168]
Scientists who performed research in Oxford include chemist Dorothy Hodgkin who received her Nobel Prize for "determinations by X-ray techniques of the structures of important biochemical substances". [169] Both Richard Dawkins [170] and Frederick Soddy [171] studied at the university and returned for research purposes. Robert Hooke , [18] Edwin Hubble , [18] and Stephen Hawking [18] all studied in Oxford.
Robert Boyle , a founder of modern chemistry, never formally studied or held a post within the university, but resided within the city to be part of the scientific community and was awarded an honorary degree. [172] Notable scientists who spent brief periods at Oxford include Albert Einstein [173] developer of general theory of relativity and the concept of photons ; and Erwin Schrödinger who formulated the Schrödinger equation and the Schrödinger's cat thought experiment.
Economists Adam Smith , Alfred Marshall , E. F. Schumacher , and Amartya Sen all spent time at Oxford.

Literature, music, and drama
The long list of writers associated with Oxford includes John Fowles , Theodor Geisel , Thomas Middleton , Samuel Johnson , Christopher Hitchens , Robert Graves , Evelyn Waugh , [174] Lewis Carroll , [175] Aldous Huxley , [176] Oscar Wilde , [177] C. S. Lewis , [178] J. R. R. Tolkien , [179] Graham Greene , [180] V.S.Naipaul , Philip Pullman , [18] Joseph Heller , [181] Vikram Seth , [18] the poets Percy Bysshe Shelley , [182] John Donne , [183] A. E. Housman , [184] W. H. Auden , [185] T. S. Eliot , Wendy Perriam and Philip Larkin , [186] and seven poets laureate : Thomas Warton , [187] Henry James Pye , [188] Robert Southey , [189] Robert Bridges , [190] Cecil Day-Lewis , [191] Sir John Betjeman , [192] and Andrew Motion . [193]
Composers Hubert Parry , George Butterworth , John Taverner , William Walton , James Whitbourn and Andrew Lloyd Webber have all been involved with the university.
Actors Hugh Grant , [194] Kate Beckinsale , [194] Dudley Moore , [195] Michael Palin , [18] Terry Jones , [196] Anna Popplewell , and Rowan Atkinson were undergraduates at the university, as were filmmakers Ken Loach [197] and Richard Curtis . [18]

Religion
Oxford has also produced at least 12 saints , and 20 Archbishops of Canterbury , the most recent Archbishop being Rowan Williams , who studied at Wadham College and was later a Canon Professor at Christ Church . [18] [198] Religious reformer John Wycliffe was an Oxford scholar, for a time Master of Balliol College . John Colet , Christian humanist, Dean of St Paul's , and friend of Erasmus , studied at Magdalen College . Several of the Caroline Divines e.g. in particular William Laud as President of St. John's and Chancellor of the University, and the Non-Jurors , e.g. Thomas Ken had close Oxford connections.The founder of Methodism , John Wesley , studied at Christ Church and was elected a fellow of Lincoln College . [199] The Oxford Movement (1833–1846) was closely associated with the Oriel Fellows John Henry Newman , Edward Bouverie Pusey and John Keble . Other religious figures were Mirza Nasir Ahmad , the third Caliph of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community , Shoghi Effendi , one of the appointed leaders of the Baha'i faith and Joseph Cordeiro , the only Pakistani Catholic cardinal. [200]

Philosophy
Oxford's philosophical tradition started in the medieval era, with Robert Grosseteste [201] and William of Ockham , [201] commonly known for Occam's razor , among those teaching at the university. Thomas Hobbes , [202] [203] Jeremy Bentham and the empiricist John Locke received degrees from Oxford. Though the latter's main works were written after leaving Oxford, Locke was heavily influenced by his twelve years at the university. [201]
Philosophy was never absent from Oxford's preoccupations. Oxford philosophers of the 20th century include Gilbert Ryle , [201] author of the influential The Concept of Mind , who spent his entire philosophical career at the university and Derek Parfit , who specialised in personal identity and related matters. Other commonly read modern philosophers to have studied at the university include A. J. Ayer , [201] Paul Grice , Thomas Nagel , known for his essay " What Is it Like to Be a Bat? ", Robert Nozick , John Rawls , Michael Sandel , and Peter Singer . John Searle , presenter of the Chinese room thought experiment, studied and began his academic career at the university. [204]

Sport
Some 50 Olympic medal-winners have academic connections with the university, including Sir Matthew Pinsent , quadruple gold-medallist rower. [18] [205] Other sporting connections include Imran Khan . [18]
Rowers from Oxford who have won gold at the Olympics or World Championships include Michael Blomquist , Ed Coode , Chris Davidge , Hugh Edwards , Jason Flickinger , Tim Foster , Christopher Liwski , Matthew Pinsent , Pete Reed , Jonny Searle , Andrew Triggs Hodge , Jake Wetzel , Michael Wherley , and Barney Williams . Many Oxford graduates have also risen to the highest echelon in cricket: Harry Altham , Bernard Bosanquet (inventor of the googly ), Colin Cowdrey , Gerry Crutchley , Jamie Dalrymple , Martin Donnelly , R. E. Foster (the only man to captain England at both cricket and football), C. B. Fry , George Harris (also served in the House of Lords ), Douglas Jardine , Malcolm Jardine , Imran Khan , Alan Melville , Iftikhar Ali Khan Pataudi , Mansoor Ali Khan Pataudi , M. J. K. Smith , and Pelham Warner .
Oxford students have also excelled in other sports. Such alumni include American football player Myron Rolle ( NFL player); Olympic gold medalists in athletics David Hemery and Jack Lovelock ; basketball players Bill Bradley ( US Senator and NBA player) and Charles Thomas McMillen ( US Congressman and NBA player); figure skater John Misha Petkevich (national champion); footballers John Bain , Charles Wreford-Brown , and Cuthbert Ottaway ; modern pentathlete Steph Cook (Olympic gold medalist); rugby footballers Stuart Barnes , Simon Danielli , David Humphreys , David Edward Kirk , Anton Oliver , Ronald Poulton-Palmer , Joe Roff , and William Webb Ellis (allegedly the inventor of rugby football ); runner Sir Roger Gilbert Bannister (who ran the first sub-four-minute mile), World Cup freestyle skier Ryan Max Riley (national champion); and tennis player Clarence Bruce .

Adventure and exploration
Three of the most well-known adventurers and explorers who attended Oxford are Walter Raleigh , one of the most notable figures of the Elizabethan era , T. E. Lawrence , whose life was the basis of the 1962 film Lawrence of Arabia , and Thomas Coryat . The latter, the author of " Coryat's Crudities hastily gobbled up in Five Months Travels in France, Italy, &c' " (1611) and court jester of Henry Frederick, Prince of Wales , is credited with introducing the table fork and umbrella to England and being the first Briton to do a Grand Tour of Europe. [206]
Other notable figures include Gertrude Bell , an explorer, archaeologist , mapper and spy, who, along with T. E. Lawrence , helped establish the Hashemite dynasties in what is today Jordan and Iraq and played a major role in establishing and administering the modern state of Iraq ; Richard Francis Burton , who travelled in disguise to Mecca and journeyed with John Hanning Speke as the first European explorers to visit the Great Lakes of Africa in search of the source of the Nile ; mountaineer Tom Bourdillon , member of the expedition to make the first ascent of Mount Everest ; and Peter Fleming , adventurer and travel writer and elder brother of Ian Fleming , creator of James Bond .

Oxford in literature and other media
The University of Oxford is the setting for numerous works of fiction. Oxford was mentioned in fiction as early as 1400 when Chaucer in his Canterbury Tales referred to a "Clerk [student] of Oxenford". By 1989, 533 novels based in Oxford had been identified and the number continues to rise. [207] Famous literary works range from Brideshead Revisited by Evelyn Waugh , to the trilogy His Dark Materials by Philip Pullman , which features an alternate-reality version of the university.
Other notable examples include:
Notable non-fiction works on Oxford include Oxford by Jan Morris . [208]

See also
WebPage index: 00058
Scientology
Scientology is a body of religious beliefs and practices created in 1954 by American author L. Ron Hubbard (1911–86). Hubbard initially developed a program of ideas called Dianetics , which was distributed through the Dianetics Foundation. The foundation soon entered bankruptcy and Hubbard lost the rights to his seminal publication Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental Health in 1952. He then recharacterized the subject as a religion and renamed it Scientology, [4] retaining the terminology, doctrines, the E-meter , and the practice of auditing . [5] [6] Within a year, he regained the rights to Dianetics and retained both subjects under the umbrella of the Church of Scientology . [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12]
Hubbard describes the etymology of the word Scientology as coming from the Latin word, "scio," meaning know or distinguish, and the Greek word “logos,” meaning “the word or outward form by which the inward thought is expressed and made known.” Hubbard writes, “thus, Scientology means knowing about knowing, or science of knowledge.” [13]
Hubbard's groups have encountered considerable opposition and controversy. [14] In January 1951, the New Jersey Board of Medical Examiners brought proceedings against Hubbard's Dianetics Foundation on the charge of teaching medicine without a license. [15] Hubbard's followers engaged in a program of covert and illegal infiltration of the U.S. government . [16] [17]
Hubbard-inspired organizations and their classification are often a point of contention. Germany classifies Scientology groups as an "anti-constitutional sect" ( verfassungsfeindliche Sekte ). [18] [19] In France , Scientology groups have been classified as a dangerous cult by some parliamentary reports. [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26]

History

L. Ron Hubbard
L. Ron Hubbard (1911–1986) was the only child of Harry Ross Hubbard, a United States Navy officer, and his wife Ledora. Hubbard spent three semesters at George Washington University but was placed on probation in September 1931. He failed to return for the fall 1932 semester. [27]
In July 1941, Hubbard was commissioned as a Lieutenant (junior grade) in the U.S. Naval Reserve. On May 18, 1943, the subchaser left Portland. That night, Hubbard ordered his crew to fire 35 depth charges and a number of gun rounds at what he believed were Japanese submarines. [28] His ship sustained minor damage and three crew were injured. Having run out of depth charges and with the presence of a submarine still unconfirmed by other ships, Hubbard's ship was ordered back to port. The navy report concludes that "there was no submarine in the area." A decade later, Hubbard claimed he had sunk a Japanese submarine in his Scientology lectures. [29]
On June 28, 1941, Hubbard ordered his crew to fire on the Coronado Islands . Hubbard apparently did not realize that the islands belonged to US-allied Mexico , nor that he had taken his vessel into Mexican territorial waters. [30] He was reprimanded and removed from command on July 7. [30] After reassignment to a naval facility in Monterey, California, Hubbard became depressed and fell ill. Reporting stomach pains in April 1945, he spent the remainder of the war as a patient in Oak Knoll Naval Hospital in Oakland, California. [31] According to his later teachings, during this time Hubbard made scientific "breakthroughs" by use of "endocrine experiments". [32]
On October 15, 1947, Hubbard wrote a letter to the Veterans Administration formally requesting psychiatric treatment, but admitted that he was unable to afford it. [33] Within a few years, Hubbard would condemn psychiatry as evil, which would grow into a major theme in Scientology.

Excalibur and Babalon Working
In April 1938, Hubbard reportedly reacted to a drug used in a dental procedure. According to his account, this triggered a revelatory near-death experience . Allegedly inspired by this experience, Hubbard composed a manuscript, which was never published, with the working titles of "The One Command" or Excalibur . [34] [35] The contents of Excalibur formed the basis for some of his later publications. [36] Arthur J. Burks , who read the work in 1938, later recalled it discussed the "one command": to survive. This theme would be revisited in Dianetics, the set of ideas and practices regarding the metaphysical relationship between the mind and body which became the central philosophy of Scientology. [37] Hubbard later cited Excalibur as an early version of Dianetics. [38] [ better source needed ]
In August 1945, Hubbard moved into the Pasadena mansion of John "Jack" Whiteside Parsons , an avid occultist and Thelemite , follower of the English ceremonial magician Aleister Crowley and leader of a lodge of Crowley's magical order , Ordo Templi Orientis (OTO). [39] [40] Parsons and Hubbard collaborated on the " Babalon Working ", a sex magic ritual intended to summon an incarnation of Babalon , the supreme Thelemite Goddess. [16] The Church of Scientology admits to Hubbard’s involvement with Parsons while claiming that it was for the purpose of naval intelligence. [41]
In the late 1940s, Hubbard practiced as a hypnotist [42] and he worked in Hollywood posing as a swami . [43] The Church says that Hubbard's experience with hypnosis led him to create Dianetics. [44]

Dianetics
In May 1950, Hubbard's Dianetics: The Evolution of a Science was published by pulp magazine Astounding Science Fiction . [45] [46] [47] [48] In the same year, he published the book-length Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental Health , considered the seminal event of the century by Scientologists. [49] Scientologists sometimes use a dating system based on the book's publication; for example, "A.D. 25" does not stand for Anno Domini , but "After Dianetics". [50]
Dianetics uses a counseling technique known as auditing in which an auditor assists a subject in conscious recall of traumatic events in the individual's past. [51] It was originally intended to be a new psychotherapy and was not expected to become the foundation for a new religion. [52] [53] Hubbard variously defined Dianetics as a spiritual healing technology and an organized science of thought. [54] The stated intent is to free individuals of the influence of past traumas by systematic exposure and removal of the engrams (painful memories) these events have left behind, a process called clearing . [54] Rutgers scholar Beryl Satter says that "there was little that was original in Hubbard's approach", with much of the theory having origins in popular conceptions of psychology. [55] Satter observes that in "keeping with the typical 1950s distrust of emotion, Hubbard promised that Dianetic treatment would release and erase psychosomatic ills and painful emotions, thereby leaving individuals with increased powers of rationality." [55] [56] According to Gallagher and Ashcraft, in contrast to psychotherapy, Hubbard stated that Dianetics "was more accessible to the average person, promised practitioners more immediate progress, and placed them in control of the therapy process." Hubbard's thought was parallel with the trend of humanist psychology at that time, which also came about in the 1950s. [55] Passas and Castillo write that the appeal of Dianetics was based on its consistency with prevailing values. [57] Shortly after the introduction of Dianetics, Hubbard introduced the concept of the " thetan " (or soul) which he claimed to have discovered. Dianetics was organized and centralized to consolidate power under Hubbard, and groups that were previously recruited were no longer permitted to organize autonomously. [58]
Two of Hubbard's key supporters at the time were John W. Campbell Jr. , the editor of Astounding Science Fiction , and Campbell's brother-in-law, physician Joseph A. Winter . [59] Dr. Winter, hoping to have Dianetics accepted in the medical community, submitted papers outlining the principles and methodology of Dianetic therapy to the Journal of the American Medical Association and the American Journal of Psychiatry in 1949, but these were rejected. [60] [61]
Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental Health spent six months on the New York Times bestseller list. [15] [62] [63] According to religious studies professor Paul Gutjahr, Dianetics is the bestselling non-Christian religious book of the century. [50] (subscription required) Publisher's Weekly gave a posthumous plaque to Hubbard to commemorate Dianetics' appearance on its list of bestsellers for one hundred weeks. Studies that address the topic of the origins of the work and its significance to Scientology as a whole include Peter Rowley's New Gods in America , Omar V. Garrison's The Hidden Story of Scientology , and Albert I. Berger's Towards a Science of the Nuclear Mind: Science-fiction Origins of Dianetics . More complex studies include Roy Wallis's The Road to Total Freedom . [50]
Dianetics appealed to a broad range of people who used instructions from the book and applied the method to each other, becoming practitioners themselves. [48] [64] Dianetics soon met with criticism. Morris Fishbein , the editor of the Journal of the American Medical Association and well-known at the time as a debunker of quack medicine , dismissed Hubbard's book. [65] [66] An article in Newsweek stated that "the Dianetics concept is unscientific and unworthy of discussion or review". [67] Hubbard asserted that Dianetics is “an organized science of thought built on definite axioms: statements of natural laws on the order of those of the physical sciences.” [68]
Hubbard became the leader of a growing Dianetics movement. [48] He became a popular lecturer and established the Hubbard Dianetic Research Foundation in Elizabeth, New Jersey , where he trained his first Dianetics counselors or auditors . [48] [64]
Some practitioners of Dianetics reported experiences which they believed had occurred in past lives, or previous incarnations. [64] In early 1951, reincarnation became a subject of intense debate within the Dianetics community. [69] Hubbard took the reports of past life events seriously and introduced the concept of the thetan , an immortal being analogous to the soul . [64] This was an important factor in the transition from secular Dianetics to the religion of Scientology. Sociologists Roy Wallis and Steve Bruce suggest that Dianetics, which set each person as his or her own authority, was about to fail due to its inherent individualism, and that Hubbard started Scientology as a religion to establish himself as the overarching authority. [70]
Also in 1951, Hubbard incorporated the electropsychometer ( E-meter for short), a kind of electrodermal activity meter, as an auditing aid. [69] Based on a design by Volney Mathison , the device is held by Scientologists to be a useful tool in detecting changes in a person's state of mind. [69] The global spread of Scientology at the latter half of the 1950s was culminated with the opening of churches in Johannesburg and Paris, while world headquarters transferred to England in Saint Hill, a rural estate. Hubbard lived there for the next seven years. [71]
Dianetics is different from Scientology in that Scientology is a religion while Dianetics is not. The purpose of Dianetics is the improvement of the individual, the individual or “self” being only one of eight "dynamics." [72]

Church of Scientology
In January 1951, the New Jersey Board of Medical Examiners began proceedings against the Hubbard Dianetic Research Foundation for teaching medicine without a license, which eventually led to that foundation's bankruptcy. [73] [74] [75] In December 1952, the Hubbard Dianetic Foundation filed for bankruptcy, and Hubbard lost control of the Dianetics trademark and copyrights to financier Don Purcell. [76] Author Russell Miller argues that Scientology "was a development of undeniable expedience, since it ensured that he would be able to stay in business even if the courts eventually awarded control of Dianetics and its valuable copyrights to ... Purcell". [77] [78]
L. Ron Hubbard originally intended for Scientology to be considered a science, as stated in his writings. In 1952, Scientology was organized to put this intended science into practice, and in the same year, Hubbard published a new set of teachings as Scientology, a religious philosophy. [79] Marco Frenschkowski quotes Hubbard in a letter written in 1953, to show that he never denied that his original approach was not a religious one: “Probably the greatest discovery of Scientology and its most forceful contribution to mankind has been the isolation, description and handling of the human spirit, accomplished in July, 1951, in Phoenix, Arizona. I established, along scientific rather than religious or humanitarian lines that the thing which is the person, the personality, is separable from the body and the mind at will and without causing bodily death or derangement. (Hubbard 1983: 55).” [80]
In April 1953, Hubbard wrote a letter proposing that Scientology should be transformed into a religion. [81] As membership declined and finances grew tighter, Hubbard had reversed the hostility to religion he voiced in Dianetics . [82] His letter discussed the legal and financial benefits of religious status. [82] Hubbard outlined plans for setting up a chain of "Spiritual Guidance Centers" charging customers $500 for twenty-four hours of auditing ("That is real money ... Charge enough and we'd be swamped."). He wrote:
In December 1953, Hubbard incorporated three churches – a "Church of American Science", a "Church of Scientology" and a "Church of Spiritual Engineering" – in Camden, New Jersey . [84] On February 18, 1954, with Hubbard's blessing, some of his followers set up the first local Church of Scientology, the Church of Scientology of California, adopting the "aims, purposes, principles and creed of the Church of American Science, as founded by L. Ron Hubbard." [84] [85] The movement spread quickly through the United States and to other English-speaking countries such as Britain, Ireland, South Africa and Australia. [86] The second local Church of Scientology to be set up, after the one in California, was in Auckland, New Zealand . [86] In 1955, Hubbard established the Founding Church of Scientology in Washington, D.C. . [64] The group declared that the Founding Church, as written in the certificate of incorporation for the Founding Church of Scientology in the District of Columbia, was to “act as a parent church for the religious faith down as ‘Scientology’ and to act as a church for the religious worship of the faith.” [87]
The Church experienced further challenges. The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) began an investigation concerning the claims the Church of Scientology made in connection with its E-meters. [65] On January 4, 1963, FDA agents raided offices of the Church of Scientology, seizing hundreds of E-meters as illegal medical devices and tons of literature that they accused of making false medical claims. [88] The original suit by the FDA to condemn the literature and E-meters did not succeed, [89] but the Court ordered the Church to label every meter with a disclaimer that it is purely religious artifact, [90] to post a $20,000 bond of compliance, and to pay the FDA's legal expenses. [91]
In the course of developing Scientology, Hubbard presented rapidly changing teachings that some have seen as often self-contradictory. [92] [93] According to Lindholm, for the inner cadre of Scientologists in that period, involvement depended not so much on belief in a particular doctrine but on unquestioning faith in Hubbard. [92]
In 1966, Hubbard purportedly stepped down as executive director of Scientology to devote himself to research and writing. [64] [94] The following year, he formed the ship-based Sea Organization or Sea Org which operated three ships: the Diana , the Athena , and the flagship the Apollo . [64] [95] One month after the establishment of the Sea Org, Hubbard announced that he had made a breakthrough discovery, the result of which were the " OT III " materials purporting to provide a method for overcoming factors inhibiting spiritual progress. [95] These materials were first disseminated on the ships, and then propagated by Sea Org members reassigned to staff Advanced Organizations on land. [95]

Hubbard in hiding, death, and aftermath
In 1972, facing criminal charges in France, Hubbard returned to the United States and began living in an apartment in Queens , New York. [96] When faced with possible indictment in the United States, Hubbard went into hiding in April 1979. He hid first in an apartment in Hemet, California , where his only contact with the outside world was via ten trusted Messengers. He cut contact with everyone else, even his wife, whom he saw for the last time in August 1979. [97] In February 1980 he disappeared into deep cover in the company of two trusted Messengers, Pat and Anne Broeker. [98] [99]
In 1979, as a result of FBI raids during Operation Snow White , eleven senior people in the church's Guardian's Office were convicted of obstructing justice, burglary of government offices, and theft of documents and government property. In 1981, Scientology took the German government to court for the first time. [100]
On January 24, 1986, L. Ron Hubbard died at his ranch in Creston, California . [101] David Miscavige emerged as the new head of the organization.

Splinter groups: Independent Scientology, Freezone, and Miscavige's RTC
While Scientology generally refers to Miscavige -led Church of Scientology , other groups practice Scientology. These groups, collectively known as Independent Scientologists, consist of former members of the official Church of Scientology as well as entirely new members.
In 1950, founding member Joseph Winter cut ties with Hubbard and set up a private Dianetics practice in New York. [102] In 1965, a longtime Church member and "Doctor of Scientology" Jack Horner (born 1927), dissatisfied with the Church's "ethics" program, developed Dianology. [103] Capt. Bill Robertson, a former Sea Org member, was a primary instigator of the movement in the early 1980s. [104] The church labels these groups " squirrels " ( Scientology jargon ) and often subjects them to considerable legal and social pressure. [105] [106] [107]
On January 1, 1982, Miscavige established the Religious Technology Center (RTC). [108] On November 11, 1982, the Free Zone was established by top Scientologists in disagreement with RTC. [109] The Free Zone Association was founded and registered under the laws of Germany, and espouses the doctrine that the official Church of Scientology led by David Miscavige has departed from Hubbard's original philosophy. [110]
The Advanced Ability Center was established by Hubbard's personal auditor David Mayo after February 1983 – a time when some of Scientology's upper and middle management split with Miscavige 's organization. [111]
More recently, high-profile defectors Mark Rathbun and Mike Rinder have championed the cause of Independent Scientologists wishing to practice Scientology outside of the Church. [112] [113]

Beliefs and practices
According to Scientology, its beliefs and practices are based on rigorous research, and its doctrines are accorded a significance equivalent to scientific laws. [114] Scientology cosmology is, however, at odds with modern science, with claims of memories going back "76 trillion years": [115] much longer than the age of the universe . Blind belief is held to be of lesser significance than the practical application of Scientologist methods. [114] Adherents are encouraged to validate the practices through their personal experience. [114] Hubbard put it this way: "For a Scientologist, the final test of any knowledge he has gained is, 'did the data and the use of it in life actually improve conditions or didn't it? ' " [114] Hubbard defined Scientology’s aims as: “A civilization without insanity, without criminals and without war; where the world can prosper and honest beings can have rights, and where man is free to rise to greater heights, are the aims of Scientology." [116] [117] L. Ron Hubbard described Scientology as an "applied religious philosophy" because, according to him, it consists of a metaphysical doctrine, a theory of psychology, and teachings in morality. [118] The core of Scientology teaching lies in the belief that “each human has a reactive mind that responds to life’s traumas, clouding the analytic mind and keeping us from experiencing reality.” Scientologists undergo auditing to discover sources of this trauma, believing that re-experiencing it neutralizes it and reinforces the ascendancy of the analytic mind, with the final goal believed to be achieving a spiritual state that Scientology calls “clear.” [119]

Theological doctrine
Scientology does not preach or impose a particular idea of God on Scientologists. Rather, people are expected to discover the truth through their own observations as their awareness advances.
Many Scientologists avoid using the words “belief” or “faith” to describe how Hubbard’s teachings impacts their lives. They perceive that Scientology are based on verifiable technologies, speaking to Hubbard’s original scientific objectives for Dianetics, based on the quantifiability of auditing on the E-meter. Scientologists call Dianetics and Scientology as technologies because of their claim of their scientific precision and workability. [121]

Reactive mind, traumatic memories, and auditing
Scientology presents two major divisions of the mind. [122] The reactive mind is thought to record all pain and emotional trauma, while the analytical mind is a rational mechanism that serves consciousness. [123] [124] The reactive mind stores mental images which are not readily available to the analytical (conscious) mind; these are referred to as engrams . [125] Engrams are painful and debilitating; as they accumulate, people move further away from their true identity. [126] To avoid this fate is Scientology's basic goal. [126] Some engrams are taught by Hubbard to happen by accident while others are inflicted by “thetans who have gone bad and want power,” as described by the Los Angeles Times. These engrams are named Implants in the doctrine of Scientology. Hubbard said, “Implants result in all varieties of illness, apathy, degradation, neurosis and insanity and are the principal cause of these in man.” [127]
Dianetic auditing is one way by which the Scientologist may progress toward the Clear state, winning gradual freedom from the reactive mind's engrams and acquiring certainty of his or her reality as a thetan. [128] David V. Barrett , a sociologist of religion who has written widely about the subject, says that according to Scientology, the “first major goal is to go Clear.” Clearing was described to represent “the attainment of Man’s dreams through the ages of attaining a new and higher state of existence and freedom from the endless cycle of birth, death, birth … Clear is the total erasure of the reactive mind from which stems all the anxieties and problems the individual has.” [129]
Scientology asserts that people have hidden abilities which have not yet been fully realized. [130] It teaches that increased spiritual awareness and physical benefits are accomplished through counseling sessions referred to as auditing . [131] Through auditing, people can solve their problems and free themselves of engrams. [132] This restores them to their natural condition as thetans and enables them to be at cause in their daily lives, responding rationally and creatively to life events rather than reacting to them under the direction of stored engrams. [133] Accordingly, those who study Scientology materials and receive auditing sessions advance from a status of Preclear to Clear and Operating Thetan . [134] Scientology's utopian aim is to "clear the planet", that is, clear all people in the world of their engrams. [135]
Auditing is a one-on-one session with a Scientology counselor or auditor. [136] It is similar to confession or pastoral counseling, but the auditor records and stores all information received and does not dispense forgiveness or advice as a pastor or priest of another religion might do. [136] Instead, the auditor's task is to help a person discover and understand the universal principles of affinity, reality, and communication (ARC). [136] Most auditing requires an E-meter , a device that measures minute changes in electrical resistance through the body when a person holds electrodes (metal "cans"), and a small current is passed through them. [132] [136]
Scientology teaches that the E-meter helps to locate spiritual difficulties. [136] Once an area of concern has been identified, the auditor asks the individual specific questions about it to help him or her eliminate the difficulty, and uses the E-meter to confirm that the "charge" has been dissipated. [136] As the individual progresses up the "Bridge to Total Freedom", the focus of auditing moves from simple engrams to engrams of increasing complexity and other difficulties. [136] At the more advanced OT levels, Scientologists act as their own auditors ("solo auditors"). [136]
Douglas E. Cowan writes that the e-meter “provides an external, material locus for the legitimation of [Scientology] practice.” Scientologists depend on the “appearance of objectivity or empirical validity” of the e-meter rather than simply trusting an auditor’s abstract interpretation of a participant’s statements. He also states that without the e-meter, “Scientology could not have achieved whatever status it enjoys as a new religious movement.” He also argues that without it, the Church may not have survived the early years when Dianetics was just formed. [137]

Emotional Tone Scale and survival
Scientology uses an emotional classification system called the tone scale . [138] The tone scale is a tool used in auditing; Scientologists maintain that knowing a person's place on the scale makes it easier to predict his or her actions and assists in bettering his or her condition. [139]
Scientology emphasizes the importance of survival , which it subdivides into eight classifications that are referred to as " dynamics " . [140] [141] An individual's desire to survive is considered to be the first dynamic, while the second dynamic relates to procreation and family. [140] [142] The remaining dynamics encompass wider fields of action, involving groups, mankind, all life, the physical universe, the spirit, and infinity, often associated with the Supreme Being. [140] The optimum solution to any problem is held to be the one that brings the greatest benefit to the greatest number of dynamics. [140]

Toxins and Purification
The Purification Rundown [143] is a controversial "detoxification" program used by the Church of Scientology as an introductory service. [143] [144] It features high-dose dietary supplements and extended time in a sauna (up to five hours a day for five weeks). [145] Scientology claims it the only effective way to deal with the long-term effects of drug abuse or toxic exposure. [144]
Narconon is a "drug education and rehabilitation program" founded on Hubbard's beliefs about "toxins" and "purification". [146] [147] Narconon is offered in the United States, Canada and a number of European countries; its Purification Program also uses high-dose vitamins and extended sauna sessions, combined with auditing and study. [146] [147]

Introspection Rundown
The Introspection Rundown is a controversial Church of Scientology auditing process that is intended to handle a psychotic episode or complete mental breakdown. Introspection is defined for the purpose of this rundown as a condition where the person is "looking into one's own mind, feelings, reactions, etc." [148] The Introspection Rundown came under public scrutiny after the death of Lisa McPherson in 1995. [149]

Rejection of psychology and psychiatry
Scientology is vehemently opposed to psychiatry and psychology . [150] [151] [152] Psychiatry rejected Hubbard's theories in the early 1950s and in 1951, Hubbard's wife Sara consulted doctors who recommended he "be committed to a private sanatorium for psychiatric observation and treatment of a mental ailment known as paranoid schizophrenia ." [153] [154] Thereafter, Hubbard criticized psychiatry as a "barbaric and corrupt profession". [155]
Hubbard taught that psychiatrists were responsible for a great many wrongs in the world, saying that psychiatry has at various times offered itself as a tool of political suppression and "that psychiatry spawned the ideology which fired Hitler's mania, turned the Nazis into mass murderers, and created the Holocaust." [153] [155] Hubbard created the anti-psychiatry organization Citizens Commission on Human Rights (CCHR), which operates Psychiatry: An Industry of Death , an anti-psychiatry museum. [153] [155]
From 1969, CCHR has campaigned in opposition to psychiatric treatments, electroconvulsive shock therapy , lobotomy , and drugs such as Ritalin and Prozac . [156] According to the official church website, "the effects of medical and psychiatric drugs, whether painkillers, tranquilizers or 'antidepressants', are as disastrous" as illegal drugs. [157]

Body and thetan
Scientology beliefs revolve around the immortal soul, the thetan . [123] [126] [158] Scientology teaches that the thetan is the true identity of a person – an intrinsically good, omniscient, non-material core capable of unlimited creativity. [123] [126]
Hubbard taught that thetans brought the material universe into being largely for their own pleasure. [126] The universe has no independent reality, but derives its apparent reality from the fact that thetans agree it exists. [123] Thetans fell from grace when they began to identify with their creation rather than their original state of spiritual purity. [126] Eventually they lost their memory of their true nature, along with the associated spiritual and creative powers. As a result, thetans came to think of themselves as nothing but embodied beings. [123] [128]
Thetans are reborn time and time again in new bodies through a process called "assumption" which is analogous to reincarnation . [126] Scientology posits a causal relationship between the experiences of earlier incarnations and one's present life, and with each rebirth, the effects of the MEST universe (MEST here stands for matter, energy, space, and time) on the thetan become stronger. [126]

Space opera and the Wall of Fire
The Church of Scientology holds that at the higher levels of initiation (" OT levels "), mystical teachings are imparted that may be harmful to unprepared readers. These teachings are kept secret from members who have not reached these levels. The church says that the secrecy is warranted to keep its materials' use in context and to protect its members from being exposed to materials they are not yet prepared for. [132]
These are the OT levels, the levels above Clear , whose contents are guarded within Scientology. The OT level teachings include accounts of various cosmic catastrophes that befell the thetans. [159] Hubbard described these early events collectively as " space opera ".
In the OT levels, Hubbard explains how to reverse the effects of past-life trauma patterns that supposedly extend millions of years into the past. [160] Among these advanced teachings is the story of Xenu (sometimes Xemu), introduced as the tyrant ruler of the " Galactic Confederacy ". According to this story, 75 million years ago Xenu brought billions of people to Earth in spacecraft resembling Douglas DC-8 airliners, stacked them around volcanoes and detonated hydrogen bombs in the volcanoes. The thetans then clustered together, stuck to the bodies of the living, and continue to do this today. Scientologists at advanced levels place considerable emphasis on isolating body thetans and neutralizing their ill effects. [161]
Excerpts and descriptions of OT materials were published online by a former member in 1995 and then circulated in mainstream media. This occurred after the teachings were submitted as evidence in court cases involving Scientology, thus becoming a matter of public record. [160] [162] There are eight publicly known OT levels, OT I to VIII. [163] The highest level, OT VIII, is disclosed only at sea on the Scientology cruise ship Freewinds . [163] It has been rumored that additional OT levels, said to be based on material written by Hubbard long ago, will be released at some appropriate point in the future. [164]
A large Church of Spiritual Technology symbol carved into the ground at Scientology's Trementina Base is visible from the air. [165] Washington Post reporter Richard Leiby wrote, "Former Scientologists familiar with Hubbard’s teachings on reincarnation say the symbol marks a 'return point' so loyal staff members know where they can find the founder’s works when they travel here in the future from other places in the universe." [166]

Ethics, suppressives, and disconnection
The Ethics system regulates member behavior, [167] [168] and Ethics officers are present in every Scientology organization. Ethics officers ensure "correct application of Scientology technology" and deal with "behavior adversely affecting a Scientology organization's performance", ranging from "Errors" and "Misdemeanors" to "Crimes" and "Suppressive Acts", as those terms defined by Scientology. [169]
Scientology asserts some people are truly malevolent, and Hubbard taught 20 percent of the population were suppressive persons , which includes some hopelessly antisocial personalities who are the truly dangerous individuals in humanity: "the Adolf Hitlers and the Genghis Khans, the unrepentant murderers and the drug lords." [170] [171] Scientology disconnection policy prohibits most contact with Suppressive Persons. [170] [171] The church denies that a disconnection policy exists, and quotes Hubbard's definition of disconnection as "a self-determined decision made by an individual that he is not going to be connected to another." [172]
A Scientologist who communicates with a suppressive person risks being declared a Potential Trouble Source . [173] [174] Defectors who turn into critics of the movement are declared suppressive persons, [175] [176] [177] [178] and the Church of Scientology has a reputation for moving aggressively against such detractors. [179]

Fair game
The term Fair Game is used to describe policies and practices carried out against people the Church perceives as its enemies. Hubbard established the policy in the 1950s, in response to criticism both from within and outside his organization. [16] [17] Individuals or groups who are "Fair Game" are judged to be a threat to the Church and, according to the policy, can be punished and harassed using any and all means possible. [16] [17]
Hubbard and his followers targeted many individuals as well as government officials and agencies, including a program of covert and illegal infiltration of the IRS and other U.S. government agencies during the 1970s. [16] [17] They also conducted private investigations, character assassination and legal action against the Church's critics in the media. [16] The policy remains in effect and has been defended by the Church of Scientology as a core religious practice. [180] [181] [182]

Scientology ceremonies
In Scientology, ceremonies for events such as weddings, child naming, and funerals are observed. [126] Friday services are held to commemorate the completion of a person's religious services during the prior week. [126] Ordained Scientology ministers may perform such rites. [126] However, these services and the clergy who perform them play only a minor role in Scientologists' religious lives. [183]

Organization
The internal structure of Scientology organizations is strongly bureaucratic with a focus on statistics-based management. [167] Organizational operating budgets are performance-related and subject to frequent reviews. [167]

Membership statistics
A 2001 survey found only 55,000 people in the United States who claimed to be Scientologists. Worldwide estimates of Scientology's core practicing membership ranges between 100,000 and 200,000, mostly in the U.S., Europe, South Africa and Australia. [132] In 2010, an article in The New York Times claimed that the 2008 American Religious Identification Survey found that the number of American Scientologists had dropped to 25,000, [185] and this claim was repeated since then in several scholarly sources. [186] In fact, however, the 2008 ARIS did not include a specific figure for Scientology, including it in a larger category of "new religious movements", for which the figure was 2.8 million. [187] The figure of 25,000 for Scientology was mentioned in 2009 in an anti-Scientology forum, where a contributor claimed to have received that information from the ARIS team in a private communication, together with a caveat that the estimate was tentative and not reliable. [188] In 2017, however, Italian scholar Massimo Introvigne, in a study about ARIS and Scientology, published a mail sent to him by professor Barry Kosmin, the principal author of the ARIS reports, stating that "we never reported adherent figures for small religious groups in ARIS 2008 because of their unreliability. We were approached by several scholars and media outlets interested in Scientology. Our informal response – caveat emptor - was that our data suggested 25,000 +/- 300,000," i.e. a range between 25,000 and 300,000. [189] Scientology has also been found as declining in the United Kingdom. [190]
Although the Church of Scientology claims to be the fastest growing religious movement on Earth, the church's estimates of its membership numbers are reportedly significantly exaggerated. [191] [192] [193]

Sea Org
The highest echelon of the Scientology hierarchy are the members the Sea Organization or Sea Org . [167] The organization includes some 5,000 of Scientology's most dedicated adherents, who work for low pay, and sign a billion-year contract. [167] [194]

Rehabilitation Project Force
The Rehabilitation Project Force (RPF) is a controversial part of the Scientology "justice" system. [169] When Sea Org members are found guilty of a violation, is assigned to the RPF. [169] The RPF involves a daily regimen of five hours of auditing or studying, eight hours of work, often physical labor, such as building renovation, and at least seven hours of sleep. [169] Douglas E. Cowan and David G. Bromley state that scholars and observers have come to radically different conclusions about the RPF and whether it is "voluntary or coercive, therapeutic or punitive". [169]

Office of Special Affairs
The Office of Special Affairs or OSA (formerly the Guardian's Office ) is a department of the Church of Scientology which has been characterized as a non-state intelligence agency . [195] [196] [197] It has targeted critics of the Church for "dead agent" operations, which is mounting character assassination operations against perceived enemies. [198] [199]

Franchises and advanced organizations
Many Scientologists' first contact with Scientology is through local informal groups and field auditors practicing Dianetics counseling. [200] In addition to these, Scientology operates hundreds of Churches and Missions around the world. [146] This is where Scientologists receive introductory training, and it is at this local level that most Scientologists participate. [146] Churches and Missions are licensed franchises; they may offer services for a fee provided they contribute a proportion of their income and comply with the Religious Technology Center (RTC) and its standards. [146] [201] [202]
Operating Thetan levels are offered only at Scientology's Advanced Organizations (Los Angeles, Sydney, East Grinstead and Copenhagen ). [203] The Flag Service Organization in Clearwater, Florida offers OT levels VI and VII. The Scientology ship Freewinds offers OT VIII. [204]

Celebrity Centers
In 1955, Hubbard created a list of 63 celebrities targeted for conversion to Scientology. [205] In a church policy letter in 1973, L. Ron Hubbard wrote, "The purpose of [the] Celebrity Centre is, to forward the expansion and popularization of Scientology through the arts." [206]
Scientology operates eight churches that are designated Celebrity Centres , designed to minister to celebrity Scientologists. [207] The largest of these is in Hollywood, California, called Church of Scientology Celebrity Centre International . [207] The Celebrity Centre International was the first one that was opened in 1969 and its opening is celebrated the first week of August each year in an evening gala. [208]
Former silent-screen star Gloria Swanson and actors Tom Cruise and John Travolta have spoken publicly about their commitment to Scientology, as has actress and musician Juliette Lewis . [205] [209] [210]

Scientology tech in jails and prisons, schools, and management
Several Scientology organizations promote the use of Scientology technology as a means to solve social problems. Scientology began to focus on these issues in the early 1970s, led by Hubbard. The church developed outreach programs to fight drug addiction, illiteracy, learning disabilities and criminal behavior. These have been presented to schools, businesses and communities as secular techniques based on Hubbard's writings. [211] The Association for Better Living and Education (ABLE) acts as an umbrella organization for these efforts. [212] Notable examples include:

Volunteer ministers
The Church of Scientology began its " Volunteer Ministers " program as a way to participate in community outreach projects. Volunteer Ministers sometimes travel to the scenes of major disasters in order to provide assistance with relief efforts. According to critics, these relief efforts consist of passing out copies of a pamphlet authored by Hubbard entitled The Way to Happiness , and engaging in a method said to calm panicked or injured individuals known in Scientology as a " touch assist ." Accounts of the Volunteer Ministers' effectiveness have been mixed, and touch assists are not supported by scientific evidence. [214] [215] [216]

Other entities
Other Scientology-related organizations include:

Controversies
The Church of Scientology is one of the most controversial religious organizations. A first point of controversy was its challenge of the psychotherapeutic establishment. Another was a 1991 Time magazine article that attacked the church, which was rejected by the court as baseless early in 1992. And a third is its religious status in the United States, formalized when the IRS granted the organization tax-exempt status in 1993. [220]
It has been in conflict with the governments and police forces of many countries (including the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, [221] France [222] and Germany). [7] [223] [224] [225] [226] It has been one of the most litigious religious movements in history, filing countless lawsuits against governments, organizations and individuals. [227]
Reports and allegations have been made, by journalists, courts, and governmental bodies of several countries, that the Church of Scientology is an unscrupulous commercial enterprise that harasses its critics and brutally exploits its members. [224] [225] A considerable amount of investigation has been aimed at the church, by groups ranging from the media to governmental agencies. [224] [225]
The controversies involving the church and its critics, some of them ongoing, include:
Scientology social programs such as drug and criminal rehabilitation have likewise drawn both support and criticism. [233] [234] [235] [236]
Stephen A. Kent , a professor of sociology, has said that "Scientologists see themselves as possessors of doctrines and skills that can save the world, if not the galaxy." [237] As stated in Scientology doctrine: "The whole agonized future of this planet, every man, woman and child on it, and your own destiny for the next endless trillions of years depend on what you do here and now with and in Scientology." [238] Kent has described Scientology's ethics system as "a peculiar brand of morality that uniquely benefited [the Church of Scientology] ... In plain English, the purpose of Scientology ethics is to eliminate opponents, then eliminate people's interests in things other than Scientology." [239]
Many former members have come forward to speak out about the Church and the negative effects its teachings have had on them, including celebrities such as Leah Remini . Remini spoke about her split from the Church, saying that she still has friends within the organization that she is no longer able to speak to. [240]
A 2017 CNN feature on religion called Scientology “probably one of the most successful new American faiths to have emerged in the past century” despite the fact that its beliefs and practices are often misunderstood. [241]

Criminal behavior
Much of the controversy surrounding Scientology stems from the criminal convictions of core members of the Scientology organization.
In 1978, a number of Scientologists, including L. Ron Hubbard's wife Mary Sue Hubbard (who was second in command in the organization at the time), were convicted of perpetrating what was at the time the largest incident of domestic espionage in the history of the United States, called " Operation Snow White ". This involved infiltrating, wiretapping, and stealing documents from the offices of Federal attorneys and the Internal Revenue Service . [242] L. Ron Hubbard was convicted in absentia by French authorities of engaging in fraud and sentenced to four years in prison. [243] The head of the French Church of Scientology was convicted at the same trial and given a suspended one-year prison sentence. [244]
An FBI raid on the Church's headquarters revealed documentation that detailed Scientology's criminal actions against various critics of the organization. In " Operation Freakout ", agents of the church attempted to destroy Paulette Cooper , author of The Scandal of Scientology , an early book that had been critical of the movement. [245] Among these documents was a plan to frame Gabe Cazares , the mayor of Clearwater , Florida, with a staged hit-and-run accident.
In 1988, Scientology president Heber Jentzsch and ten other members of the organization were arrested in Spain on various charges including illicit association, coercion, fraud, and labor law violations. [246]
In October 2009, the Church of Scientology was found guilty of organized fraud in France. [247] The sentence was confirmed by appeal court in February 2012. [248]
In 2012, Belgian prosecutors indicted Scientology as a criminal organization engaged in fraud and extortion. [249] [250] [251] On March 2016, the Church of Scientology was acquitted of all charges, and demands to close its Belgian branch and European headquarters were dismissed. [252]

Organized harassment
Scientology has historically engaged in hostile action toward its critics; executives within the organization have proclaimed that Scientology is "not a turn-the-other-cheek religion". [253] Journalists , politicians , former Scientologists and various anti- cult groups have made accusations of wrongdoing against Scientology since the 1960s, and Scientology has targeted these critics – almost without exception – for retaliation, in the form of lawsuits and public counter-accusations of personal wrongdoing. Many of Scientology's critics have also reported they were subject to threats and harassment in their private lives. [254] [255]
Journalist John Sweeney reported that "While making our BBC Panorama film Scientology and Me I have been shouted at, spied on, had my hotel invaded at midnight, denounced as a 'bigot' by star Scientologists, brain-washed—that is how it felt to me—in a mock up of a Nazi -style torture chamber and chased round the streets of Los Angeles by sinister strangers". [256]

Violation of auditing confidentiality
During the auditing process, the auditor collects and records personal information from the client. [257] [258]
While the Church of Scientology claims to protect the confidentiality of auditing records, the Church has a history of attacking and psychologically abusing former members using information culled from the records. [258] For example, a December 16, 1969, a Guardian's Office order (G. O. 121669) by Mary Sue Hubbard explicitly authorized the use of auditing records for purposes of "internal security." [259] Former members report having participated in combing through information obtained in auditing sessions to see if it could be used for smear campaigns against critics. [260] [261]

Shunning
The practice of shunning in Scientology is termed "Disconnection". Members can disconnect from any person they already know, including existing family members. Many examples of this policy's application have been established in court. [262] [263] [264] Failure to disconnect from a Suppressive Person is itself labelled a Suppressive act. [265]

Allegation of coerced abortions
The Sea Org originally operated on vessels at sea where it was understood that it was not permitted to raise children on board the ships. [239] Pregnant women in the Sea Org have reported been pressured to undergo abortions. [239] Sea Org members were reportedly shown secret writings by L. Ron Hubbard to convince them that having an abortion was not against Scientology practices. [266]
In 2003, The Times of India reported that "Forced abortions, beatings, starvation are considered tools of discipline in this church." [267]
A former high-ranking source reports that "some 1,500 abortions" have been "carried out by women in the Sea Organization since the implementation of a rule in the late '80s that members could not remain in the organization if they decided to have children." The source noted that "And if members who have been in the Sea Organization for, say, 10 years do decide to have kids, they are dismissed with no more than $1,000" as a severance package . [268]
Many former members have claimed they were pressured to undergo abortion.
Longtime member Astra Woodcraft reportedly "left Scientology for good when the church tried to pressure her to have an abortion". [269] [270] Former Sea Org member Karen Pressley recounted that she was often asked by fellow Scientologists for loans so that they could get an abortion and remain in the Sea Org. [271] [272] Scientology employee Claire Headley has claimed that she worked "was forced to have (two) abortions to keep her job and was subjected to violations of personal rights and liberties for the purpose of obtaining forced labor." [273] Laura Ann DeCrescenzo reported that while a minor, she was "coerced to have an abortion". [274]
In March 2009, Maureen Bolstad reported that women who worked at Scientology's headquarters were forced to have abortions, or faced being declared a " Suppressive Person " by the organization's management. [275] In March 2010, former Scientologist Janette Lang stated that at age 20 she became pregnant by her boyfriend while in the organization, [276] and her boyfriend's Scientology supervisors "coerced them into terminating the pregnancy". [277] "We fought for a week, I was devastated, I felt abused, I was lost and eventually I gave in. It was my baby, my body and my choice, and all of that was taken away from me by Scientology," said Lang. [277] [278]
Australian Senator Nick Xenophon gave a speech to the Australian Parliament in November 2009, about statements he had received from former Scientologists. [279] He said that he had been told members of the organization had coerced pregnant female employees to have abortions. [279] "I am deeply concerned about this organisation and the devastating impact it can have on its followers," said Senator Xenophon, and he requested that the Australian Senate begin an investigation into Scientology. [279] According to the letters presented by Senator Xenophon, the organization was involved in "ordering" its members to have abortions. [280] Former Scientologist Aaron Saxton sent a letter to Senator Xenophon stating he had participated in coercing pregnant women within the organization to have abortions. [281] "Aaron says women who fell pregnant were taken to offices and bullied to have an abortion. If they refused, they faced demotion and hard labour. Aaron says one staff member used a coat hanger and self-aborted her child for fear of punishment," said Senator Xenophon. [282] Carmel Underwood, another former Scientologist, said she had been put under "extreme pressure" to have an abortion, [283] and that she was placed into a "disappearing programme", after refusing. [284] Underwood was the executive director of Scientology's branch in Sydney, Australia . [282]
Scientology spokesman Tommy Davis dismissed such claims as "utterly meritless". [273] Mike Ferriss, the head of Scientology in New Zealand , told media that "There are no forced abortions in Scientology". [285] Scientology spokesperson Virginia Stewart likewise rejected the claims and asserted "The Church of Scientology considers the family unit and children to be of the utmost importance and does not condone nor force anyone to undertake any medical procedure whatsoever." [286]

Scientology, litigation, and the Internet
In the 1990s, Miscavige's organization took action against increased criticism of Scientology on the Internet and online distribution of Scientology-related documents. [287]
Starting in 1991, Scientology filed fifty lawsuits against Scientology-critic Cult Awareness Network (CAN). [288] Many of the suits were dismissed, but one resulted in $2 million in losses, bankrupting the network. [288] At bankruptcy, CAN's name and logo were obtained by a Scientologist. [288] [289] A new Cult Awareness Network was set up with Scientology backing, which operates as an information and networking center for non-traditional religions, referring callers to academics and other experts. [290] [291]
In a 1993 U.S. lawsuit brought by the Church of Scientology against Steven Fishman, a former member of the Church, Fishman made a court declaration which included several dozen pages of formerly secret esoterica detailing aspects of Scientologist cosmogony . [292] As a result of the litigation, this material, normally strictly safeguarded and used only in Scientology's more advanced "OT levels", found its way onto the Internet. [292] This resulted in a battle between the Church of Scientology and its online critics over the right to disclose this material, or safeguard its confidentiality. [292] The Church of Scientology was forced to issue a press release acknowledging the existence of this cosmogony, rather than allow its critics "to distort and misuse this information for their own purposes." [292] Even so, the material, notably the story of Xenu , has since been widely disseminated and used to caricature Scientology, despite the Church's vigorous program of copyright litigation. [292]
In January 1995, church lawyer Helena Kobrin attempted to shut down the newsgroup alt.religion.scientology by sending a control message instructing Usenet servers to delete the group. [293] In practice, this rmgroup message had little effect, since most Usenet servers are configured to disregard such messages when sent to groups that receive substantial traffic, and newgroup messages were quickly issued to recreate the group on those servers that did not do so. However, the issuance of the message led to a great deal of public criticism by free-speech advocates. [294] [295] Among the criticisms raised, one suggestion is that Scientology's true motive is to suppress the free speech of its critics. [296] [297]
The Church also began filing lawsuits against those who posted copyrighted texts on the newsgroup and the World Wide Web , and lobbied for tighter restrictions on copyrights in general. The Church supported the controversial Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act as well as the even more controversial Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA). Some of the DMCA 's provisions (notably the Online Copyright Infringement Liability Limitation Act ) were heavily influenced by Church litigation against US Internet service providers over copyrighted Scientology materials that had been posted or uploaded through their servers.
Beginning in the middle of 1996 and ensuing for several years, the newsgroup was attacked by anonymous parties using a tactic dubbed sporgery by some, in the form of hundreds of thousands of forged spam messages posted on the group. Some investigators said that some spam had been traced to church members. [299] [300] Former Scientologist Tory Christman later asserted that the Office of Special Affairs had undertaken a concerted effort to destroy alt.religion.scientology through these means; the effort failed. [301]
On January 14, 2008, a video produced by the Church of Scientology featuring an interview with Tom Cruise was leaked to the Internet and uploaded to YouTube . [302] [303] [304] The Church of Scientology issued a copyright violation claim against YouTube requesting the removal of the video. [305] Subsequently, the group Anonymous voiced its criticism of Scientology and began attacking the Church. [306] Calling the action by the Church of Scientology a form of Internet censorship , participants of Anonymous coordinated Project Chanology , which consisted of a series of denial-of-service attacks against Scientology websites, prank calls , and black faxes to Scientology centers. [307] [308] [309] [310] [311] On January 21, 2008, Anonymous announced its intentions via a video posted to YouTube entitled "Message to Scientology", and a press release declaring a "war" against both the Church of Scientology and the Religious Technology Center . [310] [312] In the press release, the group stated that the attacks against the Church of Scientology would continue in order to protect the freedom of speech , and end what they saw as the financial exploitation of church members. [313]
On January 28, 2008, an Anonymous video appeared on YouTube calling for protests outside Church of Scientology centers on February 10, 2008. [314] [315] According to a letter Anonymous e-mailed to the press, about 7,000 people protested in more than 90 cities worldwide. [316] Many protesters wore masks based on the character V from V for Vendetta (who was influenced by Guy Fawkes ) or otherwise disguised their identities, in part to protect themselves from reprisals from the Church of Scientology. [317] [318] Many further protests have followed since then in cities around the world. [319]
The Arbitration Committee of the Wikipedia internet encyclopedia decided in May 2009 to restrict access to its site from Church of Scientology IP addresses, to prevent self-serving edits by Scientologists. [320] [321] A "host of anti-Scientologist editors" were topic-banned as well. [320] [321] The committee concluded that both sides had "gamed policy" and resorted to "battlefield tactics", with articles on living persons being the "worst casualties". [320]

Disputes over legal status
The legal status of Scientology or Scientology-related organizations differs between jurisdictions. [322] Scientology was legally recognized as a tax-exempt religion in South Africa , [323] Australia , [324] Sweden , [325] New Zealand , [326] [327] Portugal , [328] and Spain . [329] Scientology was granted tax-exempt status in the United States in 1993. [330] [331] [332] [333] The organization is considered a cult in Chile and an "anticonstitutional sect" in Germany, [18] and is considered a cult (French secte ) by some French public authorities. [19]
The church argues that Scientology is a genuine religious movement that has been misrepresented, maligned, and persecuted. [334] [335] The Church of Scientology has pursued an extensive public relations campaign for the recognition of Scientology as a tax-exempt religion in the various countries in which it exists. [336] [337] [338]
Scientology has often encountered opposition due to its strong-arm tactics directed against critics and members wishing to leave the organization. [176] A number of governments regard the Church as a religious organization entitled to tax-exempt status, while governments variously classify it as a business, cult, pseudoreligion , or criminal organization. [192] [339] [340]
In 1957, the Church of Scientology of California was granted tax-exempt status by the United States Internal Revenue Service (IRS), and so, for a time, were other local churches. [65] [341] In 1958 however, the IRS started a review of the appropriateness of this status. [65] In 1959, Hubbard moved to England, remaining there until the mid-1960s. [64]
In the mid-sixties, the Church of Scientology was banned in several Australian states, starting with Victoria in 1965. [342] The ban was based on the Anderson Report , which found that the auditing process involved "command" hypnosis, in which the hypnotist assumes "positive authoritative control" over the patient. On this point the report stated,
The Australian Church was forced to operate under the name of the "Church of the New Faith" as a result, the name and practice of Scientology having become illegal in the relevant states. [342] Several years of court proceedings aimed at overturning the ban followed. [342] In 1973, the law in Victoria was formally repealed in Western and Southern Australia and within two decades, all legislation against Scientology was reversed. In 1982, the law was repealed, and the High Court of Australia ruled in a unanimous decision that the Church of Scientology was “undoubtedly a religion and deserving of tax exemption” the following year. [344]
In 1967, the IRS removed Scientology's tax-exempt status, asserting that its activities were commercial and operated for the benefit of Hubbard, rather than for charitable or religious purposes. [341] The decision resulted in a process of litigation that was settled in the Church's favor a quarter of a century later, the longest case of litigation in IRS history. [65]

Scientology as a religion
Scientology is officially recognized as a religion in the United States. [330] [331] [332] [333] Recognition came in 1993, [345] when the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) stated that "[Scientology is] operated exclusively for religious and charitable purposes." [346] [347] Scientology was again recognized as a religion by the U.S. courts when the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the judgment in Headley v. Church of Scientology International in 2012. [348]
The New York Times noted in this connection that the Church of Scientology had funded a campaign which included a whistle-blower organization to publicly attack the IRS, as well as hiring of private investigators to look into the private lives of IRS officials. [341] In 1991, Miscavige, the highest-ranking Scientology leader, arranged a meeting with Fred T. Goldberg Jr. , the Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service at the time. [349] The meeting was an "opportunity for the church to offer to end its long dispute with the agency, including the dozens of suits brought against the IRS." The committee met several times with the Scientology legal team and "was persuaded that those involved in the Snow White crimes had been purged, that church money was devoted to tax-exempt purposes and that, with Mr. Hubbard's death, no one was getting rich from Scientology." [341] In August 1993, a settlement was reached; the church would receive its tax-exempt status and end its legal actions against the IRS and its personnel. The church was required only to resubmit new applications for exemption to the IRS Exempt Organizations (EO) division, which was told "not to consider any substantive matters" because those issues had been resolved by the committee. [341] The secret agreement was announced on October 13, 1993, with the IRS refusing to disclose any of the terms or the reasoning behind the decision. [341] Both the IRS and Scientology rejected any allegations that foul play or undue pressure had been used on IRS officials, insisting that the decision had been based on the merits of the case. [350] IRS officials "insisted that Scientology's tactics had not affected the decision" and that "ultimately the decision was made on a legal basis". [341] Miscavige claims that the IRS’s examination of Scientology was the most exhaustive review of any non-profit organization in history. [351]
Elsewhere, Scientology is recognized as a religion in Australia, [331] [352] Portugal, [353] Spain, [354] Slovenia , [355] Sweden, [355] [356] [357] Croatia , [355] Hungary [355] and Kyrgyzstan . [358] In New Zealand, the Inland Revenue Department classified the Church of Scientology as a charitable organization and stated that its income would be tax exempt. [359] It has gained judicial recognition in Italy, [360] [ clarification needed ] and Scientology officials have won the right to perform marriages in South Africa. [361]
Scientology is not recognized as a religion in Canada. [361] In the UK, the Charity Commission for England and Wales ruled in 1999 that Scientology was not a religion and refused to register the Church as a charity, although a year later, it was recognized as a not-for-profit body in a separate proceeding by the UK Revenue and Customs and exempted from UK value added tax . [361] [362] In December 2013, the United Kingdom’s highest court officially recognized Scientology as a religion. The ruling ended a five-year legal battle by Scientologist Louisa Hodkin, who sought the legal right to marry at the Church of Scientology chapel in central London. The opinion by five supreme court justices redefined religion in law, rendering the 1970 definition “out of date” in restricting religious worship to “reverence or veneration of God or of a Supreme Being.” [363] [364] [365] [366]

Viewed as a commercial enterprise
Scientology has been accused of being "a business, often given to criminal acts, and sometimes masquerading as a religion." [183] [367]
In conjunction with the Church of Scientology's request to be officially recognized as a religion in Germany, around 1996 the German state Baden-Württemberg conducted a thorough investigation of the group's activities within Germany. [368] The results of this investigation indicated that at the time of publication, Scientology's main sources of revenue ("Haupteinnahmequellen der SO") were from course offerings and sales of their various publications. Course offerings ranged from (German Marks) DM 182.50 to about DM 30,000 – the equivalent today of approximately $119 to $19,560 USD. Revenue from monthly, bi-monthly, and other membership offerings could not be estimated in the report, but was nevertheless placed in the millions. Defending its practices against accusations of profiteering , the Church has countered critics by drawing analogies to other religious groups who have established practices such as tithing , or require members to make donations for specific religious services. [369]
Since 1997 Germany has considered Scientology to be in conflict with the principles of the nation's constitution. It is seen as an anticonstitutional sect and a new version of political extremism and because there is "evidence for intentions against the free democratic basic order" it is observed by the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution. [370] [371] In 1997, an open letter to then-German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl , published as a newspaper advertisement in the International Herald Tribune , drew parallels between the "organized oppression" of Scientologists in Germany and the treatment of Jews in 1930s' Nazi Germany. [372] [373] The letter was signed by Dustin Hoffman , Goldie Hawn and a number of other Hollywood celebrities and executives. [373] [374] Commenting on the matter, a spokesman for the U.S. Department of State said that Scientologists were discriminated against in Germany, but condemned the comparisons to the Nazis' treatment of Jews as extremely inappropriate, as did a United Nations Special Rapporteur . [374] [375] Based on the IRS exemptions, the U.S. State Department formally criticized Germany for discriminating against Scientologists and began to note Scientologists' complaints of harassment in its annual human rights reports, [341] as well as the annual International Religious Freedom Reports it has released from 1999 onwards. [376] Germany will continue to monitor Scientology's activities in the country, despite continued objection from Scientology which cites such monitoring as abuse of freedom of religion. [377]
France and Belgium have not recognized Scientology as a religion, and Stephen A. Kent , writing in 2001, noted that recognition had not been obtained in Ireland , Luxembourg , Israel or Mexico either. [378] The Belgian State Prosecution Service has recommended that various individuals and organizations associated with Scientology should be prosecuted. [379] [380] An administrative court has yet to decide if charges will be pressed. [379] [380]
In Greece, Scientology is not recognized as a religion by the Greek government, and multiple applications for religious status have been denied, notably in 2000 and 2003. [381]
In the Netherlands , Scientology was granted tax exempt status in October 2013. [382] The status was revoked in October 2015. The court ruled that because auditing fees and course costs were more expensive than most commercial education institutions, Scientology appeared to be aimed at making a profit. [383] [384]
Scientology maintains strict control over the use of its symbols, icons, and names. It claims copyright and trademark over its "Scientology cross", and its lawyers have threatened lawsuits against individuals and organizations who have published the image in books and on Web sites. Because of this, it is very difficult for individual groups to attempt to publicly practice Scientology on their own, independent of the official Church of Scientology. Scientology has filed suit against a number of individuals who have attempted to set up their own auditing practices, using copyright and trademark law to shut these groups down. [385]
The Church of Scientology and its many related organizations have amassed considerable real estate holdings worldwide, likely in the hundreds of millions of dollars. [223] Scientology encourages existing members to "sell" Scientology to others by paying a commission to those who recruit new members. [223] Scientology franchises, or missions, must pay the Church of Scientology roughly 10% of their gross income. [386] On that basis, it is likened to a pyramid selling scheme . [387] While introductory courses do not cost much, courses at the higher levels may cost several thousand dollars each. [388] As a rule, the great majority of members proceeds up the bridge in a steady rate commensurate with their income. Most recently the Italian Supreme Court agreed with the American IRS that the church's financial system is analogous to the practices of other groups and not out of line with its religious purposes. [389]
In November 2009, Australian Senator Nick Xenophon used a speech in Federal Parliament to allege that the Church of Scientology is a criminal organization. Based on letters from former followers of the religion, he said that there were "allegations of forced imprisonment, coerced abortions, and embezzlement of church funds, of physical violence and intimidation, blackmail and the widespread and deliberate abuse of information obtained by the organization" [390]

Scientology in religious studies
Describing the available scholarship on Scientology, David G. Bromley and Douglas E. Cowan stated in 2006 that "most scholars have concluded that Scientology falls within the category of religion for the purposes of academic study, and a number have defended the Church in judicial and political proceedings on this basis." [183] Hugh B. Urban writes that "Scientology's efforts to get itself defined as a religion make it an ideal case study for thinking about how we understand and define religion." [391] Urban presented a “balanced description” of the Church utilizing interviews with current satisfied practitioners and interviews with former members critical of the establishment in his work. [ citation needed ] Toward the second decade of the 2000s, a new interest for Scientology emerged among scholars, bringing the subject from obscurity. [392]
According to the Encyclopedia of Religious Controversies in the United States , "even as Scientology raises questions about how and who gets to define religion, most scholars recognize it as a religion, one that emerges from and builds on American individualism and the spiritual marketplace that dominated 1950s America." [393] David G. Bromley comments that Scientology “could gain strength by adding to the new perspective on existence, the hope and human meaning that only a transcendent creed can give.” [394]
Bromley and Cowan noted in 2008 that Scientology's attempts "to gain favor with new religion scholars" had often been problematic. [337] According to Religious Studies professor Mary Farrell Benarowski, Scientology describes itself as drawing on science, religion, psychology and philosophy but "had been claimed by none of them and repudiated, for the most part, by all." [395]
Regis Dericquesbourg writes about the efficacy of Scientology in imparting knowledge: “Scientology indeed not only brings knowledge, it also brings personal introspection through auditing, and transmission in upper levels is not merely reading texts: what is transmitted is experienced through a solo or duo auditing experience.” He compared it to psychoanalysis. [396]
Frank K. Flinn, adjunct professor of religious studies at Washington University in St. Louis wrote, "it is abundantly clear that Scientology has both the typical forms of ceremonial and celebratory worship and its own unique form of spiritual life." [397] Flinn further states that religion requires "beliefs in something transcendental or ultimate, practices (rites and codes of behavior) that re-inforce those beliefs and, a community that is sustained by both the beliefs and practices", all of which are present within Scientology. [192] Similarly, World Religions in America states that "Scientology contains the same elements of most other religions, including myths, scriptures, doctrines, worship, sacred practices and rituals, moral and ethical expectations, a community of believers, clergy, and ecclesiastic organizations." [398]
While acknowledging that a number of his colleagues accept Scientology as a religion, sociologist Stephen A. Kent writes: "Rather than struggling over whether or not to label Scientology as a religion, I find it far more helpful to view it as a multifaceted transnational corporation, only one element of which is religious" [emphasis in the original]. [399] [400]
Donna Batten in the Gale Encyclopedia of American Law writes, "A belief does not need to be stated in traditional terms to fall within First Amendment protection. For example, Scientology—a system of beliefs that a human being is essentially a free and immortal spirit who merely inhabits a body—does not propound the existence of a supreme being, but it qualifies as a religion under the broad definition propounded by the Supreme Court." [401]
J. Gordon Melton asserts that while the debate over definitions of religion will continue, “scholars will probably continue in the future to adopt a broad definition, thus including Scientology in a wider religious field.” [402]
The material contained in the OT levels has been characterized as bad science fiction by critics, while others claim it bears structural similarities to gnostic thought and ancient Hindu beliefs of creation and cosmic struggle. [159] [403] Melton suggests that these elements of the OT levels may never have been intended as descriptions of historical events and that, like other religious mythology, they may have their truth in the realities of the body and mind which they symbolize. [159] He adds that on whatever level Scientologists might have received this mythology, they seem to have found it useful in their spiritual quest. [159]

Hubbard's motives
During his lifetime, Hubbard was accused of using religion as a façade for Scientology to maintain tax-exempt status and avoid prosecution for false medical claims. [367] The IRS cited a statement frequently attributed to Hubbard that the way to get rich was to found a religion. [404] [405] According to Melton, the statement is unsubstantiated, although several of Hubbard's science fiction colleagues do recall Hubbard raising the topic in conversation. [405]
Hubbard grew up in a climate that was very critical of organized religion, and frequently quoted anti-religious sentiments in his early lectures. [406] The scholar Marco Frenschkowski ( University of Mainz ) has stated that it was not easy for Hubbard "to come to terms with the spiritual side of his own movement. Hubbard did not want to found a religion: he discovered that what he was talking about in fact was religion. This mainly happened when he had to deal with apparent memories from former lives. He had to defend himself about this to his friends." [406] Frenschkowski allows that there were practical concerns in the question of "how to present Scientology to the outside world", but dismisses the notion that the religious format was just an expedient pretense; Frenschkowski points to many passages in Hubbard's works that document his struggle with this question. [406] Frenschkowski suggests that it was a biographical mistake to suggest that Hubbard only became interested in Scientology as a religion in 1954. He notes that Hubbard discussed religion and the concept of God even in the years leading up to the emergence of Scientology, and that he did not “rush into religion” but rather, “discovered it through the development of his work with pre-clears.” [80]
Drawing parallels to similar struggles for identity in other religious movements such as Theosophy and Transcendental Meditation , Frenschkowski sees in Hubbard's lectures "the case of a man whose background was non-religious and who nevertheless discovers that his ideas somehow oscillate between 'science' (in a very popular sense), 'religion' and 'philosophy', and that these ideas somehow fascinate so many people that they start to form a separate movement." Hubbard experiments with traditional religious language in a short piece written in 1953 called "The Factors", "a basic expression of Scientologist cosmology and metaphysics", reprinted in current Scientology literature. Frenschkowski observes that the text is partly biblical in structure and that this development is a component of Scientology’s metamorphosis into a religion, written at a point when the nature of the new movement was unclear. [407]
The Church of Scientology denounces the idea of Hubbard starting a religion for personal gain as an unfounded rumor. [408] The Church also suggests that the origin of the rumor was a remark by George Orwell which had been misattributed to Hubbard. [409] Robert Vaughn Young , who left the Church in 1989 after being its spokesman for twenty years, suggested that reports of Hubbard making such a statement could be explained as a misattribution, despite having encountered three of Hubbard's associates from his science fiction days who remembered Hubbard making statements of that sort in person. [224] It was Young who by a stroke of luck came up with the "Orwell quote": "but I have always thought there might be a lot of cash in starting a new religion, and we'll talk it over some time" It appears in a letter by Eric Blair (known the world as George Orwell) to his friend, Jack Common, dated 16-February-38 (February 16, 1938), and was published in Collected Essays, Journalism and Letters of George Orwell , vol. 1. [410] In 2006, Rolling Stone 's Janet Reitman also attributed the statement to Hubbard, as a remark to science fiction writer Lloyd Eshbach and recorded in Eshbach's autobiography. [411]

Scientology as a UFO religion
Scientology can be seen as a UFO religion in which the existence of extraterrestrial entities operating unidentified flying objects (UFOs) are an element of belief. In this context, it is discussed in UFO Religions by Christopher Partridge, [412] and The Encyclopedic Sourcebook of UFO Religions by James R. Lewis , [413] while Susan Palmer draws several parallels with Raelianism . [414] Gregory Reece, in his book UFO Religion: Inside flying saucer cults and culture , writes:
Regardless of such statements by critics, Hubbard wrote and lectured openly about the material he himself called "space opera." In 1952, Hubbard published a book ( What to Audit / A History of Man [416] ) on space opera and other material that may be encountered when auditing preclears. [417] [418]
According to David G. Bromley , Scientology is “part therapy, part religion, part UFO group. It’s a mix of things unlike any other religious group out there.” [157] Scholar Andreas Grunschlo writes that as a ufogical religion, Scientology “conceives of earthly human beings primarily as extraterrestrial spirits (‘Thetans') which have now to put on their ‘bridge to freedom’ again —a soul conception which is paralleled by the typical ufogical ‘star seeds’ or ‘walk-ins’ planted on this earthly ‘garden’ for spiritual growth.” [419]

Influences
The general orientation of Hubbard's philosophy owes much to Will Durant , author of the popular 1926 classic The Story of Philosophy ; Dianetics is dedicated to Durant. [420] Hubbard's view of a mechanically functioning mind in particular finds close parallels in Durant's work on Spinoza . [420] According to Hubbard himself, Scientology is "the Western anglicized continuance of many early forms of wisdom." [421] Ankerberg and Weldon mention the sources of Scientology to include "the Vedas , Buddhism , Judaism , Gnosticism , Taoism , early Greek civilization and the teachings of Jesus , Nietzsche and Freud." [422] Hubbard asserted that Freudian thought was a “major precursor” to Scientology. W. Vaughn Mccall, Professor and Chairman of the Georgia Regents University writes, “Both Freudian theory and Hubbard assume that there are unconscious mental processes that may be shaped by early life experiences, and that these influence later behavior and thought.” Both schools of thought propose a “tripartite structure of the mind.” [423] Sigmund Freud 's psychology, popularized in the 1930s and 1940s, was a key contributor to the Dianetics therapy model, and was acknowledged unreservedly as such by Hubbard in his early works. [424] Hubbard never forgot, when he was 12 years old, meeting Cmdr. Joseph Cheesman Thompson , a U.S. Navy officer who had studied with Freud [425] and when writing to the American Psychological Association in 1949, he stated that he was conducting research based on the "early work of Freud". [426]
In Dianetics , Hubbard cites Hegel as a negative influence — an object lesson in "confusing" writing. [427] According to Mary A. Mann, Scientology is considered nondenominational, accepting all people regardless of their religions background, ethnicity, or educational attainment. [428] Another major influence was Alfred Korzybski 's General Semantics . [424] Hubbard was friends with fellow science fiction writer A. E. van Vogt , who explored the implications of Korzybski's non-Aristotelian logic in works such as The World of Null-A , and Hubbard's view of the reactive mind has clear and acknowledged parallels with Korzybski's thought; in fact, Korzybski's "anthropometer" may have been what inspired Hubbard's invention of the E-meter . [424]
Beyond that, Hubbard himself named a great many other influences in his own writing – in Scientology 8-8008 , for example, these include philosophers from Anaxagoras and Aristotle to Herbert Spencer and Voltaire , physicists and mathematicians like Euclid and Isaac Newton , as well as founders of religions such as Buddha , Confucius , Jesus and Mohammed – but there is little evidence in Hubbard's writings that he studied these figures to any great depth. [424]
As noted, elements of the Eastern religions are evident in Scientology, [426] in particular the concept of karma found in Hinduism and Jainism . [429] [430] In addition to the links to Hindu texts, Scientology draws from Taoism and Buddhism . [431] According to the Encyclopedia of Community , Scientology "shows affinities with Buddhism and a remarkable similarity to first-century Gnosticism." [432] [433]
In the 1940s, Hubbard was in contact with Jack Parsons , a rocket scientist and member of the Ordo Templi Orientis then led by Aleister Crowley , and there have been suggestions that this connection influenced some of the ideas and symbols of Scientology. [434] [435] Religious scholars Gerald Willms and J. Gordon Melton have stated that Crowley's teachings bear little if any resemblance to Scientology doctrine. [434] [435]
J. Gordon Melton writes that Scientology has its roots in Esoteric thought. He cited the significance of understanding Scientology’s appeal as aligned with Esoteric tradition. The Church is a “significant revision” and “meaningful revitalization” within the esoteric tradition. Melton states that Scientology can also be traced back to Gnosticism, Manicheanism, Freemasonry and Theosophy. [436]
According to James R. Lewis , Scientology is in the same lineage of supernatural religious movements such as New Thought . Scientology goes beyond this and refers to their religio-therapeutic practices as religious technology. Lewis wrote, "Scientology sees their psycho-spiritual technology as supplying the missing ingredient in existing technologies—namely, the therapeutic engineering of the human psyche." [437]

Scientology and hypnosis
Hubbard was said to be an accomplished hypnotist, and close acquaintances such as Forrest Ackerman (Hubbard's literary agent) and A. E. van Vogt (an early supporter of Dianetics) witnessed repeated demonstrations of his hypnotic skills. [404] Scientology literature states that L. Ron Hubbard expertise in hypnosis led to the discovery of the Dianetic engram . [438] [439] But Hubbard wrote that hypnosis is a "wild variable", and compared parlor hypnosis to an atom bomb. [440] He also wrote:

Etymology of "Scientology" and earlier usage
The word Scientology is a pairing of the Latin word scientia ("knowledge", "skill"), which comes from the verb scīre ("to know"), and the Greek λόγος lógos ("word" or "account [of]"). [442] [443] Scientology , as coined by L. Ron Hubbard, comes from the Latin scio , which means "knowing, in the fullest meaning of the word" and the Greek word logos, which means "study of". Scientology is further defined as "the study and handling of the spirit in relationship to itself, universes, and other life." [444]
The term scientology had been used in published works at least twice before Hubbard. In The New Word (1901) poet and lawyer Allen Upward first used scientology to mean blind, unthinking acceptance of scientific doctrine. [445] In 1934, philosopher Anastasius Nordenholz published Scientology: Science of the Constitution and Usefulness of Knowledge , which used the term to mean the science of science . [446] It is unknown whether Hubbard was aware of either prior usage of the word. [447] [448]

ARC and KRC triangles
The ARC and KRC triangles are concept maps which show a relationship between three concepts to form another concept. These two triangles are present in the Scientology symbol. The lower triangle, the ARC triangle, is a summary representation of the knowledge the Scientologist strives for. [126] It encompasses A ffinity (affection, love or liking), R eality (consensual reality) and C ommunication (the exchange of ideas). [126] Scientology teaches that improving one of the three aspects of the triangle "increases the level" of the other two, but Communication is held to be the most important. [449] The upper triangle is the KRC triangle, the letters KRC positing a similar relationship between K nowledge , R esponsibility and C ontrol . [450]
Among Scientologists, the letters ARC are used as an affectionate greeting in personal communication, for example at the end of a letter. [451] Social problems are ascribed to breakdowns in ARC – in other words, a lack of agreement on reality, a failure to communicate effectively, or a failure to develop affinity. [170] These can take the form of overts – harmful acts against another, either intentionally or by omission – which are usually followed by withholds – efforts to conceal the wrongdoing, which further increase the level of tension in the relationship. [170]

Bridge to total freedom
Scientologists seek to attain spiritual development through study of Scientology materials and auditing. The subject (called Technology or Tech in Scientology jargon ) is structured in a series of levels (or gradients ) of gradually increasing complexity. The sequence of study ("training") and auditing ("processing") levels is termed the " Bridge to Total Freedom ", or simply "the Bridge". [449] [452] Training concerns primarily the principles and techniques of auditing. [452] Processing is personal development through participation in auditing sessions. [452]
The Church of Scientology teaches the principle of reciprocity, involving give-and-take in every human transaction. [453] Accordingly, members are required to make donations for study courses and auditing as they move up the Bridge, the amounts increasing as higher levels are reached. [453] Participation in higher-level courses on the Bridge may cost several thousand dollars, and Scientologists usually move up the Bridge at a rate governed by their income. [453]
According to David G. Bromley , religious studies professor, working toward being an “Operating Thetan” means moving up the Bridge to Total Freedom, “which at the highest level transcends material law.” He further emphasizes this belief of Scientologists: “You occasionally come across people in Scientology who say they can change the material world with their mind.” [454]

Scientology in popular culture
The 2005 South Park episode " Trapped in the Closet " publicized the story of Xenu , based directly on the actual Scientology Operating Thetan III document, [455] and accompanied by an onscreen caption reading "This is what Scientologists actually believe". After explaining these beliefs, the character representing the church's president ultimately reveals to Stan that the church is in reality a money-making scam . [ citation needed ]
Paul Thomas Anderson 's 2012 film The Master features a religious organization called "The Cause" that has many similarities to Scientology. [456] [457] [458] Also, the character of Lancaster Dodd, played by Philip Seymour Hoffman shares a physical resemblance to Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard . [459]
In April 2015, following the recent release of Going Clear: Scientology and the Prison of Belief , Saturday Night Live aired a music video featuring the "Church of Neurotology", a parody of Scientology's 1990 music video " We Stand Tall ". [460] [461]
In November 2016, cable network A&E began airing Leah Remini: Scientology and the Aftermath , an eight part documentary series. Remini, a TV actress and star, was a member of the Church of Scientology for over 30 years and a public proponent of Scientology for years before a public falling out in 2013. She is an executive producer of the series. The series follows Remini as she explores the history and workings of the Church, discusses her experiences and interviews ex-members willing to speak out about alleged abuses of the Church. The initial episode drew 2.1 million viewers. [462]

See also
WebPage index: 00059
Upworthy
Upworthy is a website for viral content started in March 2012 by Eli Pariser , the former executive director of MoveOn , and Peter Koechley, the former managing editor of The Onion . One of Facebook 's co-founders, Chris Hughes , was an early investor. [3] [4] [5]
Upworthy's stated mission is "to change what the world pays attention to." [6] It uses virality to promote stories with a progressive bent on political and social issues. [7]

History
In June 2013, an article in Fast Company called Upworthy "the fastest growing media site of all time". [8]
In August 2013 Upworthy became the first "non-traditional" site to feature in NewsWhip 's Top Ten Publisher Rankings , in fifth place. [9] By November 2013 they were the third most social publisher on Facebook, despite their low article count. [10]
Upworthy popularized a distinctive style of two-phrase headlines, which has spread to many other websites. [11] Examples of such Upworthy style headlines are:
It has been criticized for its use of overly sensationalized , emotionally manipulative, " clickbait " style, headlines as well as having a liberal bias, and simplifying issues that are controversial by nature. [7] [14] [15] [16] [17]
Since 2015, under the site's new Editorial Director, Amy O'Leary (who joined Upworthy from The New York Times in February, 2015) Upworthy focuses more on producing original content, rather than aggregating third-party content. This resulted in six of its staff being laid off as well as new staff being hired. [18] [19]

Funding
Upworthy has been through two rounds of funding. In October 2012 it raised $4 million from New Enterprise Associates and other angel investors, including BuzzFeed co-founder John Johnson, Facebook co-founder and New Republic owner Chris Hughes , and Reddit co-founder Alexis Ohanian . [20] [21] In September 2013 it raised $8 million from investors Catamount Ventures, Spark Capital , Knight Foundation and Klee Irwin. [22]

Content
Upworthy writers and video staff produce daily stories, which are distributed on social media. Topics include "Being a Better Human," "Citizenship & Democracy," "Culture," "Identities," and "Science & Technology."

Views
In November 2013, Upworthy hit a high of over 80 million unique visitors for the month. However, in early 2014 it had fallen to roughly 20 million unique visitors. [23] As of December 2014, Upworthy's mission statement says it engages a total of about 50 million people each month. [24]
As of October 2016, Upworthy's YouTube channel has 157,370 subscribers and has had over 10 million views. [25]

Advertising
Upworthy has been labeled a " clickbait shop"; however, for two years Upworthy did not monetize clicks through display advertising. The company began making money in April 2014 with the announcement of Upworthy Collaborations. [26]
As of 2016, Upworthy also relies on traditional advertising with AdSense .
Upworthy Collaborations is a name given to Upworthy's advertising partnerships with corporations. It includes native ads, and articles that its advertising partners underwrite. [27] [28] It is selective with the organizations it collaborates with and states that "We draw a line on greenwashing ". [29] Upworthy states that it wishes to work with corporations who have a common mission and similar values. Peter Koechley said on the topic: "We won’t take an ad from Exxon claiming to be good for the environment, but Skype claiming they help people communicate—that seems about right". [28] [30] It has attracted prominent brands such as Unilever , Skype , CoverGirl , and charities such as the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation . [27] [31] [32] [33]

Events
Upworthy has held events to advertise itself as well as getting new ideas from the public about the new media and Internet.
WebPage index: 00060
Human penis
The human penis is an external male intromittent organ that additionally serves as the urinal duct . The main parts are the root (radix); the body (corpus); and the epithelium of the penis including the shaft skin and the foreskin (prepuce) covering the glans penis . The body of the penis is made up of three columns of tissue : two corpora cavernosa on the dorsal side and corpus spongiosum between them on the ventral side . The human male urethra passes through the prostate gland , where it is joined by the ejaculatory duct , and then through the penis. The urethra traverses the corpus spongiosum, and its opening, the meatus ( / m iː ˈ eɪ t ə s / ), lies on the tip of the glans penis. It is a passage both for urination and ejaculation of semen . (See: male reproductive system .)
Most of the penis develops from the same tissue in the embryo as does the clitoris in females; the skin around the penis and the urethra come from the same embryonic tissue from which develops the labia minora in females. [1] [2] An erection is the stiffening and rising of the penis, which occurs during sexual arousal , though it can also happen in non-sexual situations. Spontaneous non-sexual erections frequently occur during adolescence.
The most common form of genital alteration is circumcision , removal of part or all of the foreskin for various cultural, religious and, more rarely, medical reasons. There is controversy surrounding circumcision.
In its relaxed (flaccid, i.e. soft/limp) state, the shaft of the penis has the feel of a dense sponge encased in very smooth eyelid-type skin. The tip, or glans of the penis is darker in color, and covered by the foreskin, if present.
In its fully erect state, the shaft of the penis is rigid, with the skin tightly stretched. The glans of the erect penis has the feel of a raw mushroom. The erect penis may be straight or curved and may point at an upward or downward angle, or straight ahead. It may also have a tendency to the left or right.
While results vary across studies, the consensus is that the average erect human penis is approximately 12.9–15 cm (5.1–5.9 in) in length with 95% of adult males falling within the interval 10.7–19.1 cm (4.2–7.5 in). Neither age nor size of the flaccid penis accurately predicts erectile length.

Anatomy

Parts

Structure
The human penis is made up of three columns of tissue : two corpora cavernosa lie next to each other on the dorsal side and one corpus spongiosum lies between them on the ventral side .
The enlarged and bulbous-shaped end of the corpus spongiosum forms the glans penis , which supports the foreskin , or prepuce, a loose fold of skin that in adults can retract to expose the glans. The area on the underside of the penis, where the foreskin is attached, is called the frenum , or frenulum. The rounded base of the glans is called the corona . The perineal raphe is the noticeable line along the underside of the penis.
The urethra , which is the last part of the urinary tract , traverses the corpus spongiosum, and its opening, known as the meatus / m iː ˈ eɪ t ə s / , lies on the tip of the glans penis. It is a passage both for urine and for the ejaculation of semen . Sperm are produced in the testes and stored in the attached epididymis . During ejaculation, sperm are propelled up the vas deferens , two ducts that pass over and behind the bladder. Fluids are added by the seminal vesicles and the vas deferens turns into the ejaculatory ducts , which join the urethra inside the prostate gland. The prostate as well as the bulbourethral glands add further secretions, and the semen is expelled through the penis.
The raphe is the visible ridge between the lateral halves of the penis, found on the ventral or underside of the penis, running from the meatus (opening of the urethra) across the scrotum to the perineum (area between scrotum and anus ).
The human penis differs from those of most other mammals , as it has no baculum , or erectile bone , and instead relies entirely on engorgement with blood to reach its erect state . It cannot be withdrawn into the groin, and it is larger than average in the animal kingdom in proportion to body mass .

Size
While results vary across studies, the consensus is that the average erect human penis is approximately 12.9–15 cm (5.1–5.9 in) in length with 95% of adult males falling within the interval 10.7–19.1 cm (4.2–7.5 in). Neither age nor size of the flaccid penis accurately predicted erectile length. Stretched length most closely correlated with erect length. [4] [5] [6] The average penis size is slightly larger than the median size (i.e., most penises are below average in size).
Length of the flaccid penis does not necessarily correspond to length of the erect penis; some smaller flaccid penises grow much longer, while some larger flaccid penises grow comparatively less. [7] Among all primates, the human penis is the largest in girth, but comparable to chimpanzees and certain other species in length. [8]
A research project, summarizing dozens of published studies conducted by physicians of different nationalities, shows that, worldwide, erect-penis size averages vary between 9.6 and 16 cm (3.8 and 6.3 in). It has been suggested that this difference is caused not only by genetics but also by environmental factors such as fertility medications , [9] culture , diet , and chemical/pollution exposure. [10] [11] [12] Endocrine disruption resulting from chemical exposure has been linked to genital deformation in both sexes (among many other problems).
The longest officially documented human penis was found by physician Robert Latou Dickinson . It was 34.3 cm (13.5 in) long and 15.9 cm (6.26 in) around. [13]

Normal variations

Development

Differences between female and male organs
In the developing fetus, the genital tubercle develops into the glans of the penis in males and into the clitoral glans in females; they are homologous . The urogenital fold develops into the skin around the shaft of the penis and the urethra in males and into the labia minora in females. [1] The corpora cavernosa are homologous to the body of the clitoris; the corpus spongiosum is homologous to the vestibular bulbs beneath the labia minora; the scrotum, homologous to the labia majora ; and the foreskin, homologous to the clitoral hood . [1] [16] The raphe does not exist in females, because there, the two halves are not connected.

Penile growth and puberty
On entering puberty , the penis, scrotum and testicles will enlarge toward maturity. During the process, pubic hair grows above and around the penis. A large-scale study assessing penis size in thousands of 17- to 19-year-old males found no difference in average penis size between 17-year-olds and 19-year-olds. From this, it can be concluded that penile growth is typically complete not later than age 17, and possibly earlier. [17]

Physiological functions

Urination
In males, the expulsion of urine from the body is done through the penis. The urethra drains the bladder through the prostate gland where it is joined by the ejaculatory duct , and then onward to the penis. At the root of the penis (the proximal end of the corpus spongiosum) lies the external sphincter muscle . This is a small sphincter of striated muscle tissue and is in healthy males under voluntary control. Relaxing the urethra sphincter allows the urine in the upper urethra to enter the penis properly and thus empty the urinary bladder.
Physiologically, urination involves coordination between the central , autonomic , and somatic nervous systems . In infants, some elderly individuals, and those with neurological injury, urination may occur as an involuntary reflex . Brain centers that regulate urination include the pontine micturition center , periaqueductal gray , and the cerebral cortex . [18] During erection, these centers block the relaxation of the sphincter muscles, so as to act as a physiological separation of the excretory and reproductive function of the penis, and preventing urine from entering the upper portion of the urethra during ejaculation. [19]

Voiding position
The distal section of the urethra allows a human male to direct the stream of urine by holding the penis. This flexibility allows the male to choose the posture in which to urinate. In cultures where more than a minimum of clothing is worn, the penis allows the male to urinate while standing without removing much of the clothing. It is customary for some men to urinate in seated or crouched positions. The preferred position may be influenced by cultural or religious beliefs. [20] Research on the medical superiority of either position exists, but the data are heterogenic . A meta-analysis [21] summarizing the evidence found no superior position for young, healthy males. For elderly males with LUTS however, in the sitting position compared to the standing:
This urodynamic profile is related to a lower risk of urologic complications, such as cystitis and bladder stones .

Erection
An erection is the stiffening and rising of the penis, which occurs during sexual arousal , though it can also happen in non-sexual situations. Spontaneous erections frequently occur during adolescence due to friction with clothing, a full bladder or large intestine, hormone fluctuations, nervousness, and undressing in a nonsexual situation. It is also normal for erections to occur during sleep and upon waking. (See nocturnal penile tumescence .) The primary physiological mechanism that brings about erection is the autonomic dilation of arteries supplying blood to the penis, which allows more blood to fill the three spongy erectile tissue chambers in the penis, causing it to lengthen and stiffen. The now-engorged erectile tissue presses against and constricts the veins that carry blood away from the penis. More blood enters than leaves the penis until an equilibrium is reached where an equal volume of blood flows into the dilated arteries and out of the constricted veins; a constant erectile size is achieved at this equilibrium. The scrotum will usually tighten during erection.
Erection facilitates sexual intercourse though it is not essential for various other sexual activities.

Erection angle
Although many erect penises point upwards (see illustration), it is common and normal for the erect penis to point nearly vertically upwards or nearly vertically downwards or even horizontally straight forward, all depending on the tension of the suspensory ligament that holds it in position.
The following table shows how common various erection angles are for a standing male, out of a sample of 1,564 males aged 20 through 69. In the table, zero degrees is pointing straight up against the abdomen, 90 degrees is horizontal and pointing straight forward, while 180 degrees would be pointing straight down to the feet. An upward pointing angle is most common. [22]

Ejaculation
Ejaculation is the ejecting of semen from the penis, and is usually accompanied by orgasm . A series of muscular contractions delivers semen, containing male gametes known as sperm cells or spermatozoa , from the penis. It is usually the result of sexual stimulation , which may include prostate stimulation. Rarely, it is due to prostatic disease. Ejaculation may occur spontaneously during sleep (known as a nocturnal emission or wet dream ). Anejaculation is the condition of being unable to ejaculate.
Ejaculation has two phases: emission and ejaculation proper . The emission phase of the ejaculatory reflex is under control of the sympathetic nervous system , while the ejaculatory phase is under control of a spinal reflex at the level of the spinal nerves S2–4 via the pudendal nerve . A refractory period succeeds the ejaculation, and sexual stimulation precedes it. [23]

Evolved adaptations
The human penis has been argued to have several evolutionary adaptations. The purpose of these adaptations is to maximise reproductive success and minimise sperm competition . Sperm competition is where the sperm of two males simultaneously resides within the reproductive tract of a female and they compete to fertilise the egg. [24] If sperm competition results in the rival male's sperm fertilising the egg, cuckoldry could occur. This is the process whereby males unwittingly invest their resources into offspring of another male and, evolutionarily speaking, should be avoided at all costs [25]
The most researched human penis adaptations are testis and penis size , ejaculate adjustment and semen displacement. [26]

Testis and penis size
Evolution has caused sexually selected adaptations to occur in penis and testis size in order to maximise reproductive success and minimise sperm competition . [27] [28]
Sperm competition has caused the human penis to evolve in length and size for sperm retention and displacement. [28] To achieve this, the penis must be of sufficient length to reach any rival sperm and to maximally fill the vagina. [28] In order to ensure that the female retains the male's sperm, the adaptations in length of the human penis have occurred so that the ejaculate is placed close to the female cervix. [29] This is achieved when complete penetration occurs and the penis pushes against the cervix. [30] These adaptations have occurred in order to release and retain sperm to the highest point of the vaginal tract. As a result, this adaptation also leaves the male’s sperm less vulnerable to sperm displacement and semen loss. Another reason for this adaptation is due to the nature of the human posture, gravity creates vulnerability for semen loss. Therefore, a long penis, which places the ejaculate deep in the vaginal tract, could reduce the loss of semen. [31]
Another evolutionary theory of penis size is female mate choice and its associations with social judgements in modern-day society. [28] [32] A study which illustrates female mate choice as an influence on penis size presented females with life-size, rotatable, computer generated males. These varied in height, body shape and flaccid penis size, with these aspects being examples of masculinity. [28] Female ratings of attractiveness for each male revealed that larger penises were associated with higher attractiveness ratings. [28] These relations between penis size and attractiveness have therefore led to frequently emphasized associations between masculinity and penis size in popular media. [32] This has led to a social bias existing around penis size with larger penises being preferred and having higher social status. This is reflected in the association between believed sexual prowess and male penis size and the social judgement of penis size in relation to 'manhood'. [32]
Like the penis, sperm competition has caused the human testicles to evolve in size through sexual selection . [27] This means that large testicles are an example of a sexually selected adaptation. The human testicles are moderately sized when compared to other animals such as gorillas and chimpanzees, placing somewhere midway. [33] Large testicles are advantageous in sperm competition due to their ability to produce a bigger ejaculation. [34] Research has shown that a positive correlation exists between the number of sperm ejaculated and testis size. [34] Larger testes have also been shown to predict higher sperm quality, including a larger number of motile sperm and higher sperm motility. [27]
Research has also demonstrated that evolutionary adaptations of testis size are dependent on the breeding system in which the species resides. [35] Single-male breeding systems - or monogamous societies - tend to show smaller testis size than do multi-male breeding systems or extra pair copulation (EPC) societies. Human males live largely in monogamous societies like gorillas, and therefore testis size is smaller in comparison to primates in multi-male breeding systems, such as chimpanzees. The reason for the differentiation in testis size is that in order to succeed reproductively in a multi-male breeding system, males must possess the ability to produce several fully fertilising ejaculations one after another. [27] This, however, is not the case in monogamous societies, where a reduction in fertilising ejaculations has no effect on reproductive success. [27] This is reflected in humans, as the sperm count in ejaculations is decreased if copulation occurs more than 3 to 5 times in a week. [36]

Ejaculate adjustment
One of the primary ways in which a male's ejaculate has evolved to overcome sperm competition is through the speed at which it travels. Ejaculates can travel up to 30-60 centimetres at a time which, when combined with its placement at the highest point of the vaginal tract, acts to increase a male's chances that an egg will be fertilised by his sperm (as opposed to a potential rival male's sperm), thus maximising his paternal certainty. [31]
In addition, males can - and do - adjust their ejaculates in response to sperm competition and according to the likely cost-benefits of mating with a particular female. [37] Research has focused primarily on two fundamental ways in which males go about achieving this: adjusting ejaculate size and adjusting ejaculate quality.

Ejaculate size
The number of sperm in any given ejaculate varies from one ejaculate to another. [38] This variation is hypothesised to be a male's attempt to eliminate, if not reduce, his sperm competition . A male will alter the number of sperm he inseminates into a female according to his perceived level of sperm competition, [26] inseminating a higher number of sperm if he suspects a greater level of competition from other males.
In support of ejaculate adjustment, research has shown that a male typically increases the amount he inseminates sperm into his partner after they have been separated for a period of time. [39] This is largely due to the fact that the less time a couple is able to spend together, the chances the female will be inseminated by another male increases, [40] hence greater sperm competition . Increasing the number of sperm a male inseminates into a female acts to get rid of any rival male's sperm that may be stored within the female, as a result of her potential extra-pair copulations (EPCs) during this separation. Through increasing the amount he inseminates his partner following separation, a male increases his chances of paternal certainty. This increase in the number of sperm a male produces in response to sperm competition is not observed for masturbatory ejaculates. [26]

Ejaculate quality
Males also adjust their ejaculates in response to sperm competition in terms of quality. Research has demonstrated, for example, that simply viewing a sexually explicit image of a female and two males (i.e. high sperm competition) can cause males to produce a greater amount of motile sperm than when viewing a sexually explicit image depicting exclusively three females (i.e. low sperm competition). [41] Much like increasing the number, increasing the quality of sperm that a male inseminates into a female enhances his paternal certainty when the threat of sperm competition is high.

Ejaculate adjustment and female quality
A female's phenotypic quality is a key determinant of a male's ejaculate investment. [42] Research has shown that males produce larger ejaculates containing better, more motile sperm when mating with a higher quality female. [37] This is largely to reduce a male's sperm competition , since more attractive females are likely to be approached and subsequently inseminated by more males than are less attractive females. Increasing investment in females with high quality phenotypic traits therefore acts to offset the ejaculate investment of others. [42] In addition, female attractiveness has been shown to be an indicator of reproductive quality, with greater value in higher quality females. [43] It is therefore beneficial for males to increase their ejaculate size and quality when mating with more attractive females, since this is likely to maximise their reproductive success also. Through assessing a female's phenotypic quality, males can judge whether or not to invest (or invest more) in a particular female, which will influence their subsequent ejaculate adjustment.

Semen displacement
The shape of the human penis is thought to have evolved as a result of sperm competition . [44] Semen displacement is an adaptation of the shape of the penis to draw foreign semen away from the cervix . This means that in the event of a rival male's sperm residing within the reproductive tract of a female, the human penis is able to displace the rival sperm, replacing it with his own. [45]
Semen displacement has two main benefits for a male. Firstly, by displacing a rival male's sperm , the risk of the rival sperm fertilising the egg is reduced, thus minimising the risk of sperm competition. [46] Secondly, the male replaces the rival's sperm with his own, therefore increasing his own chance of fertilising the egg and successfully reproducing with the female. However, males have to ensure they do not displace their own sperm. It is thought that the relatively quick loss of erection after ejaculation, penile hypersensitivity following ejaculation, and the shallower, slower thrusting of the male after ejaculation, prevents this from occurring. [47]
The coronal ridge is the part of the human penis thought to have evolved to allow for semen displacement. Research has studied how much semen is displaced by different shaped, artificial genitals. [48] This research showed that, when combined with thrusting, the coronal ridge of the penis is able to remove the seminal fluid of a rival male from within the female reproductive tract . It does this by forcing the semen under the frenulum of the coronal ridge, causing it to collect behind the coronal ridge shaft. [48] When model penises without a coronal ridge were used, less than half the artificial sperm was displaced, compared to penises with a coronal ridge. [48]
The presence of a coronal ridge alone, however, is not sufficient for effective semen displacement. It must be combined with adequate thrusting to be successful. It has been shown that the deeper the thrusting, the larger the semen displacement. No semen displacement occurs with shallow thrusting. [48] Some have therefore termed thrusting as a semen displacement behaviour. [49]
The behaviours associated with semen displacement, namely thrusting (number of thrusts and depth of thrusts), and duration of sexual intercourse , [49] have been shown to vary according to whether a male perceives the risk of partner infidelity to be high or not. Males and females report greater semen displacement behaviours following allegations of infidelity. In particular, following allegations of infidelity, males and females report deeper and quicker thrusting during sexual intercourse. [48]
Circumcision has been suggested to affect semen displacement. Circumcision causes the coronal ridge to be more pronounced, and it has been hypothesised that this could enhance semen displacement. [31] This is supported by females' reports of sexual intercourse with circumcised males. Females report that their vaginal secretions diminish as intercourse with a circumcised male progresses, and that circumcised males thrust more deeply. [50] It has therefore been suggested that the more pronounced coronal ridge, combined with the deeper thrusting, causes the vaginal secretions of the female to be displaced in the same way as rival sperm can be. [31]

Clinical significance

Disorders

Developmental disorders

Alleged and observed psychological disorders

Surgical replacement
The first successful penis allotransplant surgery was done in September 2005 in a military hospital in Guangzhou , China . [55] A man at 44 sustained an injury after an accident and his penis was severed; urination became difficult as his urethra was partly blocked. A recently brain-dead man, aged 23, was selected for the transplant. Despite atrophy of blood vessels and nerves, the arteries , veins , nerves and the corpora spongiosa were successfully matched. But, on 19 September (after two weeks), the surgery was reversed because of a severe psychological problem (rejection) by the recipient and his wife. [56]
In 2009, researchers Chen, Eberli, Yoo and Atala have produced bioengineered penises and implanted them on rabbits. [57] The animals were able to obtain erection and copulate , with 10 of 12 rabbits achieving ejaculation . This study shows that in the future it could be possible to produce artificial penises for replacement surgeries or phalloplasties .
In 2015 the world's first successful penis transplant took place in Cape Town , South Africa in a nine-hour operation performed by surgeons from Stellenbosch University and Tygerberg Hospital . The 21-year-old recipient, who had been sexually active, had lost his penis in a botched circumcision at 18. [58]
An Italian nonprofit known as Foregen is working on regrowing the foreskin, with the procedure potentially being partially surgical. [59]

Society and culture

Terminology
In many cultures, referring to the penis is taboo or vulgar, and a variety of slang words and euphemisms are used to talk about it. In English, these include 'member', ' dick ', 'cock', 'prick', 'dork', 'peter', 'pecker', 'putz', 'stick', 'rod', 'thing', 'banana', 'dong', 'schmuck' and 'schlong' and 'todger'. [60] Many of these (especially 'dick', 'cock', 'prick', 'dork', 'putz', and 'schmuck') are used as insults —though sometimes playfully--, meaning an unpleasant or unworthy person. [61] [62] Among these, historically, most commonly used euphemism for penis in English literature and society was 'member'. [63]

Alteration
The penis is sometimes pierced or decorated by other body art . Other than circumcision, genital alterations are almost universally elective and usually for the purpose of aesthetics or increased sensitivity. Piercings of the penis include the Prince Albert , the apadravya , the ampallang , the dydoe , and the frenum piercing . Foreskin restoration or stretching is a further form of body modification , as well as implants under the shaft of the penis.
Male to female transsexuals who undergo sex reassignment surgery , have their penis surgically modified into a neovagina . Female to male transsexuals may have a phalloplasty .
Other practices that alter the penis are also performed, although they are rare in Western societies without a diagnosed medical condition. Apart from a penectomy , perhaps the most radical of these is subincision , in which the urethra is split along the underside of the penis. Subincision originated among Australian Aborigines , although it is now done by some in the U.S. and Europe.
Penis removal is another form of alteration done to the penis.

Circumcision
The most common form of genital alteration is circumcision : removal of part or all of the foreskin for various cultural, religious, and more rarely medical reasons. For infant circumcision, modern devices such as the Gomco clamp , Plastibell , and Mogen clamp are available. [65]
With all modern devices the same basic procedure is followed. First, the amount of foreskin to be removed is estimated. The foreskin is then opened via the preputial orifice to reveal the glans underneath and ensured that it is normal. The inner lining of the foreskin (preputial epithelium) is then separated from its attachment to the glans. The device is then placed (this sometimes requires a dorsal slit) and remains there until blood flow has stopped. Finally, part, or all, of the foreskin is then removed.
Adult circumcisions are often performed without clamps and require 4 to 6 weeks of abstinence from masturbation or intercourse after the operation to allow the wound to heal. [66] In some African countries, male circumcision is often performed by non-medical personnel under non-sterile conditions. [67] After hospital circumcision, the foreskin may be used in biomedical research, [68] consumer skin-care products, [69] skin grafts, [70] [71] [72] or β-interferon -based drugs. [73] In parts of Africa, the foreskin may be dipped in brandy and eaten by the patient, eaten by the circumciser, or fed to animals. [74] According to Jewish law , after a Brit milah , the foreskin should be buried. [75]
There is controversy surrounding circumcision. Advocates of circumcision argue, for example, that it provides important health advantages that outweigh the risks, has no substantial effects on sexual function, has a low complication rate when carried out by an experienced physician, and is best performed during the neonatal period. [76] Opponents of circumcision argue, for example, that the practice has been and is still defended through the use of various myths; that it interferes with normal sexual function; that it is extremely painful; and that when performed on infants and children, it violates the individual's human rights . [77]
The American Medical Association stated in 1999: "Virtually all current policy statements from specialty societies and medical organizations do not recommend routine neonatal circumcision, and support the provision of accurate and unbiased information to parents to inform their choice." [78]
The World Health Organization (WHO; 2007), the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS; 2007), and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC; 2008) state that evidence indicates male circumcision significantly reduces the risk of HIV acquisition by men during penile-vaginal sex, but also state that circumcision only provides partial protection and should not replace other interventions to prevent transmission of HIV. [79] [80] In addition, some doctors have expressed concern over the policy and the data that supports it. [81] [82]

Object of worship
In many cultures and religions, the human penis is considered an object of worship. [83]

Additional images
WebPage index: 00061
Ejaculation
WebPage index: 00062
Music of Germany
Germany claims some of the renowned composers, producers and performers of the world. Germany is the largest music market in Europe, and third largest in the world. [1]
German Classical is one of the most performed in the world; German composers include some of the most accomplished and popular in history, among them Johann Sebastian Bach , Ludwig van Beethoven , Franz Schubert , Johannes Brahms , Robert Schumann and Richard Wagner . Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (also recognized as Austrian) was among the composers who created the field of German opera . One of the most famous film score composers is Hans Zimmer .
German popular music of the 20th and 21st century includes the movements of Neue Deutsche Welle ( Nena , Alphaville ), Disco ( Boney M. , Modern Talking , Dschinghis Khan , Milli Vanilli , Bad Boys Blue ), Metal / Rock ( Rammstein , Scorpions , Accept , Helloween ), Punk ( Die Ärzte , Böhse Onkelz , Nina Hagen , Die Toten Hosen ), Pop rock ( Herbert Grönemeyer and Indie ( Tocotronic ). Famous female singers were Marlene Dietrich and Hildegard Knef . German Electronic music gained global influence, with Kraftwerk being a pioneer group in this genre. [2] The Electro and Techno scene being internationally popular with Paul van Dyk and Scooter .
Germany hosts many large rock music festivals annually. The Rock am Ring festival and the Wacken Open Air are among the largest in the world. Since about 1990 the new-old German capital Berlin has developed a diverse music and entertainment industry.

Minnesingers and Meistersingers
The beginning of what is now considered German music could be traced back to the 12th-century compositions of mystic abbess Hildegard of Bingen , who wrote a variety of hymns and other kinds of Christian music .
After Latin-language religious music had dominated for centuries, in the 12th century to the 14th centuries, minnesingers ( love poets ), singing in German, spread across Germany. Minnesingers were aristocrats traveling from court to court who had become musicians, and their work left behind a vast body of literature, Minnelieder . The following two centuries saw the minnesingers replaced by middle-class meistersingers , who were often master craftsmen in their main profession, whose music ( meistergesang ) was much more formalized and rule-based than that of the minnesingers. Minnesingers and meistersingers could be considered parallels of French troubadours and trouvère .
Among the minnesingers, Hermann, a monk from Salzburg , deserves special note. He incorporated folk styles from the Alpine regions in his compositions. He made some primitive forays into polyphony as well. Walther von der Vogelweide and Reinmar von Hagenau are probably the most famous minnesingers from this period.

Classical music
Germans have played a leading role in the development of classical music. Many of the best classical musicians such as Bach, Händel, Haydn, Beethoven, Schubert, Mozart, Schumann, Brahms, Wagner, Mahler, or Schoenberg (a lineage labeled the "German Stem" by Igor Stravinsky ) were German. At the beginning of the 15th century, German classical music was revolutionized by Oswald von Wolkenstein , who travelled across Europe learning about classical traditions, spending time in countries like France and Italy. He brought back some techniques and styles to his homeland, and within a hundred years, Germany had begun producing composers renowned across the continent. Among the first of these composers was the organist Conrad Paumann . The largest summer festival for classical music in Germany is the Schleswig-Holstein Musik Festival .

Chorale
Beginning in the 16th century, polyphony , or the intertwining of multiple melodies , arrived in Germany. Protestant chorales predominated; in contrast to Catholic music, chorale was vibrant and energetic. Composers included Dieterich Buxtehude , Heinrich Schütz and Martin Luther , leader of the Protestant Reformation . Luther happened to accompany his sung hymns with a lute, later recreated as the waldzither that became a national instrument of Germany in the 20th century. [3]

Opera
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart 's Die Zauberflöte (1791) is usually said to be the beginning of German-language opera . An earlier starting date for German opera, however, could be Heinrich Schütz 's Dafne from 1627. Schütz is said to be the first great German composer before Johann Sebastian Bach , and was a major figure in 17th-century music.
In the 19th century, two figures were paramount in German opera: Carl Maria von Weber and Richard Wagner . Wagner introduced devices like the leitmotiv , a musical theme which recurs for important characters or ideas. Wagner (and Weber) based his operas of German history and folklore, most importantly including the Ring of the Nibelung (1874). Into the 20th century, opera composers included Richard Strauss ( Der Rosenkavalier ) and Engelbert Humperdinck , who wrote operas meant for young audiences. Across the border in Austria, Arnold Schoenberg innovated a form of twelve-tone music that used rhythm and dissonance instead of traditional melodies and harmonies, while Kurt Weill and Bertolt Brecht collaborated on some of the great works of German theater, including Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny and The Three-Penny Opera .
Following the war, German composers like Karlheinz Stockhausen and Hans Werner Henze began experimenting electronic sounds in classical music.
Germany is also very well known for its many subsidised opera houses , such as Semperoper , Munich State Theatre and the Bayreuth Festspielhaus .

Baroque period
Baroque music, which was the first music to use tonality in the modern sense, is also known for its ornamentation and artistic use of counterpoint . It originated in Northern Italy at the end of the 16th century, and the style migrated quickly to Germany, which was one of the most active centers of early Baroque music. Early German Baroque composers included Heinrich Schütz , Michael Praetorius , Johann Schein , and Samuel Scheidt . The culmination of the Baroque era was undoubtedly in the work of Johann Sebastian Bach in the first half of the 18th century. Bach established German styles through his skill in counterpoint , harmonic and motivic organisation, and adapted rhythms, forms, and textures from Italy and France. Bach wrote numerous Baroque works, including preludes , cantatas , fugues , concertos for harpsichord, violin and wind, orchestral suites, the Brandenburg Concertos , St Matthew Passion , St John Passion and the Christmas Oratorio . Bach's contemporaries included Georg Philipp Telemann and Georg Friedrich Händel , the latter best known for the oratorio Messiah .

Classical era
By the middle of the 18th century, the cities of Vienna , Dresden , Berlin and Mannheim had become the center for orchestral music. The Esterházy princes of Vienna, for example, were the patrons of Joseph Haydn , an Austrian who invented the classic format of the string quartet , symphony and sonata . Later that century, Vienna's Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart emerged, mixing German and Italian traditions into his own style. Mozart was a prolific and influential composer who composed over 600 works , many acknowledged as pinnacles of symphonic , concertante , chamber , operatic , and choral music. He is among the most popular of classical composers, and his influence on subsequent Western art music is profound; Ludwig van Beethoven composed his own early works in the shadow of Mozart.

Romantic era
The following century saw two major German composers come to fame early— Ludwig van Beethoven and Franz Schubert . Beethoven, a student of Haydn's in Vienna, used unusually daring harmonies and rhythm and composed numerous pieces for piano , violin , symphonies , chamber music , string quartets and an opera . Schubert created a field of artistic, romantic poetry and music called lied ; his lieder cycles included Die schöne Müllerin and Winterreise . [4]
Franz Schubert was extremely prolific during his lifetime. His output consists of over six hundred secular vocal works (mainly Lieder ), seven complete symphonies , sacred music, operas , incidental music and a large body of chamber and piano music. He is ranked among the greatest composers of the late Classical era and early Romantic era.
Early in the 19th century, a composer by the name of Richard Wagner was born. He was a "Musician of the Future" who disliked the strict traditionalist styles of music. He is credited with developing leitmotivs which were simple recurring themes found in his operas.
Carl Maria von Weber was a composer , conductor , pianist , guitarist [5] and critic , one of the first significant composers of the Romantic school. His operas Der Freischütz , Euryanthe and Oberon greatly influenced the development of the Romantic opera in Germany. Felix Mendelssohn was a composer, pianist, organist and conductor of the early Romantic period. He was particularly well received in Britain as a composer, conductor and soloist. He wrote symphonies , concerti , oratorios , piano music and chamber music . Robert Schumann was a composer and influential music critic. He is widely regarded as one of the greatest composers of the Romantic era. Schumann's published compositions were written exclusively for the piano until 1840; he later composed works for piano and orchestra; many Lieder (songs for voice and piano); four symphonies ; an opera; and other orchestral, choral , and chamber works. Johannes Brahms honored the music pioneered by Mozart and Beethoven and advanced his music into a Romantic idiom , in the process creating bold new approaches to harmony and melody.
The later 19th century saw Vienna continue its elevated position in European classical music, as well as a burst of popularity with Viennese waltzes . These were composed by people like Johann Strauss the Younger . Richard Strauss was a leading composer of the late Romantic and early modern eras. He is known for his operas , which include Der Rosenkavalier and Salome ; his lieder , especially his Four Last Songs ; and his tone poems . Strauss, along with Gustav Mahler , represents the late flowering of German Romanticism after Richard Wagner , in which pioneering subtleties of orchestration are combined with an advanced harmonic style.

20th century
The first half of 20th century saw a split between German and Austrian music. In Vienna, Arnold Schoenberg and his pupils Alban Berg and Anton Webern moved along an increasingly avant-garde path, pioneering atonal music in 1909 and twelve-tone music in 1923. Meanwhile, composers in Berlin took a more populist route, from the cabaret-like socialist operas of Kurt Weill to the Gebrauchsmusik of Paul Hindemith . In Munich there was also Carl Orff , who was influenced by the French Impressionist composer Claude Debussy . He began to use colorful, unusual combinations of instruments in his orchestration . His most popular work is Carmina Burana .
Many composers emigrated to the United States when the Nazi Party came to power, including Schoenberg, Hindemith, and Erich Korngold . During this period, the Nazi Party embarked on a campaign to rid Germany of so-called degenerate art , which became a catch-all phrase that included music with any link to Jews, Communists, jazz, and anything else thought to be dangerous. Some figures such as Karl Amadeus Hartmann remained defiantly in Germany during the years of Nazi dominance, continually watchful of how their output might be interpreted by the authorities.
After the dissolution of the Third Reich , musicians were also subjected to the Allied policy of denazification . But here, the supposed non-political nature of music was able to excuse many, including Wilhelm Furtwängler and Herbert von Karajan (who had actually joined the Nazi Party in 1933). They both claimed to have concentrated mainly on music and to have ignored politics, but also to have conducted pieces in ways that were meant to be "gestures of defiance." [6]
In West Germany in the second half of the 20th century, German and Austrian music was largely dominated by the avant-garde. In the 60s and 70s, the Darmstadt New Music Summer School was a major center of European modernism; German composers such as Karlheinz Stockhausen and Hans Werner Henze and non-German ones such as Pierre Boulez and Luciano Berio all studied there. In contrast, composers in East Germany were advised to avoid the avant-garde and to compose music in keeping with the tenets of Socialist Realism . [7] Music written in this style was supposed to advance party politics as well as be more accessible to all. [8] Hanns Eisler and Ernst Hermann Meyer were among the most famous of the first generation of GDR composers.
More recently, composers such as Helmut Lachenmann and Olga Neuwirth have extensively explored the possibilities of extended techniques . Hans Werner Henze largely dissociated himself from the Darmstadt school in favour of a more lyrical approach, and remains perhaps Germany's most lauded contemporary composer. Although he had lived outside the country since the 1950s and until his death in 2012, he remained influenced by the Germanic musical tradition.

Folk music
Germany has many unique regions with their own folk traditions of music and dance. Much of the 20th century saw German culture appropriated for the ruling powers (who fought "foreign" music at the same time).
In both East and West Germany, folk songs called "volkslieder" were taught to children; these were popular, sunny and optimistic, and had little relation to authentic German folk traditions. Inspired by American and English roots revivals , Germany underwent many of the same changes following the 1968 student revolution in West Germany, and new songs, featuring political activism and realistic joy, sadness and passion, were written and performed on the burgeoning folk scene. In East Germany, the same process did not begin until the mid-70s, where some folk musicians began incorporating revolutionary ideas in coded songs.
Popular folk songs included emigration songs from the 19th century, work songs and songs of apprentices, as well as democracy-oriented folk songs collected in the 1950s by Wolfgang Steinitz . Beginning in 1970, the Festival des politischen Liedes , an East German festival focusing on political songs, was held annually and organized (until 1980) by the FDJ (East German youth association). Musicians from up to thirty countries would participate, and, for many East Germans, it was the only exposure possible to foreign music. Among foreign musicians at the festival, some were quite renowned, including Inti-Illimani ( Chile ), Billy Bragg (England), Dick Gaughan ( Scotland ), Mercedes Sosa ( Argentina ) and Pete Seeger (United States), while German performers included, from both East and West, Oktoberklub, Wacholder and Hannes Wader .
Oom-pah is a kind of music played by the brass bands ; it is associated with beer halls .

Bavaria and Swabia
Bavarian folk music is likely the most well-known outside of Germany. Yodeling and schuhplattler dancers are among the stereotyped images of German folk life, though these are only found today in the southernmost areas, and to cater to tourists. Bavarian folk music has played a role in the Alpine New Wave , and produced several pioneering world music groups that fuse traditional Bavarian sounds with foreign styles.
It was around the turn of the 20th century, across Europe and especially in Bavaria, many people became concerned about a loss of cultural traditions. This idea was connected to the Heimatschutz movement, which sought to protect regional identities and boundaries. What is considered Bavarian folk music in modern Germany is not the same as what Bavarian folk music was in the early 20th century; like any kind of folk or popular music, styles and traditions have evolved over time, giving birth to new forms of music.
The popularity of the Volkssänger ( people's singer ) in Bavaria began in the 1880s, and continued in earnest until the 1920s. Shows consisting of duets, ensemble songs, humor and parodies were popular, but the format began changing significantly following World War I. Bally Prell , the "Beauty Queen of Schneizlreuth ", was emblematic of this change. She was an attractive tenor who sang lieder , chanson and opera and operetta .
Swabian folk music is most popularly represented by acts like Saiten Fell and Firlefanz and the singer-songwriter (and player of the hurdy-gurdy and guitar ) Thomas Felder.

Christmas carols
Some Christmas carols familiar in English are translations of German Christmas songs ( Weihnachtslieder ). Pastoral Weihnachtslieder are sometimes called hirtenlieder ("shepherd songs"). Three well-known examples are " O Christmas Tree " (" O Tannenbaum "), from a German folksong arranged by Ernst Anschütz ; " Silent Night " (" Stille Nacht, heilige Nacht "), by the Austrians Franz Xaver Gruber and Joseph Mohr ; and " Still, Still, Still ", an Austrian folksong also from the Salzburg region, based on an 1819 melody by Süss, with the original words, slightly changed over time and location, by G. Götsch. [9]

Early popular music
Between World War I and World War II, German music branched out to form new, more liberal and independent styles.

Kabarett
The first form of German pop music is said to be cabaret , which arose during the Weimar Republic in the 1920s as the sensual music of late-night clubs. Marlene Dietrich and Margo Lion were among the most famous performers of the period, and became associated with both humorous satire and liberal ideas.

Swing Movement
The strict regimentation of youth culture in Nazi Germany through the Hitler Youth led to the emergence of several underground protest movements, through which adolescents were able better to exert their independence.
One of these consisted mainly of upper middle class youths, who based their protest on their musical preferences, rejecting the völkisch music propagated by the Party in place of American jazz forms, especially Swing . While musical preferences are often a feature of youthful rebellion—as the history of rock and roll shows—jazz and especially Swing were particularly offensive to the Nazi hierarchy: not only did they promote sexual permissiveness, but they were also associated with the American enemy and worse, with the African race they considered inferior. On the other hand, Joseph Goebbels assembled some of the now jobless musicians from Germany and conquered countries into a big band called Charlie and His Orchestra .

Popular music from West Germany
After World War II, German pop music was greatly influenced by music from USA and Great Britain. Apart from Schlager and Liedermacher, it is necessary to distinguish between pop music in West Germany and pop music in East Germany which developed in different directions. Pop music from West Germany was often heard in East Germany, had more variety and is still present today, while East German music has had little influence.
In West Germany, English-language pop music became more and more important, and today most songs on the radio are English. Nevertheless, there is great diversity in German language pop music. There is also original English-language pop music from Germany, some having international success (for instance the Scorpions and James Last ), but little with enduring broad success in Germany itself. There was very little English pop music from East Germany.
Germany has also had a thriving English-language pop scene since the end of the war, with several European and American acts topping the charts. However, Germans and German-oriented musicians have been successful as well. In the 1990s and the first decade of the 21st century such European pop acts were popular as well as artists like Sarah Connor , No Angels and Monroseall who performed various types of mainstream pop in English. Many of these acts have had success all over Europe and Asia.

Schlager and Volksmusik
Schlager is a kind of vocal pop music, frequently in the form of sentimental ballads sung in German, popularized by singers such as Gitte Hænning and Rex Gildo in the 1960s, though not without a wide range within the style (Modern Schlager, Schlager-Gold, Volksmusik resp. "volkstümlicher Schlager" [ clarification needed ] ). Schlager /Volksmusik [ clarification needed ] is strictly separated from international pop music and is only played on special format radio stations (sometimes mixed with international Oldies ).
An important part of Schlager is volkstümliche Musik , a Schlager-like interpretation of traditional German folk themes that is very popular in German speaking countries, especially among the older generation.
Schlager has a wide variety, and the artists with many different styles for example Heino , Katja Ebstein , Wolfgang Petry , Guildo Horn , Roland Kaiser , Helene Fischer and many others.

Liedermacher
Liedermacher (Songwriter) has sophisticated lyrics and is sung with minimal instrumentation, for instance only with acoustic guitar. Some songs are very political in nature. This is related to American Folk/ Americana and French Chanson styles.
Famous West German Liedermacher are Reinhard Mey , Klaus Hoffmann , Hannes Wader and Konstantin Wecker . A famous East German Liedermacher was Wolf Biermann . Herman van Veen from the Netherlands was also very popular in Germany. Several Liedermacher artists also record special albums for children.

Rock
The US military radio station American Forces Network (AFN) had a great impact on German postwar culture, starting with AFN Munich in July 1945, which was formative for the further development of German rock and jazz culture. Bill Ramsey , a senior producer at AFN Frankfurt in 1953 who came from Ohio , later became famous as a jazz and Schlager singer in Germany (while remaining almost unknown in the US).
Prior to the late 1960s however, rock music in Germany was a negligible part of the schlager genre covered by interpreters such as Peter Kraus and Ted Herold , who played rock 'n' roll standards by Little Richard or Bill Haley, sometimes translated into German.
Genuine German rock first appeared around 1968, just as the hippie countercultural explosion was peaking in the US and UK. At the time, the German musical avant-garde had been experimenting with electronic music for more than a decade, and the first German rock bands fused psychedelic rock from abroad with electronic sounds. The next few years saw the formation of a group of bands that came to be known as Krautrock or Kosmische Musik groups; these included Amon Düül , who later became the world music pioneers Dissidenten , Tangerine Dream , Popol Vuh , Can , Neu! and Faust .

Neue Deutsche Welle
Neue Deutsche Welle (NDW) is an outgrowth of British punk rock and new wave which appeared in the mid-to late 1970s. It was arguably the first successful unique German form of Pop music, but was limited in its stylistic devices (funny lyrics and surreal composition and production). Though it was a huge success in Germany itself in the 1980s, this was not long-lasting mostly due to over-commercialization. Some artists became famous internationally like Nena , Falco (from Austria) and Joachim Witt .

Popular artists
In the 1980s and 1990s most German-language popular music was sung by male solo artists. Very popular singers are Udo Jürgens , Udo Lindenberg , Herbert Grönemeyer , Marius Müller-Westernhagen , Peter Maffay and BAP .
Udo Jürgens has maintained a large following since the late 60s and still sold out entire soccer stadiums during concerts in 2012. Grönemeyer also has managed to maintain his success up to today. Maffay developed from Schlager to rock and has a large but delimited fan base—he is seldom played on the radio. BAP, who sing in the hard-to-understand dialect of their hometown, Cologne, enjoy success nationwide.

Hamburger Schule
Hamburger Schule (School of Hamburg) is an underground music-movement that started in the late 1980s and was still active till around the mid-1990s. It has similar traditions as Neue Deutsche Welle and mixed all that with punk , grunge and experimental pop music . Hamburger Schule has been an important part of Germany's youth and gave the term "Pop" a new definition, as now it was "ok" (or "cool") to sing in the German language. Hamburger Schule also includes intellectual lyrics with postmodern theories and social criticism. Important artists are Blumfeld , Die Sterne and Tocotronic .

Popular music from East Germany

Ostrock
By the early 1970s, experimental West German rock styles had crossed the border into East Germany and influenced the creation of an East German rock movement referred to as Ostrock . On the other side of the Wall , these bands tended to be stylistically more conservative than in the West, to have more reserved engineering, and often to include more classical and traditional structures (such as those developed by Kurt Weill and Bertolt Brecht in their 1920s Berlin theater songs). These groups often featured poetic lyrics loaded with indirect double-meanings and deeply philosophical challenges to the status quo. As such, they were a style of Krautrock . The best-known of these bands were The Puhdys , Karat , City , Stern-Combo Meißen and Silly
Only a few individual songs, such as "Am Fenster" by City and "Über sieben Brücken mußt Du geh'n" by Karat , found wide popularity outside the GDR . There was also a wide diversity of underground bands. Out of this scene later grew the internationally successful band Rammstein (see Neue Deutsche Härte below).

Popular music from reunified Germany

Modern popular music
In the 1990s, German-language groups had only limited popularity, and only a few artists managed to be played on the radio, for example Rammstein , Rosenstolz or Die Prinzen . Rammstein , is a German Industrial metal band who were nominated for Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance twice.
By 2000s the German band, Wir sind Helden , was a success with a new musical self-confidence. The Notwist , an indie rock band had great critical and commercial success for their album Neon Golden . This success was followed by several other bands and a broader acceptance of existing German-language recording artists, such as:

Euro Disco

Synthpop and Eurodance
In the late 1980s (prior to reunification ) and the 1990s, Synthpop and Eurodance became popular throughout Germany. Often, different styles were mixed in between these to attract a broad variety of audiences. Successful representatives of these styles were:

Reggae, dancehall, ska
Popular bands and performers include Culcha Candela , Dr. Ring-Ding , Gentleman , Hans Söllner , Jan Delay , Mamadee , Milky Chance , Oceana , Patrice , Peter Fox and Seeed .

R&B, soul, funk
Notable R&B , Soul and Funk artists include Ayọ , Cassandra Steen , Denyo , Miss Platnum , Nadja Benaissa , Nneka , Söhne Mannheims and Xavier Naidoo .

Hip hop
Hip hop in Germany arrived in the early 1980s, and graffiti and breakdancing became well-known quickly. German hip hop "started out as a transnational youth subculture. [10] [11] The commercial success started in 1992 with the hit "Die Da" from Die Fantastischen Vier from Stuttgart . The Rödelheim Hartreim Projekt tried to establish a "gangster" rap. An early influential group was Advanced Chemistry including Torch . They sparked an interest in speaking out for the immigrants and used rap as a way to defend themselves. [12] [13] Fettes Brot from Hamburg, has been successful since their beginning. They sing about funny topics, such as infidelity and boasting about their prowess with women. Whereas hip hop had a peak of success in the early first decade of the 21st century, gangster rap became a controversial part of German music and youth culture just as late as 2004 with Aggro Berlin . Some of Germany's hip hop artists are: Kool Savas , Sido , Samy Deluxe , Bushido , Marteria , Eko Fresh and Afrob .

Punk
Punk music in Germany has a long and diverse history. When bands like the Sex Pistols and The Clash became popular in West Germany, a number of Punk bands were formed, which led to the creation a German punk scene. Among the first wave of bands were Male, from Düsseldorf , founded in 1976, PVC, from West Berlin , and Big Balls and the Great White Idiot , from Hamburg . Early German punk groups were heavily influenced by UK bands, often writing their lyrics in English. The main difference is that German punk bands hadn't yet become political.
Beginning in the late 1970s and early 1980s there were new movements within the German punk scene, led by labels like ZickZack Records, from Hamburg. It was during this period that the term Neue Deutsche Welle (New German Wave) was first coined by Alfred Hilsberg. Many of these bands played experimental post-punk , often using synthesizers and computers. Among them were The Nina Hagen Band , as well as Fehlfarben and Abwärts , from Hamburg. Both are still active, though they've changed their style several times. In response to these developments, some bands played a more aggressive style of punk rock, because they didn't consider the experimental bands Punk.
There are few German language bands who managed to be successful for a longer period. The best known are the punk bands Die Ärzte and Die Toten Hosen . Both were formed in the early 1980s but have very different approaches to punk. As successful as those two bands in number of sales and number one albums but much lesser accepted by the public and normally not played by German media but with a huge fan community were Böhse Onkelz .
Digital hardcore band Atari Teenage Riot got very famous especially in the United Kingdom and Japan as well as in German autonomist circles.

Heavy metal
Germany has a long and strong history with heavy metal . It is considered by many [ who? ] to be one of Europe's heaviest contributors to the scene. The genre is quite popular and mainstream within the country. Early hard rock /heavy metal was brought to German soil with the success of Scorpions and Accept . Germany is today known for its large metal festivals including Wacken Open Air and Summer Breeze Open Air .
Germany has a strong tradition of speed metal and power metal . Early speed metal bands include Running Wild , Grave Digger , Rage , and to some extent Warlock . The European style of power metal, born in Germany, was popularized by German bands like Blind Guardian , Helloween , and Gamma Ray , and gained international recognition. In many cases these bands initially started out playing speed metal, but later switched to power metal.
Three local variants of metal subgenres exist in Germany. The Teutonic thrash metal scene is represented by such groups as Exumer , Violent Force, Sodom , Kreator , Protector, Tankard and Destruction . Medieval metal , a branch of folk metal , incorporates German traditional music with industrial metal . It includes Subway to Sally , In Extremo , Corvus Corax , Wolgemut and Schandmaul (the last is considered folk rock in Germany). Another variant, Neue Deutsche Härte , a form of industrial metal , is detailed below.
Bands from genres of death metal , deathcore , metalcore , doom metal , black metal and a cappella metal are: Absurd , Agathodaimon , Atrocity , Bethlehem , Caliban , Crematory , Dark Fortress , Deadlock , Debauchery , Desaster , Die Apokalyptischen Reiter , Disbelief , Endstille , Eskimo Callboy , Equilibrium , Falkenbach Finsterforst , Fleshcrawl , Golem , Grailknights , Heaven Shall Burn , Katharsis , Leaves' Eyes , Moonblood , Morgoth , Nargaroth , Neaera , Necrophagist , Nocte Obducta , Obscura , The Ocean , The Ruins of Beverast , Secrets of the Moon , Suidakra , Van Canto , We Butter The Bread With Butter
Neue Deutsche Härte (engl. "New German Hardness") is a term for extremely popular German wave of Industrial metal . It combines the common sound of metal with electronic samples and is mostly sung with German lyrics. It draws its audience from both the metalheads and goth scene. Some bands like Rammstein or Oomph! have gained mainstream success. Other famous artists include Stahlhammer (from Austria), Megaherz , Unheilig , Eisbrecher , Tanzwut , and Joachim Witt .
Medieval metal or medieval rock is a subgenre of folk metal that blends hard rock or heavy metal music with medieval folk music. Medieval metal is mostly restricted to Germany where it is known as Mittelalter-Metal or Mittelalter-Rock. The genre emerged from the middle of the 1990s with contributions from Subway to Sally , In Extremo , Schandmaul and Wolgemut . The style is characterised by the prominent use of a wide variety of traditional folk and medieval instruments.

Goth
Germany is the home of a vivid Goth scene, and has a large scene of musicians from the spectrum who are typically known as Goth musicians . Most notable artists for example are Lacrimosa , Lacrimas Profundere , Xmal Deutschland , Das Ich , Deine Lakaien , Illuminate , Untoten , Erben der Schöpfung (from Liechtenstein), No More , Girls Under Glass or Project Pitchfork . Leipzig is home of the largest event of this subculture worldwide called the Wave-Gotik-Treffen , regularly hosting 25,000 attendants. The WGT is closely followed by the annual M'era Luna festival in Hildesheim .
Neue Deutsche Todeskunst (engl. "New German Death Art") is a German death-obsessed Dark Wave style of music that blends Death rock , German Rock , Gothic Rock , and neo-classical music with German philosophical texts and a theatrical stage show. It is restricted to Germany where it emerged in the early 1990s from bands such as Das Ich , Lacrimosa , Relatives Menschsein and Goethes Erben . Many NDT artists are known for their use of Classical Latin .

Electronic music and techno
Germany has the largest electronic music scene in the world. The band Kraftwerk was one of the first bands in the world to make music entirely on electronic equipment, and the band Tangerine Dream is often credited as being among the originators and primary influences of the "Berlin School" of electronic music, which would later influence trance music . Some other bands like Liaisons Dangereuses , Tyske Ludder , Deutsch Amerikanische Freundschaft and Die Krupps created a style later called Electronic body music . Also well-known are Scooter . Recently a few electronica artists have become successful in the mainstream, such as Monika Kruse , Marusha , Blümchen and MIA. Artists on the cutting edge of German-language techno include Klee . Both Einstürzende Neubauten (collapsing new buildings, translated literally) and KMFDM (no pity for the majority, translated literally) are considered by many industrial and electronic music fans as the godfathers of their genre. Their sounds developed the modern styles of groups such as NIN, Marilyn Manson, Rammstein, and New Order. Einstürzende Neubauten can be recognized by their Prince-esque logo, which has been subliminally fused into several mainstream American movies (such as a tattoo in the movie Bug, directed by William Friedkin, starring Harry Connick Jr.). KMFDM has released many songs in English, making them more accessible to their huge American and worldwide audience. Since 2006 producer and DJ Paul Kalkbrenner gained popularity in Germany. He nowadays is one of the most famous performers of electronic music.
Trance music is a style of electronic music that originated in Germany in the very late 1980s and early 1990s, upon German unification. Following the development of trance music in Germany, many Trance genres stemmed from the original trance music and most trance genres developed in Germany, most notably " Anthem trance " or also called "uplifting" or "epic" trance, progressive trance , and " Ambient trance" .
One of the most notable event referring to this scene was the Love Parade festival with up to 1.5 million participants from all over the world.

Jazz

World music
Germany became a hotbed for klezmer music in the 1980s, and has produced many of the most popular bands in the field since then. Controversially, many or most of the German klezmer bands are not, in fact, Jewish.
Germany was the starting point of the international career of Cuban-born singer & songwriter Addys Mercedes .

Notes
WebPage index: 00063
Internet service provider
An Internet service provider ( ISP ) is an organization that provides services accessing and using the Internet . Internet service providers may be organized in various forms, such as commercial, community-owned , non-profit , or otherwise privately owned .
Internet services typically provided by ISPs include Internet access , Internet transit , domain name registration, web hosting , Usenet service and colocation .

History
The Internet was developed as a network between government research laboratories and participating departments of universities. By the late 1980s, a process was set in place towards public, commercial use of the Internet. The remaining restrictions were removed by 1995, 4 years after the introduction of the World Wide Web . [1]
In 1989, the first ISPs were established in Australia [2] and the United States. In Brookline, Massachusetts, The World became the first commercial ISP in the US. Its first customer was served in November 1989. [3]
On 23 April 2014, the U.S. Federal Communications Commission (FCC) was reported to be considering a new rule that will permit ISPs to offer content providers a faster track to send content, thus reversing their earlier net neutrality position. [4] [5] [6] A possible solution to net neutrality concerns may be municipal broadband , according to Professor Susan Crawford , a legal and technology expert at Harvard Law School . [7] On 15 May 2014, the FCC decided to consider two options regarding Internet services: first, permit fast and slow broadband lanes, thereby compromising net neutrality; and second, reclassify broadband as a telecommunication service, thereby preserving net neutrality. [8] [9] On 10 November 2014, President Barack Obama recommended that the FCC reclassify broadband Internet service as a telecommunications service in order to preserve net neutrality . [10] [11] [12] On 16 January 2015, Republicans presented legislation, in the form of a U.S. Congress H.R. discussion draft bill , that makes concessions to net neutrality but prohibits the FCC from accomplishing the goal or enacting any further regulation affecting Internet service providers. [13] [14] On 31 January 2015, AP News reported that the FCC will present the notion of applying ("with some caveats") Title II (common carrier) of the Communications Act of 1934 to the internet in a vote expected on 26 February 2015. [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] Adoption of this notion would reclassify internet service from one of information to one of the telecommunications [20] and, according to Tom Wheeler , chairman of the FCC, ensure net neutrality . [21] [22] The FCC is expected to enforce net neutrality in its vote, according to the New York Times . [23] [24]
On 26 February 2015, the FCC ruled in favor of net neutrality by adopting Title II (common carrier) of the Communications Act of 1934 and Section 706 in the Telecommunications Act of 1996 to the Internet. [25] [26] [27] The FCC Chairman, Tom Wheeler , commented, "This is no more a plan to regulate the Internet than the First Amendment is a plan to regulate free speech. They both stand for the same concept." [28]
On 12 March 2015, the FCC released the specific details of the net neutrality rules. [29] [30] [31] On 13 April 2015, the FCC published the final rule on its new " Net Neutrality " regulations. [32] [33]

Classifications

Access providers ISP
ISPs provide Internet access , employing a range of technologies to connect users to their network. [34] Available technologies have ranged from computer modems with acoustic couplers to telephone lines, to television cable (CATV), wireless Ethernet (wi-fi), and fiber optics.
For users and small businesses, traditional options include copper wires to provide dial-up , DSL, typically asymmetric digital subscriber line (ADSL), cable modem or Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) (typically basic rate interface ). Using fiber-optics to end users is called Fiber To The Home or similar names. [35]
For customers with more demanding requirements (such as medium-to-large businesses, or other ISPs) can use higher-speed DSL (such as single-pair high-speed digital subscriber line ), Ethernet , metropolitan Ethernet , gigabit Ethernet , Frame Relay , ISDN Primary Rate Interface , ATM (Asynchronous Transfer Mode) and synchronous optical networking (SONET). [36]
Wireless access is another option, including cellular and satellite Internet access .

Mailbox providers
A mailbox provider is an organization that provides services for hosting electronic mail domains with access to storage for mail boxes. It provides email servers to send, receive, accept, and store email for end users or other organizations.
Many mailbox providers are also access providers, [37] while others are not (e.g., Yahoo! Mail , Outlook.com , Gmail , AOL Mail , Po box ). The definition given in RFC 6650 covers email hosting services , as well as the relevant department of companies, universities, organizations, groups, and individuals that manage their mail servers themselves. The task is typically accomplished by implementing Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) and possibly providing access to messages through Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP), the Post Office Protocol , Webmail , or a proprietary protocol. [38]

Hosting ISPs
Internet hosting services provide email, web-hosting, or online storage services. Other services include virtual server , cloud services, or physical server operation.

Transit ISPs
Just as their customers pay them for Internet access, ISPs themselves pay upstream ISPs for Internet access. An upstream ISP usually has a larger network than the contracting ISP or is able to provide the contracting ISP with access to parts of the Internet the contracting ISP by itself has no access to. [39]
In the simplest case, a single connection is established to an upstream ISP and is used to transmit data to or from areas of the Internet beyond the home network; this mode of interconnection is often cascaded multiple times until reaching a tier 1 carrier . In reality, the situation is often more complex. ISPs with more than one point of presence (PoP) may have separate connections to an upstream ISP at multiple PoPs, or they may be customers of multiple upstream ISPs and may have connections to each one of them at one or more point of presence. [40] Transit ISPs provide large amounts of bandwidth for connecting hosting ISPs and access ISPs. [41]

Virtual ISPs
A virtual ISP (VISP) is an operation that purchases services from another ISP, sometimes called a wholesale ISP in this context, [42] which allow the VISP's customers to access the Internet using services and infrastructure owned and operated by the wholesale ISP. VISPs resemble mobile virtual network operators and competitive local exchange carriers for voice communications.

Free ISPs
Free ISPs are Internet service providers that provide service free of charge. Many free ISPs display advertisements while the user is connected; like commercial television , in a sense they are selling the user's attention to the advertiser. Other free ISPs, sometimes called freenets , are run on a nonprofit basis, usually with volunteer staff. [ citation needed ]

Wireless ISP
A wireless Internet service provider (WISP) is an Internet service provider with a network based on wireless networking. Technology may include commonplace Wi-Fi wireless mesh networking, or proprietary equipment designed to operate over open 900 MHz, 2.4 GHz, 4.9, 5.2, 5.4, 5.7, and 5.8 GHz bands or licensed frequencies such as 2.5 GHz (EBS/BRS), 3.65 GHz (NN) and in the UHF band (including the MMDS frequency band) and LMDS. [ citation needed ]

Peering
ISPs may engage in peering , where multiple ISPs interconnect at peering points or Internet exchange points (IXs), allowing routing of data between each network, without charging one another for the data transmitted—data that would otherwise have passed through a third upstream ISP, incurring charges from the upstream ISP. [39]
ISPs requiring no upstream and having only customers (end customers and/or peer ISPs) are called Tier 1 ISPs .
Network hardware, software and specifications, as well as the expertise of network management personnel are important in ensuring that data follows the most efficient route, and upstream connections work reliably. A tradeoff between cost and efficiency is possible. [ citation needed ]

Law enforcement and intelligence assistance
Internet service providers in many countries are legally required (e.g., via Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA) in the U.S.) to allow law enforcement agencies to monitor some or all of the information transmitted by the ISP, or even store the browsing history of users to allow government access if needed (e.g. via the Investigatory Powers Act 2016 in the United Kingdom ). Furthermore, in some countries ISPs are subject to monitoring by intelligence agencies. In the U.S., a controversial National Security Agency program known as PRISM provides for broad monitoring of Internet users traffic and has raised concerns about potential violation of the privacy protections in the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution . [43] [44] Modern ISPs integrate a wide array of surveillance and packet sniffing equipment into their networks, which then feeds the data to law-enforcement/intelligence networks (such as DCSNet in the United States, or SORM [45] in Russia) allowing monitoring of Internet traffic in real time.

See also
WebPage index: 00064
Lolicon
Lolicon ( ロリコン ? ) , also romanised as lolikon or rorikon , is Japanese discourse or media focusing on the attraction to young or prepubescent girls. The term lolicon is a portmanteau of the phrase " Lolita complex "; [1] it describes an attraction to young or prepubescent girls, an individual with such an attraction, or lolicon manga or lolicon anime , a genre of manga and anime wherein childlike female characters are often depicted in an "erotic-cute" manner (also known as ero kawaii ), in an art style reminiscent of the shōjo manga (girls' comics) style. [2] [3] [4] [5]
Outside Japan, lolicon is in less common usage and usually refers to the genre. The term is a reference to Vladimir Nabokov 's book Lolita , in which a middle-aged man becomes sexually obsessed with a twelve-year-old girl. It was first used in Japan in the 1970s and quickly became used to describe erotic dojinshi (amateur comics) portrayals of young girls.
Laws have been enacted in various countries, including in Japan, which regulate explicit content featuring children or childlike characters. Parent and citizens groups in Japan have organized to work toward stronger controls and stricter laws governing lolicon manga and other similar media. Studies of lolicon fans state that they are attracted to an aesthetic of cuteness rather than the age of the characters, [6] and that collecting lolicon represents a disconnect from society. [7] [8] [9]

Definition and scope
Generally, manga and anime featuring lolicon include sexual attraction to younger girls or to girls with youthful characteristics. Individuals in each group respond sexually to visual images of children and young people in distinct and narrow age ranges. [ clarification needed ] [10] Manga and anime featuring lolicon contain images and narratives involving romantic and erotic interactions between typically an adult man and a girl in the age range desired by such men. [3]
Strictly speaking, Lolita complex in Japanese refers to the paraphilia itself, but the abbreviation lolicon can also refer to an individual who has the paraphilia. [4] Lolicon is widespread in Japan, where it is a frequent subject of scholarly articles and criticism. [11] Lolicon anime and manga are typically consumed by young men. [12] Many general bookstores and newsstands openly offer illustrated lolicon material, but there has also been police action against lolicon manga. [11]
The kawaii (cute) and ero kawaii (erotic-cute) style is extremely popular in Japan, where it is present in many of the manga/anime styles. [13] The school-age girl in a school uniform is also an erotic symbol in Japan. [14] Burusera shops cater to men with lolicon complexes by selling unwashed panties, men can make dates with teenagers through terekura (telephone clubs), [15] and some schoolgirls moonlight as prostitutes. [16] Sharon Kinsella observed an increase in unsubstantiated accounts of schoolgirl prostitution in the media in the late 1990s, and speculated that these unproven reports developed in counterpoint to the increased reporting on comfort women . She speculated that, "It may be that the image of happy girls selling themselves voluntarily cancels out the other guilty image". [17]

Genre characteristics and meaning outside Japan
Lolicon manga are usually short stories, published as dōjinshi (fan works) or in magazines specializing in the genre such as Lemon People , [18] Manga Burikko [19] [20] and Comic LO (where "LO" is an abbreviation for "Lolita Only"). [21] Common focuses of these stories include taboo relationships, such as between a teacher and student or brother and sister, while others feature sexual experimentation between children. Some lolicon manga cross over with other erotic genres, such as crossdressing and futanari . [11] Plot devices are often used to explain the young appearance for many of the characters. [22] Schoolgirls accidentally showing their underwear are common characters in the lolicon genre. [2]
Akira Akagi believes that during the 1980s, the lolicon genre changed from being tales of a young girl having sex with an older man to being about "girl-ness" and "cuteness". [18] Akagi identifies subgenres within lolicon of sadomasochism , "groping objects" ( tentacles and robots in the role of the penis ), " mecha fetishes" (a combination of a machine, usually a weapon, and a girl), parodies of mainstream anime and manga, and "simply indecent or perverted stuff". Additionally, lolicon can include themes of lesbianism and masturbation . [6]
Men began reading shōjo manga in the 1970s, including the works of the Year 24 Group and the "girly" works of Mutsu A-ko . [18] According to Dinah Zank, lolicon is "rooted in the glorification of girls culture in Japan", and therefore uses shōjo manga vocabulary. [23] The lolicon style borrows from shōjo manga designs and has also been influenced by women creating pornographic materials for men. [24]
According to Michael Darling, female manga artists who draw lolicon material include Chiho Aoshima ( The red-eyed tribe billboard), [25] Aya Takano ( Universe Dream wall painting)., [26] and Kaworu Watashiya (who created Kodomo no Jikan ; was interpreted as a lolicon work by Jason DeAngelis. [27] ) According to Darling, male artists include Henmaru Machino (untitled, aka Green Caterpillar's Girl ), Hitoshi Tomizawa ( Alien 9 , Milk Closet ), and Bome (sculptures). [2] Weekly Dearest My Brother is a manga and figurine series which, according to Takashi Murakami, women find cute and "an innocent fantasy", but which arouses "pedophiliac desires" among men. [28]
The meaning of lolicon has evolved much in the Western world , as have words like anime, otaku and hentai. [29] "Lolicon" is also used to refer directly to the products, anime or manga that contains explicitly sexual or erotic portrayals of prepubescent girls. However, there is disagreement if this definition also applies to childlike characters who are not clearly prepubescent and if it applies to material lacking explicit sexual content . [17] [29] [30]

History

Origin
The phrase is a reference to Vladimir Nabokov 's book Lolita , in which a middle-age man becomes sexually obsessed with a twelve-year-old girl. [31] The term "Lolita complex" was first used in the early 1970s with the translation of Russell Trainer 's The Lolita Complex and may have entered Japanese nomenclature at that time. [22] Shinji Wada used the word in his Stumbling upon a Cabbage Field ( キャベツ畑でつまずいて ? , Kyabetsu-batake de Tsumazuite ) , an Alice in Wonderland manga parody in 1974. [32] The shortening of the term to "lolicon" came later. [22] Early lolicon idols were Clarisse from Lupin III: Castle of Cagliostro (1979) and the shōjo heroine Minky Momo (1982) as female characters in shōnen series at that point were largely mothers or older-sister characters. [22] [33] Although Clarisse was depicted as 16, older than most "lolicon" images today, she inspired "fairytale-esque" or "girly" fanworks. Galbraith asserts that Minky Momo was an attempt to court lolicon fans. This is denied by Satō Toshihiko , who planned the original Minky Momo. [18] Helen McCarthy suggests that the roots of 'lolikon' anime lie in the magical girl genre, where the lines between young girls and adult women become blurred. [3]

1980s–2000s
The lolicon manga genre began in the 1980s with Hideo Azuma 's works, such as The Machine Which Came from the Sea ( 海から来た機械 ? , Umi kara Kita Kikai ) . [ citation needed ] In 1979, Azuma had previously published the first "blatantly lolicon" manga in his own self-published dōjinishi magazine Cybele . [22] [34] Azuma's works became popular among schoolboy readers because most of the pornographic manga up until then had featured mature women influenced by gekiga . [ citation needed ] Other dōjinshi magazines began featuring "underage or barely pubescent virgins" in erotic contexts and by the late 1980s this "fantasy genre" had spread to some mass market magazines. [35] Frederik L. Schodt and Dinah Zank both suggest that Japanese laws prohibiting the depiction of pubic hair may have encouraged the spread of "erotic manga with a rorikon flavor". [14] [23] Throughout the 1980s, notable lolicon manga artists who published in these magazines include Miki Hayasaka , Kamui Fujiwara , Kyoko Okazaki , Narumi Kakinouchi , and Yoshiki Takaya peaking in the mid-1980s. [22] [36]
Frederik L. Schodt has suggested that one reason lolicon manga is popular with some fans is because the female characters portrayed are "younger, slightly softer, [and] rarely possessing an in-your-face aggressive feminism" which is often found in female characters in American comics. [37]
Public attention was brought to bear on lolicon when Tsutomu Miyazaki kidnapped and murdered four girls between the ages of 4 and 7 in 1988 and 1989, committing acts of necrophilia with their corpses. [38] He was found to be a "withdrawn and obsessive" otaku and in particular he enjoyed lolicon. The Tokyo High Court ruled Miyazaki sane, stating that "the murders were premeditated and stemmed from Miyazaki's sexual fantasies " [39] and he was executed by hanging for his crimes on June 17, 2008. [40]
The case caused a moral panic about "harmful manga", and "sparked a crackdown by local authorities on retailers and publishers, including the larger companies, and the arrests of dojinshi creators". [35] In the aftermath, the Japanese non-profit organization CASPAR was founded with the goal of campaigning for regulation of lolicon. [22] [41]
Public sentiment against sexual cartoon depictions of minors was revived in 2005 when a convicted sex offender , who was arrested for the murder of a seven-year-old girl in Nara , was suspected as a lolicon. [41] Despite media speculation, it was found that the murderer, Kaoru Kobayashi , seldom had interest in manga, games, or dolls. [42] He claimed, however, that he had become interested in small girls after watching an animated pornographic video as a high school student. [43] He was sentenced to death by hanging.

2010s–present
In February 2010, a proposal to amend the Tokyo law on what material could be sold to minors included a ban on sexualised depictions of "nonexistent youths" under the age of 18. [44] [45] This proposal was criticised by many manga artists, [46] and opposed by the Democratic Party of Japan . [47] The bill was put on hold until June of that year, [48] [49] where after some amendments, including changing the text for "nonexistent youths" to "depicted youths". [50] [51] However, in spite of the changes, the bill was rejected by the Tokyo Metropolitan Assembly in June. [52]
A revised edition was presented in November that year to the Tokyo Metropolitan Assembly, which would require self-regulation of "'manga, anime and other images'...that 'unjustifiably glorify or emphasize' certain sexual or pseudo sexual acts...depictions of 'sexual or pseudo sexual acts that would be illegal in real life'". [53] However, the bill no longer uses the term "nonexistent youth" and applies to all characters and to material that is not necessarily meant to be sexually stimulating. [54] It was approved in December and took full effect in July 2011; [55] [56] [57] [58] however, the bill does not regulate mobile sites or downloaded content and is only intended for publications such as books and DVDs. [59] On April 14, 2011, the title Oku-sama wa Shōgakusei ("My Wife Is an Elementary Student") was listed as a title to be considered for restriction due to "child rape". [60] It was later published online by J-Comi . [61] On August 25, 2011, Japan's Liberal Democratic Party submitted a petition requesting stricter laws on child pornography , which included animated child pornography, however no action took place as a result of the petition. [62] [63] On May 27, 2013, a revised child pornography law was introduced by the Liberal Democratic Party, the New Komei Party and the Japan Restoration Party that would make possession of sexual images of individuals under 18 illegal with a fine of 1 million yen (about US$10,437) and less than a year in jail. [64] The Japanese Democratic Party, [65] along with several industry associations involved in anime and manga, had protested against the bill saying "while they appreciate that the bill protects children, it will also restrict freedom of expression". [66] [67] Manga creator and artist Ken Akamatsu has gone on to say that "There is also no scientific evidence to prove that so-called 'harmful media' increases crime". [68] The bill was not rejected and remained in a stalemate situation until June 2014, when it went forward with the removal of lolicon anime/manga from the bill. [69] [70] The law was put into full effect the following year banning real life child pornography. [71]

Controversy
The legal status of lolicon manga and anime that portray children involved erotically with adults has changed with time and is currently under intensive debate in Japan. [11] [72] A Japanese non-profit organization called CASPAR has claimed that lolicon and other anime magazines and games encourage sex crimes . [41] According to Galbraith, Yasushi Takatsuki has noted that sexual abuse of minors in Japan has declined since the 1960s and 1970s, which "roughly coincides with the increasing presence of fictional lolicon". Galbraith feels that this is not an argument that lolicon "compensates for or relieves real desires", but instead that lolicon imagery does not "reflect the desires" of readers, or inspire them to commit crimes. [18] It has been suggested that restricting sexual expression in drawings or animated games and videos might actually increase the rate of sexual crime by eliminating a harmless outlet for desires that could motivate crime. [73] [ need quotation to verify ]
Cultural critic Hiroki Azuma said that very few readers of lolicon manga commit crimes. He states that in the otaku culture, lolicon is the "most convenient [form of rebellion]" against society. Azuma says that some otaku feel so "excluded from society" that they "feel as if they are the sort of 'no good' person who should be attracted to little girls". [17] Sarah Goode describes the accumulation of lolicon materials as being "a medium through which disaffected men may choose to express their sense of anomie and disconnection with society". When questioning the relationship of lolicon to "finding children in real life sexually attractive", Goode presents the argument of a lolicon fan "that even if I could be classified as a kind of anime lolicon, it'd NEVER translate into RL pedophilia. This is predicated on the belief that the anime lolis I like DO NOT EXIST in RL". [9]
Setsu Shigematsu believes that lolicon manga should not be equated to photographic or adult video lolicon materials which involve real children; instead she argues that lolicon represents an artificial sexuality, turning away from "three dimensional reality" and redirecting sexual energies towards "two dimensional figures of desire". [8] Akira Akagi writes that in lolicon manga, the girl represents cuteness, and that it is not her age which makes her attractive, [6] and furthermore, that lolicon fans project themselves onto lolicon characters, identifying themselves with the girl. [18]
Lolicon manga has been and is marketed to both boys and men. [24] Sharon Kinsella wrote that lolicon manga was a late 1980s outgrowth of girls' manga, [31] which included yaoi and parodies of boys' and adult manga. [74] This occurred as more men attended amateur manga conventions and as new boys' amateur manga genres appeared at Comiket . Kinsella distinguished between the attitudes toward gender of amateur lolicon manga and that of male fans of girls' manga. [31] While parody manga created by women ridicule male stereotypes and appeal to both male and female fans, lolicon manga "usually features a girl heroine with large eyes and a body that is both voluptuous and child-like, scantily clad in an outfit that approximates a cross between a 1970s bikini and a space-age suit of armour" [31] Kinsella noted dominant British and American genres and imports of animation video in the 1990s derived from lolicon manga, suggesting women, and therefore also men, in all of these countries have gone through similar social and cultural experiences. [75]
Ito characterises otaku as having more affection towards the anime and manga world than for a realistic world, saying that to the otaku, the two-dimensional world portrayed becomes "more real". Ito views the preference for young girls as sex objects in manga and anime to be due to a change in Japanese society in the 1970s and 1980s. Ito says that at that time, boys felt that girls were "surpassing them in terms of willpower and action". However, as the boys believed girls to be the weaker sex, the boys began focusing on young girls "who were 'easy to control'". Additionally, the young girls of lolicon exist in the media, which Ito points out is a place where one can control things however they want. [7]
Responding to the portrayal of Clarisse from Lupin III: Castle of Cagliostro , Hayao Miyazaki criticized the lolicon artists and fans who idolize her in what he considers a demeaning manner. He differentiates his female protagonists , labeling those the aforementioned idolized, according to The Otaku Encyclopedia , "as pets". [22]

See also
WebPage index: 00065
Public figure
In United States law, a public figure is a person such as a politician , celebrity , or business leader. In the context of defamation actions (libel and slander) as well as invasion of privacy , a public figure cannot base a lawsuit on incorrect harmful statements unless there is proof that the writer or publisher acted with actual malice (knowledge of falsity or reckless disregard for the truth). [1] The burden of proof in defamation actions is higher in the case of a public figure.
The controlling precedent in the United States was set in 1964 by the United States Supreme Court in New York Times Co. v. Sullivan . It is considered a key decision in supporting the First Amendment and freedom of the press .
A fairly high threshold of public activity is necessary to elevate people to a public figure status. Typically, they must either be:

See also
WebPage index: 00066
Right to privacy
The right to privacy is an element of various legal traditions which may restrain both government and private party action that threatens the privacy of individuals. [1] [2] Over 150 national constitutions mention this right. [3]
Since the global surveillance disclosures of 2013, the inalienable human right to privacy has been a subject of international debate. In combating worldwide terrorism, government agencies such as the NSA , CIA , RAW , GCHQ , and others have engaged in mass global surveillance , perhaps undermining the right to privacy. There is now a question as to whether the right to privacy can co-exist with the current capabilities of government agencies to access and analyse virtually every detail of an individual's life. A major question is whether or not the right to privacy needs to be forfeited as part of the social contract in order to bolster defense against supposed terrorist threats.

Background
State of consideration of constitutional laws and acts formed by sectors and sections
Privacy uses the theory of natural rights , and generally responds to new information and communication technologies. In the United States, an article in the December 15, 1890 issue of the Harvard Law Review , written by attorney Samuel D. Warren and future U.S. Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis , entitled " The Right to Privacy ", is often cited as the first implicit declaration of a U.S. right to privacy. Warren and Brandeis wrote that privacy is the "right to be let alone", and focused on protecting individuals. This approach was a response to recent technological developments of the time, such as photography, and sensationalist journalism, also known as " yellow journalism ". [4]
Privacy rights are inherently intertwined with information technology. In his widely cited dissenting opinion in Olmstead v. United States (1928), Brandeis relied on thoughts he developed in his 1890 article The Right to Privacy . But in his dissent, he now changed the focus whereby he urged making personal privacy matters more relevant to constitutional law , going so far as saying "the government [was] identified...as a potential privacy invader." He writes, "Discovery and invention have made it possible for the Government, by means far more effective than stretching upon the rack, to obtain disclosure in court of what is whispered in the closet." At that time, telephones were often community assets, with shared party lines and the potentially nosey human operators. By the time of Katz , in 1967, telephones had become personal devices with lines not shared across homes and switching was electro-mechanical. In the 1970s, new computing and recording technologies began to raise concerns about privacy, resulting in the Fair Information Practice Principles .

Definitions
In recent years there have been only few attempts to clearly and precisely define a "right to privacy". In 2005, students of the Haifa Center for Law & Technology asserted that in fact the right to privacy "should not be defined as a separate legal right" at all. By their reasoning, existing laws relating to privacy in general should be sufficient. [5] Other experts, such as William Prosser , have attempted, but failed, to find a "common ground" between the leading kinds of privacy cases in the court system, at least to formulate a definition. [5] One law school treatise from Israel, however, on the subject of "privacy in the digital environment," suggests that the "right to privacy should be seen as an independent right that deserves legal protection in itself." It has therefore proposed a working definition for a "right to privacy":

An individual right
Alan Westin believes that new technologies alter the balance between privacy and disclosure, and that privacy rights may limit government surveillance to protect democratic processes. Westin defines privacy as "the claim of individuals, groups, or institutions to determine for themselves when, how, and to what extent information about them is communicated to others". Westin describes four states of privacy: solitude, intimacy, anonymity, reserve. These states must balance participation against norms:
Under liberal democratic systems, privacy creates a space separate from political life, and allows personal autonomy, while ensuring democratic freedoms of association and expression .
David Flaherty believes networked computer databases pose threats to privacy. He develops 'data protection' as an aspect of privacy, which involves "the collection, use, and dissemination of personal information". This concept forms the foundation for fair information practices used by governments globally. Flaherty forwards an idea of privacy as information control, "[i]ndividuals want to be left alone and to exercise some control over how information about them is used". [7]
Marc Rotenberg has described the modern right to privacy as Fair Information Practices, "the rights and responsibilities associated with the collection and use of personal information". Rotenberg emphasizes that the allocation of rights are to the data subject and the responsibilities are assigned to the data collectors because of the transfer of the data and the asymmetry of information concerning data practices. [8]
Richard Posner and Lawrence Lessig focus on the economic aspects of personal information control. Posner criticizes privacy for concealing information, which reduces market efficiency. For Posner, employment is selling oneself in the labour market, which he believes is like selling a product. Any 'defect' in the 'product' that is not reported is fraud. [9] For Lessig, privacy breaches online can be regulated through code and law. Lessig claims "the protection of privacy would be stronger if people conceived of the right as a property right", and that "individuals should be able to control information about themselves". [10] Economic approaches to privacy make communal conceptions of privacy difficult to maintain.

A collective value and a human right
There have been attempts to reframe privacy as a fundamental human right , whose social value is an essential component in the functioning of democratic societies. [11] Amitai Etzioni suggests a communitarian approach to privacy. This requires a shared moral culture for establishing social order. [12] Etzioni believes that "[p]rivacy is merely one good among many others", [13] and that technological effects depend on community accountability and oversight. He claims that privacy laws only increase government surveillance. [14]
Priscilla Regan believes that individual concepts of privacy have failed philosophically and in policy. She supports a social value of privacy with three dimensions: shared perceptions, public values, and collective components. Shared ideas about privacy allows freedom of conscience and diversity in thought. Public values guarantee democratic participation, including freedoms of speech and association, and limits government power. Collective elements describe privacy as collective good that cannot be divided. Regan's goal is to strengthen privacy claims in policy making: "if we did recognize the collective or public-good value of privacy, as well as the common and public value of privacy, those advocating privacy protections would have a stronger basis upon which to argue for its protection". [15]
Leslie Regan Shade argues that the human right to privacy is necessary for meaningful democratic participation, and ensures human dignity and autonomy. Privacy depends on norms for how information is distributed, and if this is appropriate. Violations of privacy depend on context. The human right to privacy has precedent in the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights. Shade believes that privacy must be approached from a people-centered perspective, and not through the marketplace. [16]

Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948
A right to privacy is explicitly stated under Article 12 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights :

United States
Although the Constitution does not explicitly include the right to privacy, the Supreme Court has found that the Constitution implicitly grants a right to privacy against governmental intrusion from the First Amendment , Third Amendment , Fourth Amendment , and the Fifth Amendment . [17] This right to privacy has been the justification for decisions involving a wide range of civil liberties cases, including Pierce v. Society of Sisters , which invalidated a successful 1922 Oregon initiative requiring compulsory public education , Griswold v. Connecticut , where a right to privacy was first established explicitly, Roe v. Wade , which struck down a Texas abortion law and thus restricted state powers to enforce laws against abortion , and Lawrence v. Texas , which struck down a Texas sodomy law and thus eliminated state powers to enforce laws against sodomy .
The 1890 Warren and Brandeis article "The Right To Privacy", is often cited as the first implicit declaration of a U.S. right to privacy. [4] This right is frequently debated. Strict constructionists [ who? ] argue that no such right exists (or at least that the Supreme Court has no jurisdiction to protect such a right), while some civil libertarians [ who? ] argue that the right invalidates many types of currently allowed civil surveillance ( wiretaps , public cameras, etc.).
Most states of the United States [ who? ] also grant a right to privacy and recognize four torts based on that right:
Also, in some American jurisdictions the use of a person's name as a keyword under Google's AdWords for advertising or trade purposes without the person's consent [18] has raised certain personal privacy concerns. [19]
On March 11, 2015, Intelligence Squared US , an organization that stages Oxford-style debates , held an event centered on the question, "Should the U.S. adopt the 'Right to be Forgotten' online?" The side against the motion won with a 56% majority of the voting audience. [20]

Journalism
It is often claimed, particularly by those in the eye of the media , that their right to privacy is violated when information about their private lives is reported in the press. The point of view of the press, however, is that the general public have a right to know personal information about those with status as a public figure . This distinction is encoded in most legal traditions as an element of freedom of speech .

Mass surveillance and privacy
Governmental organisations such as the NSA, CIA, and GCHQ amongst others conduct mass surveillance throughout the world . Programmes such as PRISM , MYSTIC , and other operations conducted by Nato -member states are capable of collecting a vast quantity of metadata, internet history, and even actual recordings of phone-calls from various countries. The existence of programmes is justified by their conductors in terms of supposed benefits for defence and law enforcement, however this is also in conflict with the right to privacy established under various treaties, constitutions, and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The argument in favour of privacy has therefore come under a larger opposition to intelligence operations carried out for political purposes, and has become a contentious issue since it undermines the perceived need of nations to spy on the general population in order to maintain their power structures.

Arguments "For" and "Against" the right to privacy

For

Against

See also

Notes

Further reading

External links
WebPage index: 00067
Wiktionary
Wiktionary is a multilingual , web -based project to create a free content dictionary of all words in all languages . It is collaboratively edited via a wiki , and its name is a portmanteau of the words wiki and dictionary . It is available in 172 languages and in Simple English . Like its sister project Wikipedia , Wiktionary is run by the Wikimedia Foundation , and is written collaboratively by volunteers , dubbed "Wiktionarians". Its wiki software , MediaWiki , allows almost anyone with access to the website to create and edit entries.
Because Wiktionary is not limited by print space considerations, most of Wiktionary's language editions provide definitions and translations of words from many languages, and some editions offer additional information typically found in thesauri and lexicons . The English Wiktionary includes a Wikisaurus (thesaurus) of synonyms of various words.
Wiktionary data are frequently used in various natural language processing tasks .

History and development
Wiktionary was brought online on December 12, 2002, [a] following a proposal by Daniel Alston and an idea by Larry Sanger , co-founder of Wikipedia. [b] On March 28, 2004, the first non- English Wiktionaries were initiated in French and Polish . Wiktionaries in numerous other languages have since been started. Wiktionary was hosted on a temporary domain name (wiktionary.wikipedia.org) until May 1, 2004, when it switched to the current domain name. [c] As of November 2016 [ref] , Wiktionary features over 25.9 million entries across its editions. [2] The largest of the language editions is the English Wiktionary, with over 5 million entries, followed by the Malagasy Wiktionary with over 3.9 million bot -generated entries and the French Wiktionary with over 3 million. Forty-one Wiktionary language editions now contain over 100,000 entries each. [d]
Most of the entries and many of the definitions at the project's largest language editions were created by bots that found creative ways to generate entries or (rarely) automatically imported thousands of entries from previously published dictionaries. Seven of the 18 bots registered at the English Wiktionary [e] created 163,000 of the entries there. [3]
Another of these bots, "ThirdPersBot," was responsible for the addition of a number of third-person conjugations that would not have received their own entries in standard dictionaries; for instance, it defined "smoulders" as the "third-person singular simple present form of smoulder." Of the 648,970 definitions the English Wiktionary provides for 501,171 English words, 217,850 are "form of" definitions of this kind. [4] This means its coverage of English is slightly smaller than that of major monolingual print dictionaries. The Oxford English Dictionary , for instance, has 615,000 headwords, while Merriam-Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged has 475,000 entries (with many additional embedded headwords). Detailed statistics exist to show how many entries of various kinds exist.
The English Wiktionary does not rely on bots to the extent that some other editions do. The French and Vietnamese Wiktionaries, for example, imported large sections of the Free Vietnamese Dictionary Project (FVDP), which provides free content bilingual dictionaries to and from Vietnamese. [f] These imported entries make up virtually all of the Vietnamese edition's contents. Almost all non-Malagasy-language entries of the Malagasy Wiktionary were copied by bot from other Wiktionaries. Like the English edition, the French Wiktionary has imported the approximately 20,000 entries from the Unihan database of Chinese, Japanese, and Korean characters . The French Wiktionary grew rapidly in 2006 thanks in large part to bots copying many entries from old, freely licensed dictionaries, such as the eighth edition of the Dictionnaire de l'Académie française (1935, around 35,000 words), and using bots to add words from other Wiktionary editions with French translations. The Russian edition grew by nearly 80,000 entries as "LXbot" added boilerplate entries (with headings, but without definitions) for words in English and German . [5]
In 2017 English part of en.wikitionary had over 500,000 gloss definitions and over 900,000 definitions (including different forms). [6]

Logos
Wiktionary has historically lacked a uniform logo across its numerous language editions. Some editions use logos that depict a dictionary entry about the term "Wiktionary", based on the previous English Wiktionary logo, which was designed by Brion Vibber, a MediaWiki developer. [g] Because a purely textual logo must vary considerably from language to language, a four-phase contest to adopt a uniform logo was held at the Wikimedia Meta-Wiki from September to October 2006. [h] Some communities adopted the winning entry by "Smurrayinchester", a 3×3 grid of wooden tiles, each bearing a character from a different writing system. However, the poll did not see as much participation from the Wiktionary community as some community members had hoped, and a number of the larger wikis ultimately kept their textual logos. [h]
In April 2009, the issue was resurrected with a new contest. This time, a depiction by "AAEngelman" of an open hardbound dictionary won a head-to-head vote against the 2006 logo, but the process to refine and adopt the new logo then stalled. [i] In the following years, some wikis replaced their textual logos with one of the two newer logos. In 2012, 55 wikis that had been using the English Wiktionary logo received localized versions of the 2006 design by "Smurrayinchester". [j] In July 2016, the English Wiktionary adopted a variant of this logo. [7] As of 4 July 2016 [update] , 135 wikis, representing 61% of Wiktionary's entries, use a logo based on the 2006 design by "Smurrayinchester", 33 wikis (36%) use a textual logo, and three wikis (3%) use the 2009 design by "AAEngelman". [k]

Accuracy
To ensure accuracy, the English Wiktionary has a policy requiring that terms be attested . [8] Terms in major languages such as English and Chinese must be verified by:
For smaller languages such as Creek and extinct languages such as Latin , one use in a permanently recorded medium or one mention in a reference work is sufficient verification.

Critical reception
Critical reception of Wiktionary has been mixed. In 2006 Jill Lepore wrote in the article "Noah's Ark" for The New Yorker, [l]
Keir Graff 's review for Booklist was less critical:
References in other publications are fleeting and part of larger discussions of Wikipedia, not progressing beyond a definition, although David Brooks in The Nashua Telegraph described it as "wild and woolly". [m] One of the impediments to independent coverage of Wiktionary is the continuing confusion that it is merely an extension of Wikipedia. [n] In 2005, PC Magazine rated Wiktionary as one of the Internet's "Top 101 Web Sites", [10] although little information was given about the site.
The measure of correctness of the inflections for a subset of the Polish words in the English Wiktionary showed that this grammatical data is very stable. Only 131 out of 4748 Polish words have had their inflection data corrected. [11]

Wiktionary data in natural language processing
Wiktionary has semi-structured data . [12] Wiktionary lexicographic data can be converted to machine-readable format in order to be used in natural language processing tasks. [13] [14] [15]
Wiktionary data mining is a complex task. There are the following difficulties: [16] (1) the constant and frequent changes to data and schemata, (2) the heterogeneity in Wiktionary language edition schemata [o] and (3) the human-centric nature of a wiki .
There are several parsers for different Wiktionary language editions: [17]
The various natural language processing tasks were solved with the help of Wiktionary data: [29]

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00068
Catalan language
Catalan ( / ˈ k æ t əl æ n / ; [4] autonym : català [kətəˈla] or [kataˈla] ) is a Romance language derived from Vulgar Latin and named after the medieval Principality of Catalonia , in northeastern modern Spain and adjoining parts of France . It is the national and only official language of Andorra , [5] and a co-official language of the Spanish autonomous communities of Catalonia , the Balearic Islands , and Valencia (where the language is known as Valencian , and there exist regional standards). It also has semi-official status in the commune of Alghero , situated on the northwestern coast of the island of Sardinia ( Italy ), where a variant of it is spoken. [6] It is also spoken with no official recognition in parts of the Spanish autonomous communities of Aragon ( La Franja ) and Murcia ( Carche ), and in the historic region of Roussillon / Northern Catalonia , roughly equivalent to the department of Pyrénées-Orientales in modern France . [7] All these territories are often called Catalan Countries .
According to the Statistical Institute of Catalonia , in 2013 the Catalan language is the second most commonly used in Catalonia, after Spanish , as a native or self-defining language: 7% of the population self-identifies with both Catalan and Spanish equally, 36.4% with Catalan and 47.5% only Spanish. [8] In 2003 the same studies concluded no language preference for self-identification within the population above 15 years old: 5% self-identified with both languages, 44.3% with Catalan and 47.5 with Spanish. [9] Comparing these statistics with the same study made by this official institute 10 years after in 2013, we notice the fast decline Catalan language has had in a short time, mostly due to the fast increase of non-Catalan immigration. In order to integrate newcomers, the Generalitat de Catalunya (Catalonia's official Autonomous government) spends part of its annual budget on the promotion of the use of Catalan in Catalonia and in other territories. [10]
Catalan evolved from Vulgar Latin in the Middle Ages around the eastern Pyrenees . During the Low Middle Ages it saw a golden age as the literary and dominant language of the Crown of Aragon , and was widely used all over the Mediterranean . [11] [12] The union of Aragon with the other territories of Spain in 1479 marked the start of the decline of the language. [11] [12] In 1659 Spain ceded Northern Catalonia to France , and Catalan was banned in both states in the early 18th century. [12] 19th-century Spain saw a Catalan literary revival , [12] [11] which culminated in the 1913 orthographic standardization, and the official status of the language during the Second Spanish Republic (1931–39). However, the Francoist dictatorship (1939–75) banned the use of Catalan in schools and in the public administration, again. [13] [12]
Since the Spanish transition to democracy (1975–1982), Catalan has been recognized as an official language, a language of education, and a language of mass media, all of which have contributed to its increased prestige. [14] There is no parallel in Europe for such a large, bilingual , non-state speech community. [14]
Catalan dialects are relatively uniform, [15] [16] and are mutually intelligible. [7] [17] [18] [1] They are divided into two blocks, Eastern and Western, differing mostly in pronunciation. [15] [16] The terms "Catalan" and " Valencian " (respectively used in Catalonia and the Valencian Community ) are two varieties of the same language. [19] There are two institutions regulating the two standard varieties, the Institute of Catalan Studies in Catalonia and the Valencian Academy of the Language in the Valencian Community.
Catalan shares many traits with its neighboring Romance languages . [7] However, though mostly situated in the Iberian Peninsula today, Catalan differs more from Iberian Romance (such as Spanish and Portuguese ) in terms of vocabulary , pronunciation , and grammar than from Gallo-Romance ( Occitan , French , Gallo-Italic languages , etc.) due to its historical origin and human and cultural links with the ancient Languedoc and its people. [20] [21] [22] [15] [23] [24] [25] Thus, the similarities are naturally most notable with eastern Occitan. [23] [24] [25]
Catalan has an inflectional grammar. Nouns have two genders (masculine, feminine), and two numbers (singular, plural). Pronouns additionally can have a neuter gender [ citation needed ] , and some are also inflected for case and politeness , and can be combined in very complex ways. Verbs are split in several paradigms and are inflected for person , number , tense , aspect , mood , and gender . In terms of pronunciation, Catalan has many words ending in a wide variety of consonants and some consonant clusters, in contrast with many other Romance languages. [26]

Etymology and pronunciation
The word Catalan derives from the territory of Catalonia , itself of disputed etymology. The main theory suggests that Catalunya ( Latin Gathia Launia ) derives from the name Gothia or Gauthia ("Land of the Goths"), since the origins of the Catalan counts, lords and people were found in the March of Gothia , whence Gothland > Gothlandia > Gothalania > Catalonia theoretically derived. [27] [28]
In English , the term referring to a person first appears in the mid 14th century as Catelaner , followed in the 15th century as Catellain (from French ). It is attested a language name since at least 1652. Catalan can be pronounced as / ˈ k æ t əl æ n / , / k æ t ə ˈ l æ n / or / ˈ k æ t əl ən / . [4]
The endonym is pronounced /kə.təˈɫa/ in the Eastern Catalan dialects, and /ka.taˈɫa/ in the Western dialects. In the Valencian Community , the term valencià ( /va.len.siˈa/ ) is frequently used instead. The names "Catalan" and "Valencian" are two names for the same language. [29] [30] See also status of Valencian below.

History

Middle Ages
By the 9th century, Catalan had evolved from Vulgar Latin on both sides of the eastern end of the Pyrenees , as well as the territories of the Roman province of Hispania Tarraconensis to the south. [11] From the 8th century onwards the Catalan counts extended their territory southwards and westwards at the expense of the Muslims, bringing their language with them. [11] This process was given definitive impetus with the separation of the County of Barcelona from the Carolingian Empire in 988. [11]
In the 11th century, documents written in macaronic Latin begin to show Catalan elements, [32] with texts written almost completely in Romance appearing by 1080. [32] Old Catalan shared many features with Gallo-Romance , diverging from Old Occitan between the 11th and 14th centuries. [33]
During the 11th and 12th centuries the Catalan rulers expanded up to north of the Ebro river , [11] and in the 13th century they conquered the Land of Valencia and the Balearic Islands . [11] The city of Alghero in Sardinia was repopulated with Catalan speakers in the 14th century. The language also reached Murcia , which became Spanish-speaking in the 15th century. [34]
In the Low Middle Ages , Catalan went through a golden age, reaching a peak of maturity and cultural richness. [11] Examples include the work of Majorcan polymath Ramon Llull (1232–1315), the Four Great Chronicles (13th–14th centuries), and the Valencian school of poetry culminating in Ausiàs March (1397–1459). [11] By the 15th century, the city of Valencia had become the sociocultural center of the Crown of Aragon , and Catalan was present all over the Mediterranean world. [11] During this period, the Royal Chancery propagated a highly standardized language. [11] Catalan was widely used as an official language in Sicily until the 15th century, and in Sardinia until the 17th. [34] During this period, the language was what Costa Carreras terms "one of the 'great languages' of medieval Europe". [11]
Martorell 's outstanding [11] novel of chivalry Tirant lo Blanc (1490) shows a transition from Medieval to Renaissance values, something that can also be seen in Metge 's work. [11] The first book produced with movable type in the Iberian Peninsula was printed in Catalan. [35] [11]

Start of the modern era
With the union of the crowns of Castille and Aragon (1479), the use of Spanish gradually became more prestigious. [34] Starting in the 16th century, Catalan literature experienced a decline, the language came under the influence of Spanish, and the urban and literary classes became bilingual . [34]

French state: 18th to 20th centuries
With the Treaty of the Pyrenees (1659), Spain ceded the northern part of Catalonia to France , and soon thereafter the local Catalan varieties came under the influence of French , which in 1700 became the sole official language of the region. [5] [36]
Shortly after the French Revolution (1789), the French First Republic prohibited official use of, and enacted discriminating policies against, the nonstandard languages of France ( patois ), such as Catalan, Alsatian , Breton , Occitan , Flemish , and Basque .
Following the French capture of Algeria (1833), that region saw several waves of Catalan-speaking settlers. People from the Spanish Alacant province settled around Oran , whereas Algiers received immigration from Northern Catalonia and Minorca . Their speech was known as patuet . By 1911, the number of Catalan speakers was around 100,000. After the declaration of independence of Algeria in 1962, almost all the Catalan speakers fled to Northern Catalonia (as Pieds-Noirs ) or Alacant. [37]
Nowadays, France only recognizes French as an official language. Nevertheless, on 10 December 2007, the General Council of the Pyrénées-Orientales officially recognized Catalan as one of the languages of the department [38] and seeks to further promote it in public life and education.

Spanish state: 18th to 20th centuries
The decline of Catalan continued in the 16th and 17th centuries. The defeat of the pro-Habsburg coalition in the War of Spanish Succession (1714) initiated a series of laws which, among other centralizing measures, imposed the use of Spanish in legal documentation all over Spain.
In parallel, however, the 19th century saw a Catalan literary revival ( Renaixença ), which has continued up to the present day. [5] This period starts with Aribau 's Ode to the Homeland (1833); followed in the second half of the 19th century, and the early 20th by the work of Verdaguer (poetry), Oller (realist novel), and Guimerà (drama). [39]
In the 19th century, the region of Carche , in the province of Murcia was repopulated with Catalan speakers from the Land of Valencia . [7]
The Second Spanish Republic (1931–1939) saw a brief period of tolerance, with most restrictions against Catalan being lifted. [5]

Present day
Since the Spanish transition to democracy (1975–1982), Catalan has been institutionalizated as an official language, language of education, and language of mass media; all of which have contributed to its increased prestige. [14] In Catalonia , there is an unparalleled large, bilingual , European, non-state speech community. [14] The teaching of Catalan is mandatory in all schools, [5] but it is possible to use Spanish for studying in the public education system of Catalonia in two situations – if the teacher assigned to a class chooses to use Spanish, or during the learning process of one or more recently arrived students. [40] There is also some intergenerational shift towards Catalan. [5]
In Andorra , Catalan has always been the sole official language. [5] Since the promulgation of the 1993 constitution , several policies favouring Catalan have been enforced, like Catalan medium education. [5]
On the other hand, there are several language shift processes currently taking place. In the Northern Catalonia area of France, Catalan has followed the same trend as the other minority languages of France, with most of its native speakers being 60 or older (as of 2004). [5] Catalan is studied as a foreign language by 30% of the primary education students, and by 15% of the secondary. [5] The cultural association La Bressola promotes a network of community-run schools engaged in Catalan language immersion programs.
In the Alicante province Catalan is being replaced by Spanish , and in Alghero by Italian . [14] There are also well ingrained diglossic attitudes against Catalan in the Valencian Community , Ibiza , and to a lesser extent, in the rest of the Balearic islands . [5]

Classification and relationship with other Romance languages
The ascription of Catalan to the Occitano-Romance branch of Gallo-Romance languages is not shared by all linguists and philologists, particularly among Spanish ones, such as Ramón Menéndez Pidal .
According to Pèire Bèc , its specific classification is as follows:
Catalan bears varying degrees of similarity to the linguistic varieties subsumed under the cover term Occitan language (see also differences between Occitan and Catalan and Gallo-Romance languages ). Thus, as it should be expected from closely related languages, Catalan today shares many traits with other Romance languages.

Relationship with other Romance languages
Catalan shares many traits with the other neighboring Romance languages ( Italian , Sardinian , Occitan, and Spanish). [7] However, despite being spoken mostly on the Iberian Peninsula , Catalan has marked differences with the Iberian Romance group ( Spanish and Portuguese ) in terms of pronunciation , grammar, and especially vocabulary; showing instead its closest affinity with Occitan [23] [24] [25] and to a lesser extent Gallo-Romance ( French , Franco-Provençal , Gallo-Italian ). [20] [21] [22] [15] [23] [24] [25]
According to Ethnologue , the lexical similarity between Catalan and other Romance languages is: 87% with Italian; 85% with Portuguese and Spanish; 76% with Ladin ; 75% with Sardinian; and 73% with Romanian. [1]
During much of its history, and especially during the Francoist dictatorship (1939–1975), the Catalan language has often been degraded as a mere dialect of Spanish . [24] [25] This view, based on political and ideological considerations, has no linguistic validity. [24] [25] Spanish and Catalan have important differences in their sound systems, lexicon, and grammatical features, placing the language in a number of respects closer to Occitan (and French ). [24] [25]
There is evidence that, at least from the a.d. 2nd century, the vocabulary and phonology of Roman Tarraconensis was different from the rest of Roman Hispania. [23] Differentiation has arisen generally because Spanish, Asturian , and Galician-Portuguese share certain peripheral archaisms (Spanish hervir , Asturian/Portuguese ferver vs. Catalan bullir , Occitan bolir "to boil") and innovatory regionalisms (Sp novillo , Ast nuviellu vs. Cat torell , Oc taurèl "bullock"), while Catalan has a shared history with the Western Romance innovative core, especially Occitan. [46] [23]
Like all Romance languages, Catalan has a handful of native words which are rare or only found in Catalan. These include:
The Gothic superstrate has had different outcomes in Spanish and Catalan. For example, Catalan fang "mud" and rostir "to roast", of Germanic origin, contrast with Spanish lodo and asar , of Latin origin; whereas Catalan filosa "spinning wheel" and pols "temple", of Latin origin, contrast with Spanish rueca and sien , of Germanic origin. [23]
The same happens with Arabic loanwords. Thus, Catalan alfàbia "large earthenware jar" and rajola "tile", of Arabic origin, contrast with Spanish tinaja and teja , of Latin origin; whereas Catalan oli "oil" and oliva "olive", of Latin origin, contrast with Spanish aceite and aceituna . [23] However, the Arabic element in Spanish is generally much more prevalent. [23]
Situated between two large linguistic blocks (Iberian Romance and Gallo-Romance), Catalan has many unique lexical choices, such as enyorar "to miss somebody", apaivagar "to calm down somebody", or rebutjar "reject". [23]

Geographic distribution

Catalan-speaking territories
Catalan-speaking territories are sometimes called the Països Catalans (Catalan Countries), a denomination based on cultural affinity and common heritage, that has also had a subsequent political interpretation but no official status. Various interpretations of the term may include some or all of these regions.

Number of speakers
The number of people known to be fluent in Catalan varies depending on the sources used. A 2004 study did not count the total number of speakers, but estimated a total of 9–9.5 million by matching the percentage of speakers to the population of each area where Catalan is spoken. [48] The web site of the Generalitat de Catalunya estimated that as of 2004 there were 9,118,882 speakers of Catalan. [49] These figures only reflect potential speakers; today it is the native language of only 35.6% of the Catalan population. [50] According to Ethnologue , Catalan had four million native speakers and five million second-language speakers in 2012. [1] The most important social characteristic of the Catalan language is that all the areas where it is spoken are bilingual in practice: together with the French language in Roussillon, with Italian in Alghero, with Spanish and French in Andorra and with Spanish in the rest of the territories.

Level of knowledge
(% of the population 15 years old and older).

Social use
(% of the population 15 years old and older).

Native language
[52] [53] [54]

Phonology
The Catalan phonology varies depending on the dialect. Notable features include: [26]
In contrast with other Romance languages, Catalan has many monosyllabic words; and those ending in a wide variety of consonants and some consonant clusters . [26] Also, Catalan has final obstruent devoicing , thus featuring many couplets like amic "(male friend") vs. amiga ("female friend"). [26]
Central Catalan is considered the standard pronunciation of the language. [18] The descriptions below are mostly for this variety. [55] For the differences in pronunciation of the different dialects, see the section pronunciation of dialects in this article.

Vowels
Catalan has inherited the typical vowel system of Vulgar Latin , with seven stressed phonemes: /a ɛ e i ɔ o u/ , a common feature in Western Romance , except Spanish . [26] Balearic has also instances of stressed /ə/. [57] Dialects differ in the different degrees of vowel reduction , [58] and the incidence of the pair /ɛ e/. [59]
In Central Catalan , unstressed vowels reduce to three: /a e ɛ/ > [ə] ; /o ɔ u/ > [u] ; /i/ remains distinct. [60] The other dialects have different vowel reduction processes (see the section pronunciation of dialects in this article).

Consonants
The consonant system of Catalan is rather conservative, shared with most modern Western Romance languages.

Phonological evolution

Sociolinguistics
Catalan sociolinguistics studies the situation of Catalan in the world and the different varieties that this language presents. It is a subdiscipline of Catalan philology and other affine studies and has as an objective to analyse the relation between the Catalan language, the speakers and the close reality (including the one of other languages in contact).

Preferential subjects of study

Dialects

Overview
The dialects of the Catalan language feature a relative uniformity, especially when compared to other Romance languages; [15] both in terms of vocabulary , semantics , syntax , morphology , and phonology . [16] Mutual intelligibility between dialects is very high, [7] [17] [18] estimates ranging from 90% to 95%. [84] The only exception is the isolated idiosyncratic Alguerese dialect . [15]
Catalan is split in two major dialectal blocks: Eastern Catalan, and Western Catalan. [18] [16] The main difference lies in the treatment of unstressed a and e ; which have merged to /ə/ in Eastern dialects, but which remain distinct as /a/ and /e/ in Western dialects. [15] [18] There are a few other differences in pronunciation, verbal morphology, and vocabulary. [7]
Western Catalan comprises the two dialects of Northwestern Catalan and Valencian ; the Eastern block comprises four dialects: Central Catalan , Balearic , Rossellonese , and Alguerese . [18] Each dialect can be further subdivided in several subdialects.
Central Catalan is considered the standard pronunciation of the language and has the highest number of speakers. [18] It is spoken in the densely populated regions of the Barcelona province , the eastern half of the province of Tarragona, and most of the province of Girona. [18]

Pronunciation

Vowels
Catalan has inherited the typical vowel system of Vulgar Latin , with seven stressed phonemes: /a ɛ e i ɔ o u/ , a common feature in Western Romance , except Spanish . [26] Balearic has also instances of stressed /ə/. [57] Dialects differ in the different degrees of vowel reduction , [58] and the incidence of the pair /ɛ e/. [59]
In Eastern Catalan (except Majorcan), unstressed vowels reduce to three: /a e ɛ/ > [ə] ; /o ɔ u/ > [u] ; /i/ remains distinct. [60] There are a few instances of unreduced [e], [o] in some words. [60] Alguerese has lowered [ə] to [a].
In Majorcan, unstressed vowels reduce to four: /a e ɛ/ follow the Eastern Catalan reduction pattern; however /o ɔ/ reduce to [o] , with /u/ remaining distinct, as in Western Catalan. [86]
In Western Catalan , unstressed vowels reduce to five: /e ɛ/ > [e] ; /o ɔ/ > [o] ; /a u i/ remain distinct. [87] [88] This reduction pattern, inherited from Proto-Romance , is also found in Italian and Portuguese . [87] Some Western dialects present further reduction or vowel harmony in some cases. [87] [89]
Central, Western, and Balearic differ in the lexical incidence of stressed /e/ and /ɛ/. [59] Usually, words with /ɛ/ in Central Catalan correspond to /ə/ in Balearic and /e/ in Western Catalan. [59] Words with /e/ in Balearic almost always have /e/ in Central and Western Catalan as well. [ vague ] [59] As a result, Central Catalan has a much higher incidence of /ɛ/. [59]

Consonants

Morphology
Western Catalan: In verbs, the ending for 1st-person present indicative is - e in verbs of the 1st conjugation and -∅ in verbs of the 2nd and 3rd conjugations in most of the Valencian Community, or - o in all verb conjugations in the Northern Valencian Community and Western Catalonia. E.g. parle , tem , sent (Valencian); parlo , temo , sento (Northwestern Catalan).
Eastern Catalan: In verbs, the ending for 1st-person present indicative is - o , - i , or -∅ in all conjugations. E.g. parlo (Central), parl (Balearic), and parli (Northern), all meaning ('I speak').
Western Catalan: In verbs, the inchoative endings are - isc /- ixo , - ix , - ixen , - isca .
Eastern Catalan: In verbs, the inchoative endings are - eixo , - eix , - eixen , - eixi .
Western Catalan: In nouns and adjectives, maintenance of /n/ of medieval plurals in proparoxytone words. E.g. hòmens 'men', jóvens 'youth'.
Eastern Catalan: In nouns and adjectives, loss of /n/ of medieval plurals in proparoxytone words. E.g. homes 'men', joves 'youth'.

Vocabulary
Despite its relative lexical unity, the two dialectal blocks of Catalan (Eastern and Western) show some differences in word choices. [23] Any lexical divergence within any of the two groups can be explained as an archaism. Also, usually Central Catalan acts as an innovative element. [23]

Standards
Standard Catalan, virtually accepted by all speakers, [14] is mostly based on Eastern Catalan, [18] [91] which is the most widely used dialect. Nevertheless, the standards of the Valencian Community and the Balearics admit alternative forms, mostly traditional ones, which are not current in eastern Catalonia. [91]
The most notable difference between both standards is some tonic ⟨e⟩ accentuation, for instance: francès, anglès (IEC) – francés, anglés (AVL). Nevertheless, AVL's standard keeps the grave accent ⟨è⟩, without pronouncing this ⟨e⟩ as /ɛ/ , in some words like: què ('what'), or València . Other divergences include the use of ⟨tl⟩ (AVL) in some words instead of ⟨tll⟩ like in ametla / ametlla ('almond'), espatla / espatlla ('back'), the use of elided demonstratives ( este 'this', eixe 'that') in the same level as reinforced ones ( aquest, aqueix ) or the use of many verbal forms common in Valencian, and some of these common in the rest of Western Catalan too, like subjunctive mood or inchoative conjugation in - ix - at the same level as - eix - or the priority use of - e morpheme in 1st person singular in present indicative (- ar verbs): jo compre instead of jo compro ('I buy').
In the Balearic Islands, IEC's standard is used but adapted for the Balearic dialect by the University of the Balearic Islands 's philological section. In this way, for instance, IEC says it is correct writing cantam as much as cantem ('we sing') but the University says that the priority form in the Balearic Islands must be " cantam " in all fields. Another feature of the Balearic standard is the non-ending in the 1st person singular present indicative: jo compr ('I buy'), jo tem ('I fear'), jo dorm ('I sleep').
In Alghero, the IEC has adapted its standard to the Alguerese dialect . In this standard one can find, among other features: the definite article lo instead of el , special possessive pronouns and determinants la mia ('mine'), lo sou/la sua ('his/her'), lo tou/la tua ('yours'), and so on, the use of -v- /v/ in the imperfect tense in all conjugations: cantava , creixiva , llegiva ; the use of many archaic words, usual words in Alguerese: manco instead of menys ('less'), calqui u instead of algú ('someone'), qual/quala instead of quin/quina ('which'), and so on; and the adaptation of weak pronouns .
In 2011, the Aragonese government passed a decree for the establishment of a new language regulator of Catalan in La Franja (the so-called Catalan-speaking areas of Aragon). The new entity, designated as Acadèmia Aragonesa del Català , shall allow a facultative education in Catalan and a standardization of the Catalan language in La Franja .

 Status of Valencian
Valencian is classified as a Western dialect, along with the northwestern varieties spoken in Western Catalonia (provinces of Lleida and the western half of Tarragona ). [18] [85] The various forms of Catalan and Valencian are mutually intelligible (ranging from 90% to 95%) [84]
Linguists, including Valencian scholars, deal with Catalan and Valencian as the same language. The official regulating body of the language of the Valencian Community, the Valencian Academy of Language ( Acadèmia Valenciana de la Llengua, AVL) declares the linguistic unity between Valencian and Catalan varieties. [30]
The AVL, created by the Valencian parliament, is in charge of dictating the official rules governing the use of Valencian, and its standard is based on the Norms of Castelló ( Normes de Castelló ). Currently, everyone who writes in Valencian uses this standard, except the Royal Academy of Valencian Culture ( Acadèmia de Cultura Valenciana , RACV), which uses for Valencian an independent standard.
Despite the position of the official organizations, an opinion poll carried out between 2001 and 2004 [94] showed that the majority of the Valencian people consider Valencian different from Catalan. This position is promoted by people who do not use Valencian regularly. [14] Furthermore, the data indicates that younger generations educated in Valencian are much less likely to hold these views. A minority of Valencian scholars active in fields other than linguistics defends the position of the Royal Academy of Valencian Culture ( Acadèmia de Cultura Valenciana , RACV), which uses for Valencian a standard independent from Catalan. [95]
This clash of opinions has sparked much controversy. For example, during the drafting of the European Constitution in 2004, the Spanish government supplied the EU with translations of the text into Basque , Galician , Catalan, and Valencian, but the latter two were identical. [96]

Vocabulary

Word choices
Despite its relative lexical unity, the two dialectal blocks of Catalan (Eastern and Western) show some differences in word choices. [23] Any lexical divergence within any of the two groups can be explained as an archaism. Also, usually Central Catalan acts as an innovative element. [23]
Literary Catalan allows the use of words from different dialects, except those of very restricted use. [23] However, from the 19th century onwards, there has been a tendency towards favoring words of Northern dialects to the detriment of others, even though nowadays there is a greater freedom of choice. [ clarify ] [23]

Latin and Greek loanwords
Like other languages, Catalan has a large list of loanwords from Greek and Latin. This process started very early, and one can find such examples in Ramon Llull 's work. [23] In the 14th and 15th centuries Catalan had a far greater number of Greco-Latin loanwords than other Romance languages, as is attested for example in Roís de Corella 's writings. [23] The incorporation of learned, or "bookish" words from its own ancestor language, Latin , into Catalan is arguably another form of lexical borrowing through the influence of written language and the liturgical language of the Church. Throughout the Middle Ages and into the early modern period, most literate Catalan speakers were also literate in Latin; and thus they easily adopted Latin words into their writing—and eventually speech—in Catalan.

Word formation
The process of morphological derivation in Catalan follows the same principles as the other Romance languages , [97] where agglutination is common. Many times, several affixes are appended to a preexisting lexeme, and some sound alternations can occur, for example elèctri c [əˈlɛktri k ] ("electrical") vs. electri c itat [ələktri s iˈtat]. Prefixes are usually appended to verbs, as in pre veure ("foresee"). [97]
There is greater regularity in the process of word-compounding , where one can find compounded words formed much like those in English. [97]

Writing system
Catalan uses the Latin script , with some added symbols and digraphs. [98] The Catalan orthography is systematic and largely phonologically based. [98]

Grammar
The grammar of Catalan is similar to other Romance languages . Features include: [100]

Gender and number inflection
In gender inflection , the most notable feature is (compared to Portuguese , Spanish or Italian ), the loss of the typical masculine suffix -o . Thus, the alternance of -o / -a , has been replaced by ø / -a . [26] There are only a few exceptions, like minso / minsa ("scarce"). [26] Many not completely predictable morphological alternations may occur, such as: [26]
Catalan has few suppletive couplets, like Italian and Spanish, and unlike French. Thus, Catalan has noi / noia ("boy"/"girl") and gall / gallina ("cock"/"hen"), whereas French has garçon / fille and coq / poule . [26]
There is a tendency to abandon traditionally gender-invariable adjectives in favour of marked ones, something prevalent in Occitan and French. Thus, one can find bullent / bullenta ("boiling") in contrast with traditional bullent / bullent . [26]
As in the other Western Romance languages, the main plural expression is the suffix -s , which may create morphological alternations similar to the ones found in gender inflection, albeit more rarely. [26] The most important one is the addition of -o- before certain consonant groups, a phonetic phenomenon that does not affect feminine forms: el pols / els polsos ("the pulse"/"the pulses") vs. la pols / les pols ("the dust"/"the dusts"). [101]

Determiners
The inflection of determinatives is complex, specially because of the high number of elisions, but is similar to the neighboring languages. [97] Catalan has more contractions of preposition + article than Spanish , like dels ("of + the [plural]"), but not as many as Italian (which has sul , col , nel , etc.). [97]
Central Catalan has abandoned almost completely unstressed possessives ( mon , etc.) in favour of constructions of article + stressed forms ( el meu , etc.), a feature shared with Italian. [97]

Personal pronouns
The morphology of Catalan personal pronouns is complex, specially in unstressed forms, which are numerous (13 distinct forms, compared to 11 in Spanish or 9 in Italian). [97] Features include the gender-neutral ho and the great degree of freedom when combining different unstressed pronouns (65 combinations). [97]
Catalan pronouns exhibit T–V distinction , like all other Romance languages (and most European languages, but not Modern English). This feature implies the use of a different set of second person pronouns for formality.
This flexibility allows Catalan to use extraposition extensively, much more than French or Spanish. Thus, Catalan can have m'hi recomanaren ("they recommended me to him"), whereas in French one must say ils m'ont recommandé à lui , and Spanish me recomendaron a él . [97] This allows the placement of almost any nominal term as a sentence topic , without having to use so often the passive voice (as in French or English ), or identifying the direct object with a preposition (as in Spanish). [97]

Verbs
Like all the Romance languages, Catalan verbal inflection is more complex than the nominal. Suffixation is omnipresent, whereas morphological alternations play a secondary role. [97] Vowel alternances are active, as well as infixation and suppletion. However, these are not as productive as in Spanish, and are mostly restricted to irregular verbs. [97]
The Catalan verbal system is basically common to all Western Romance, except that most dialects have replaced the synthetic indicative perfect with a periphrastic form of anar ("to go") + infinitive. [97]
Catalan verbs are traditionally divided into three conjugations, with vowel themes -a- , -e- , -i- , the last two being split into two subtypes. However, this division is mostly theoretical. [97] Only the first conjugation is nowadays productive (with about 3500 common verbs), whereas the third (the subtype of servir , with about 700 common verbs) is semiproductive. The verbs of the second conjugation are fewer than 100, and it is not possible to create new ones, except by compounding. [97]

Syntax
The grammar of Catalan follows the general pattern of Western Romance languages. The primary word order is subject–verb–object . [106] However, word order is very flexible. Commonly, verb-subject constructions are used to achieve a semantic effect. The sentence "The train has arrived" could be translated as "Ha arribat el tren" or "El tren ha arribat." Both sentences mean "the train has arrived", but the former puts a focus on the train, while the latter puts a focus on the arrival. This subtle distinction is described as "what you might say while waiting in the station" versus "what you might say on the train." [107]

Catalan names
In Spain , every person officially has two surnames, one of which is the father's first surname and the other is the mother's first surname. [108] The law contemplates the possibility of joining both surnames with the Catalan conjunction i ("and"). [108] [109]

Sample text
Selected text [110] from Manuel de Pedrolo 's 1970 novel Un amor fora ciutat ("A love affair outside the city").

Loanwords in Catalan and English

See also
WebPage index: 00069
PHP
PHP is a server-side scripting language designed primarily for web development but also used as a general-purpose programming language . Originally created by Rasmus Lerdorf in 1994, [4] the PHP reference implementation is now produced by The PHP Development Team. [5] PHP originally stood for Personal Home Page , [4] but it now stands for the recursive acronym PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor . [6]
PHP code may be embedded into HTML or HTML5 markup , or it can be used in combination with various web template systems , web content management systems and web frameworks . PHP code is usually processed by a PHP interpreter implemented as a module in the web server or as a Common Gateway Interface (CGI) executable . The web server software combines the results of the interpreted and executed PHP code, which may be any type of data, including images, with the generated web page . PHP code may also be executed with a command-line interface (CLI) and can be used to implement standalone graphical applications . [7]
The standard PHP interpreter, powered by the Zend Engine , is free software released under the PHP License . PHP has been widely ported and can be deployed on most web servers on almost every operating system and platform , free of charge. [8]
The PHP language evolved without a written formal specification or standard until 2014, leaving the canonical PHP interpreter as a de facto standard. Since 2014 work has gone on to create a formal PHP specification. [9]

History

Early history
PHP development began in 1995 when Rasmus Lerdorf wrote several Common Gateway Interface (CGI) programs in C, [10] [11] [12] which he used to maintain his personal homepage . He extended them to work with web forms and to communicate with databases , and called this implementation "Personal Home Page/Forms Interpreter" or PHP/FI.
PHP/FI could help to build simple, dynamic web applications . To accelerate bug reporting and to improve the code, Lerdorf initially announced the release of PHP/FI as "Personal Home Page Tools (PHP Tools) version 1.0" on the Usenet discussion group comp.infosystems.www.authoring.cgi on June 8, 1995. [13] [14] This release already had the basic functionality that PHP has as of 2013 [update] . This included Perl-like variables , form handling, and the ability to embed HTML. The syntax resembled that of Perl but was simpler, more limited and less consistent. [5]
Lerdorf did not intend the early PHP to become a new programming language, but it grew organically, with Lerdorf noting in retrospect: "I don’t know how to stop it, there was never any intent to write a programming language […] I have absolutely no idea how to write a programming language, I just kept adding the next logical step on the way." [15] A development team began to form and, after months of work and beta testing, officially released PHP/FI 2 in November 1997.
The fact that PHP lacked an original overall design but instead developed organically has led to inconsistent naming of functions and inconsistent ordering of their parameters. [16] In some cases, the function names were chosen to match the lower-level libraries which PHP was "wrapping", [17] while in some very early versions of PHP the length of the function names was used internally as a hash function , so names were chosen to improve the distribution of hash values. [18]

PHP 3 and 4
Zeev Suraski and Andi Gutmans rewrote the parser in 1997 and formed the base of PHP 3, changing the language's name to the recursive acronym PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor . [5] [19] Afterwards, public testing of PHP 3 began, and the official launch came in June 1998. Suraski and Gutmans then started a new rewrite of PHP's core, producing the Zend Engine in 1999. [20] They also founded Zend Technologies in Ramat Gan , Israel. [5]
On May 22, 2000, PHP 4, powered by the Zend Engine 1.0, was released. [5] As of August 2008 this branch reached version 4.4.9. PHP 4 is no longer under development nor will any security updates be released. [21] [22]

PHP 5
On July 13, 2004, PHP 5 was released, powered by the new Zend Engine II. [5] PHP 5 included new features such as improved support for object-oriented programming , the PHP Data Objects (PDO) extension (which defines a lightweight and consistent interface for accessing databases), and numerous performance enhancements. [23] In 2008 PHP 5 became the only stable version under development. Late static binding had been missing from PHP and was added in version 5.3. [24] [25]
Many high-profile open-source projects ceased to support PHP 4 in new code as of February 5, 2008, because of the GoPHP5 initiative, [26] provided by a consortium of PHP developers promoting the transition from PHP 4 to PHP 5. [27] [28]
Over time, PHP interpreters became available on most existing 32-bit and 64-bit operating systems, either by building them from the PHP source code, or by using pre-built binaries. [29] For the PHP versions 5.3 and 5.4, the only available Microsoft Windows binary distributions were 32-bit x86 builds, [30] [31] requiring Windows 32-bit compatibility mode while using Internet Information Services (IIS) on a 64-bit Windows platform. PHP version 5.5 made the 64-bit x86-64 builds available for Microsoft Windows. [32]

PHP 6 and Unicode
PHP has received criticism due to lacking native Unicode support at the core language level, instead only supporting byte strings. In 2005, a project headed by Andrei Zmievski was initiated to bring native Unicode support throughout PHP, by embedding the International Components for Unicode (ICU) library, and representing text strings as UTF-16 internally. [33] Since this would cause major changes both to the internals of the language and to user code, it was planned to release this as version 6.0 of the language, along with other major features then in development. [34]
However, a shortage of developers who understood the necessary changes, and performance problems arising from conversion to and from UTF-16, which is rarely used in a web context, led to delays in the project. [35] As a result, a PHP 5.3 release was created in 2009, with many non-Unicode features back-ported from PHP 6, notably namespaces. In March 2010, the project in its current form was officially abandoned, and a PHP 5.4 release was prepared containing most remaining non-Unicode features from PHP 6, such as traits and closure re-binding. [36] Initial hopes were that a new plan would be formed for Unicode integration, but as of 2014 none had been adopted.

PHP 7
During 2014 and 2015, a new major PHP version was developed, which was numbered PHP 7. The numbering of this version involved some debate. [37] While the PHP 6 Unicode experiment had never been released, several articles and book titles referenced the PHP 6 name, which might have caused confusion if a new release were to reuse the name. [38] After a vote, the name PHP 7 was chosen. [39]
The foundation of PHP 7 is a PHP branch that was originally dubbed PHP next generation ( phpng ). It was authored by Dmitry Stogov, Xinchen Hui and Nikita Popov, [40] and aimed to optimize PHP performance by refactoring the Zend Engine to use more compact data structures with improved cache locality while retaining near-complete language compatibility. [41] As of 14 July 2014 [update] , WordPress -based benchmarks, which served as the main benchmark suite for the phpng project, showed an almost 100% increase in performance. Changes from phpng are also expected to make it easier to improve performance in the future, as more compact data structures and other changes are seen as better suited for a successful migration to a just-in-time (JIT) compiler. [42] Because of the significant changes, the reworked Zend Engine is called Zend Engine 3 , succeeding Zend Engine 2 used in PHP 5. [43]
Because of major internal changes in phpng, it must receive a new major version number of PHP, rather than a minor PHP 5 release, according to PHP's release process. [44] Major versions of PHP are allowed to break backward-compatibility of code and therefore PHP 7 presented an opportunity for other improvements beyond phpng that require backward-compatibility breaks, including wider use of exceptions , [45] [46] reworking variable syntax to be more consistent and complete, [47] and the deprecation or removal of various legacy features. [48] [49]
PHP 7 also introduced new language features, including return type declarations for functions, [50] which complement the existing parameter type declarations, and support for the scalar types (integer, float, string, and boolean) in parameter and return type declarations. [51]

Release history
Beginning on June 28, 2011, the PHP Group implemented a timeline for the release of new versions of PHP. [44] Under this system, at least one release should occur every month. Once per year, a minor release should occur which may include new features. Every minor release should at least be supported for two years with security and bug fixes, followed by at least one year of only security fixes, for a total of a three-year release process for every minor release. No new features, unless small and self-contained, are to be introduced into a minor release during the three-year release process.

Mascot
The mascot of the PHP project is the elePHPant , a blue elephant with the PHP logo on its side, designed by Vincent Pontier [82] in 1998. [83] The elePHPant is sometimes differently colored when in plush toy form.

Syntax
The following "Hello, World!" program is written in PHP code embedded in an HTML document:
However, as no requirement exists for PHP code to be embedded in HTML, the simplest version of Hello, World! may be written like this, with the closing tag omitted as preferred in files containing pure PHP code [84]
The PHP interpreter only executes PHP code within its delimiters . Anything outside its delimiters is not processed by PHP, although non-PHP text is still subject to control structures described in PHP code. The most common delimiters are <?php to open and ?> to close PHP sections. The shortened form <? also exists. This short delimiter makes script files less portable, since support for them can be disabled in the local PHP configuration and it is therefore discouraged. [85] [86] However, there is no recommendation against the use of the echo short tag <?= . [87] Prior to PHP 5.4.0, this short syntax for echo() only works with the short_open_tag configuration setting enabled, while for PHP 5.4.0 and later it is always available. [85] [88] [89] The purpose of all these delimiters is to separate PHP code from non-PHP content, such as JavaScript code or HTML markup. [90]
The first form of delimiters, <?php and ?> , in XHTML and other XML documents, creates correctly formed XML processing instructions. [91] This means that the resulting mixture of PHP code and other markup in the server-side file is itself well-formed XML.
Variables are prefixed with a dollar symbol , and a type does not need to be specified in advance. PHP 5 introduced type hinting that allows functions to force their parameters to be objects of a specific class, arrays, interfaces or callback functions . However, before PHP 7.0, type hints could not be used with scalar types such as integer or string. [51]
Unlike function and class names, variable names are case sensitive. Both double-quoted ("") and heredoc strings provide the ability to interpolate a variable's value into the string. [92] PHP treats newlines as whitespace in the manner of a free-form language , and statements are terminated by a semicolon. [93] PHP has three types of comment syntax : /* */ marks block and inline comments; // as well as # are used for one-line comments. [94] The echo statement is one of several facilities PHP provides to output text, e.g. , to a web browser.
In terms of keywords and language syntax, PHP is similar to the C style syntax. if conditions, for and while loops, and function returns are similar in syntax to languages such as C, C++, C#, Java and Perl.
The following is an example of PHP for loop:

Data types
PHP stores integers in a platform-dependent range, either a 64-bit or 32-bit signed integer equivalent to the C-language long type . Unsigned integers are converted to signed values in certain situations; this behavior is different from that of other programming languages. [95] Integer variables can be assigned using decimal (positive and negative), octal , hexadecimal , and binary notations.
Floating point numbers are also stored in a platform-specific range. They can be specified using floating point notation, or two forms of scientific notation . [96] PHP has a native Boolean type that is similar to the native Boolean types in Java and C++ . Using the Boolean type conversion rules, non-zero values are interpreted as true and zero as false, as in Perl and C++. [96]
The null data type represents a variable that has no value; NULL is the only allowed value for this data type. [96]
Variables of the "resource" type represent references to resources from external sources. These are typically created by functions from a particular extension, and can only be processed by functions from the same extension; examples include file, image, and database resources. [96]
Arrays can contain elements of any type that PHP can handle, including resources, objects, and other arrays. Order is preserved in lists of values and in hashes with both keys and values, and the two can be intermingled. [96] PHP also supports strings , which can be used with single quotes, double quotes, nowdoc or heredoc syntax. [97]
The Standard PHP Library (SPL) attempts to solve standard problems and implements efficient data access interfaces and classes. [98]

Functions
PHP defines a large array of functions in the core language and many are also available in various extensions; these functions are well documented in the online PHP documentation. [99] However, the built-in library has a wide variety of naming conventions and associated inconsistencies, as described under history above.
Custom functions may be defined by the developer, e.g.:
In 2017, the output of the above sample program is 'I am currently 36 years old.'
In lieu of function pointers , functions in PHP can be referenced by a string containing their name. In this manner, normal PHP functions can be used, for example, as callbacks or within function tables . [100] User-defined functions may be created at any time without being prototyped . [99] [100] Functions may be defined inside code blocks, permitting a run-time decision as to whether or not a function should be defined. There is a function_exists function that determines whether a function with a given name has already been defined. Function calls must use parentheses, with the exception of zero-argument class constructor functions called with the PHP operator new , in which case parentheses are optional.
Until PHP 5.3, support for anonymous functions and closures did not exist in PHP. While create_function() exists since PHP 4.0.1, it is merely a thin wrapper around eval() that allows normal PHP functions to be created during program execution. [101] PHP 5.3 added syntax to define an anonymous function or "closure" [102] which can capture variables from the surrounding scope:
In the example above, getAdder() function creates a closure using passed argument $x (the keyword use imports a variable from the lexical context), which takes an additional argument $y , and returns the created closure to the caller. Such a function is a first-class object, meaning that it can be stored in a variable, passed as a parameter to other functions, etc. [103]
Unusually for a dynamically typed language, PHP supports type declarations on function parameters, which are enforced at runtime. This has been supported for classes and interfaces since PHP 5.0, for arrays since PHP 5.1, for "callables" since PHP 5.4, and scalar (integer, float, string and boolean) types since PHP 7.0. [51] PHP 7.0 also has type declarations for function return types, expressed by placing the type name after the list of parameters, preceded by a colon. [50] For example, the getAdder function from the earlier example could be annotated with types like so in PHP 7:
By default, scalar type declarations follow weak typing principles. So, for example, if a parameter's type is int , PHP would allow not only integers, but also convertible numeric strings, floats or booleans to be passed to that function, and would convert them. [51] However, PHP 7 has a "strict typing" mode which, when used, disallows such conversions for function calls and returns within a file. [51]

Object-oriented programming
Basic object-oriented programming functionality was added in PHP 3 and improved in PHP 4. [5] This allowed for PHP to gain further abstraction, making creative tasks easier for programmers using the language. Object handling was completely rewritten for PHP 5, expanding the feature set and enhancing performance. [104] In previous versions of PHP, objects were handled like value types . [104] The drawback of this method was that code had to make heavy use of PHP's "reference" variables if it wanted to modify an object it was passed rather than creating a copy of it. In the new approach, objects are referenced by handle , and not by value.
PHP 5 introduced private and protected member variables and methods, along with abstract classes , final classes , abstract methods , and final methods . It also introduced a standard way of declaring constructors and destructors , similar to that of other object-oriented languages such as C++ , and a standard exception handling model. Furthermore, PHP 5 added interfaces and allowed for multiple interfaces to be implemented. There are special interfaces that allow objects to interact with the runtime system. Objects implementing ArrayAccess can be used with array syntax and objects implementing Iterator or IteratorAggregate can be used with the foreach language construct . There is no virtual table feature in the engine, so static variables are bound with a name instead of a reference at compile time. [105]
If the developer creates a copy of an object using the reserved word clone , the Zend engine will check whether a __clone() method has been defined. If not, it will call a default __clone() which will copy the object's properties. If a __clone() method is defined, then it will be responsible for setting the necessary properties in the created object. For convenience, the engine will supply a function that imports the properties of the source object, so the programmer can start with a by-value replica of the source object and only override properties that need to be changed. [106]
The following is a basic example of object-oriented programming in PHP:
The visibility of PHP properties and methods is defined using the keywords public , private , and protected . The default is public, if only var is used; var is a synonym for public . Items declared public can be accessed everywhere. protected limits access to inherited classes (and to the class that defines the item). private limits visibility only to the class that defines the item. [107] Objects of the same type have access to each other's private and protected members even though they are not the same instance. PHP's member visibility features have sometimes been described as "highly useful." [108] However, they have also sometimes been described as "at best irrelevant and at worst positively harmful." [109]

Implementations
The original, only complete and most widely used PHP implementation is powered by the Zend Engine and known simply as PHP. To disambiguate it from other implementations, it is sometimes unofficially referred to as "Zend PHP". The Zend Engine compiles PHP source code on-the-fly into an internal format that it can execute, thus it works as an interpreter . [110] [111] It is also the "reference implementation" of PHP, as PHP has no formal specification, and so the semantics of Zend PHP define the semantics of PHP itself. Due to the complex and nuanced semantics of PHP, defined by how Zend works, it is difficult for competing implementations to offer complete compatibility.
PHP's single-request-per-script-execution model, and the fact that the Zend Engine is an interpreter, leads to inefficiency; as a result, various products have been developed to help improve PHP performance. In order to speed up execution time and not have to compile the PHP source code every time the web page is accessed, PHP scripts can also be deployed in the PHP engine's internal format by using an opcode cache, which works by caching the compiled form of a PHP script (opcodes) in shared memory to avoid the overhead of parsing and compiling the code every time the script runs. An opcode cache, Zend Opcache , is built into PHP since version 5.5. [112] Another example of a widely used opcode cache is the Alternative PHP Cache (APC), which is available as a PECL extension. [113]
While Zend PHP is still the most popular implementation, several other implementations have been developed. Some of these are compilers or support JIT compilation , and hence offer performance benefits over Zend PHP at the expense of lacking full PHP compatibility. Alternative implementations include the following:

Licensing
PHP is free software released under the PHP License , which stipulates that: [116]
This restriction on use of "PHP" makes the PHP License incompatible with the General Public License (GPL), while the Zend License is incompatible due to an advertising clause similar to that of the original BSD license . [117]

Development and community
PHP includes various free and open-source libraries in its source distribution, or uses them in resulting PHP binary builds. PHP is fundamentally an Internet -aware system with built-in modules for accessing File Transfer Protocol (FTP) servers and many database servers, including PostgreSQL , MySQL , Microsoft SQL Server and SQLite (which is an embedded database), LDAP servers, and others. Numerous functions familiar to C programmers, such as those in the stdio family, are available in standard PHP builds. [118]
PHP allows developers to write extensions in C to add functionality to the PHP language. PHP extensions can be compiled statically into PHP or loaded dynamically at runtime. Numerous extensions have been written to add support for the Windows API , process management on Unix-like operating systems , multibyte strings ( Unicode ), cURL , and several popular compression formats . Other PHP features made available through extensions include integration with IRC , dynamic generation of images and Adobe Flash content, PHP Data Objects (PDO) as an abstraction layer used for accessing databases, [119] [120] [121] [122] [123] [124] [125] and even speech synthesis . Some of the language's core functions, such as those dealing with strings and arrays, are also implemented as extensions. [126] The PHP Extension Community Library (PECL) project is a repository for extensions to the PHP language. [127]
Some other projects, such as Zephir , provide the ability for PHP extensions to be created in a high-level language and compiled into native PHP extensions. Such an approach, instead of writing PHP extensions directly in C, simplifies the development of extensions and reduces the time required for programming and testing. [128]
The PHP Group consists of ten people (as of 2015 [update] ): Thies C. Arntzen , Stig Bakken , Shane Caraveo , Andi Gutmans , Rasmus Lerdorf , Sam Ruby , Sascha Schumann , Zeev Suraski , Jim Winstead , Andrei Zmievski . [129]
Zend Technologies provides a PHP Certification based on PHP 5.5 [130] exam for programmers to become certified PHP developers.

Installation and configuration
There are two primary ways for adding support for PHP to a web server –  as a native web server module, or as a CGI executable. PHP has a direct module interface called Server Application Programming Interface (SAPI), which is supported by many web servers including Apache HTTP Server , Microsoft IIS , Netscape (now defunct) and iPlanet . Some other web servers, such as OmniHTTPd, support the Internet Server Application Programming Interface (ISAPI), which is a Microsoft 's web server module interface. If PHP has no module support for a web server, it can always be used as a Common Gateway Interface (CGI) or FastCGI processor; in that case, the web server is configured to use PHP's CGI executable to process all requests to PHP files. [131]
PHP-FPM (FastCGI Process Manager) is an alternative FastCGI implementation for PHP, bundled with the official PHP distribution since version 5.3.3. [132] When compared to the older FastCGI implementation, it contains some additional features, mostly useful for heavily loaded web servers. [133]
When using PHP for command-line scripting, a PHP command-line interface (CLI) executable is needed. PHP supports a CLI SAPI as of PHP 4.3.0. [134] The main focus of this SAPI is developing shell applications using PHP. There are quite a few differences between the CLI SAPI and other SAPIs, although they do share many of the same behaviors. [135]
PHP has a direct module interface called SAPI for different web servers; [136] in case of PHP 5 and Apache 2.0 on Windows, it is provided in form of a DLL file called php5apache2.dll , [137] which is a module that, among other functions, provides an interface between PHP and the web server, implemented in a form that the server understands. This form is what is known as a SAPI.
There are different kinds of SAPIs for various web server extensions. For example, in addition to those listed above, other SAPIs for the PHP language include the Common Gateway Interface (CGI) and command-line interface (CLI). [136] [138]
PHP can also be used for writing desktop graphical user interface (GUI) applications, by using the PHP-GTK extension. PHP-GTK is not included in the official PHP distribution, [131] and as an extension it can be used only with PHP versions 5.1.0 and newer. The most common way of installing PHP-GTK is compiling it from the source code. [139]
When PHP is installed and used in cloud environments, software development kits (SDKs) are provided for using cloud-specific features. For example:
Numerous configuration options are supported, affecting both core PHP features and extensions. [142] [143] Configuration file php.ini is searched for in different locations, depending on the way PHP is used. [144] The configuration file is split into various sections, [145] while some of the configuration options can be also set within the web server configuration. [146]

Use
PHP is a general-purpose scripting language that is especially suited to server-side web development , in which case PHP generally runs on a web server . Any PHP code in a requested file is executed by the PHP runtime, usually to create dynamic web page content or dynamic images used on websites or elsewhere. [147] It can also be used for command-line scripting and client-side graphical user interface (GUI) applications. PHP can be deployed on most web servers, many operating systems and platforms , and can be used with many relational database management systems (RDBMS). Most web hosting providers support PHP for use by their clients. It is available free of charge, and the PHP Group provides the complete source code for users to build, customize and extend for their own use. [8]
PHP acts primarily as a filter , [148] taking input from a file or stream containing text and/or PHP instructions and outputting another stream of data. Most commonly the output will be HTML, although it could be JSON , XML or binary data such as image or audio formats. Since PHP 4, the PHP parser compiles input to produce bytecode for processing by the Zend Engine , giving improved performance over its interpreter predecessor. [149]
Originally designed to create dynamic web pages , PHP now focuses mainly on server-side scripting , [150] and it is similar to other server-side scripting languages that provide dynamic content from a web server to a client , such as Microsoft 's ASP.NET , Sun Microsystems ' JavaServer Pages , [151] and mod_perl . PHP has also attracted the development of many software frameworks that provide building blocks and a design structure to promote rapid application development (RAD). Some of these include PRADO , CakePHP , Symfony , CodeIgniter , Laravel , Yii Framework , Phalcon and Zend Framework , offering features similar to other web frameworks .
The LAMP architecture has become popular in the web industry as a way of deploying web applications. [152] PHP is commonly used as the P in this bundle alongside Linux , Apache and MySQL , although the P may also refer to Python , Perl , or some mix of the three. Similar packages, WAMP and MAMP , are also available for Windows and macOS , with the first letter standing for the respective operating system. Although both PHP and Apache are provided as part of the macOS base install, users of these packages seek a simpler installation mechanism that can be more easily kept up to date.
As of April 2007 [update] , over 20 million Internet domains had web services hosted on servers with PHP installed and mod_php was recorded as the most popular Apache HTTP Server module. [153] As of May 2017 [update] , PHP was used as the server-side programming language on 83% of 10 million most popular websites [154] Web content management systems written in PHP include MediaWiki , [155] Joomla , [156] eZ Publish , eZ Platform , SilverStripe , [157] WordPress , [158] Drupal , [159] and Moodle . [160] Websites written in PHP, in back-end and/or user-facing portion, include Facebook , [161] Digg , [162] Tumblr , [163] Dailymotion , [164] and Slack . [165]
For specific and more advanced usage scenarios, PHP offers a well defined and documented way for writing custom extensions in C or C++ . [166] [167] [168] [169] [170] [171] [172] Besides extending the language itself in form of additional libraries , extensions are providing a way for improving execution speed where it is critical and there is room for improvements by using a true compiled language . [173] [174] PHP also offers well defined ways for embedding itself into other software projects. That way PHP can be easily used as an internal scripting language for another project, also providing tight interfacing with the project's specific internal data structures . [175]
PHP received mixed reviews due to lacking support for multithreading at the core language level, [176] though using threads is made possible by the "pthreads" PECL extension. [177] [178]
As of January 2013 [update] , PHP was used in more than 240 million websites (39% of those sampled) and was installed on 2.1 million web servers . [179]

Security
In 2013, 9% of all vulnerabilities listed by the National Vulnerability Database were linked to PHP; [180] historically, about 30% of all vulnerabilities listed since 1996 in this database are linked to PHP. Technical security flaws of the language itself or of its core libraries are not frequent (these numbered 22 in 2009, which was about 1% of the total, although PHP applies to about 20% of programs listed.) [181] Recognizing that programmers make mistakes, some languages include taint checking to automatically detect the lack of input validation which induces many issues. Such a feature is being developed for PHP, [182] but its inclusion into a release has been rejected several times in the past. [183] [184]
There are advanced protection patches, such as Suhosin and Hardening -Patch, that are especially designed for web hosting environments, [185] primarily due to these environments being seen as places where carelessly written code may run.
There are certain language features and configuration parameters (primarily the default values for such runtime settings) that make PHP applications prone to security issues. Among these, magic_quotes_gpc and register_globals [186] configuration directives are the best known; the latter made any URL parameters become PHP variables, opening a path for serious security vulnerabilities by allowing an attacker to set the value of any uninitialized global variable and interfere with the execution of a PHP script. Support for " magic quotes " and "register globals" has been deprecated as of PHP 5.3.0, and removed as of PHP 5.4.0. [187]
Another example for the runtime settings vulnerability comes from failing to disable PHP execution (via engine configuration directive) [188] for the directory where uploaded images are stored; leaving the default settings can result in execution of malicious PHP code embedded within the uploaded images. [189] [190] [191] Also, leaving enabled the dynamic loading of PHP extensions (via enable_dl configuration directive) [192] in a shared web hosting environment can lead to security issues. [193] [194]
Also, implied type conversions that result in incompatible values being treated as identical against the programmer's intent can lead to security issues. For example, the result of the comparison "0e1234" == "0" comparison is true because the first compared value is treated as scientific notation having the value ( 0 × 10 1234 ), i.e. zero . This feature resulted in authentication vulnerabilities in Simple Machines Forum , [195] Typo3 [196] and phpBB [197] when MD5 password hashes were compared. Instead, either the function strcmp or the identity operator ( === ) should be used; "0e1234" === "0" results in false . [198]
In a 2013 analysis of over 170,000 website defacements , published by Zone-H , the most frequently (53%) used technique was exploitation of file inclusion vulnerability , mostly related to insecure usage of the PHP functions include , require , and allow_url_fopen . [199] [200]

See also
WebPage index: 00070
Web template system
A web template system is used in web publishing to allow web designers and developers to work with web templates for the automatic generation of custom web pages, such as the results from a search. This allows for reuse of the static elements of a web page, while allowing the dynamic elements to be defined based on the parameters of the web request . It can be present in content management systems , web application frameworks , and HTML editors .

Overview
A web template system is composed of the following:
The template and content resources are processed and combined by the template engine to mass-produce web documents. For purposes of this article, web documents include any of various output formats for transmission over the web via HTTP , or another Internet protocol.

Motivations and typical uses

Applications
Web templates can be used by any individual or organization to set up their website. Once a template is purchased or downloaded, the user will replace all generic information included in the web template with their own personal, organizational or product information. Examples of common uses of Templates are listed below:

Mass-production
Various agencies and organizations use web template systems for mass-production of content when slower production alternatives prove unfeasible. [ citation needed ]
For an introductory overview, take a news website as an example. Consider a "static website", where all web pages are static , built by a web designer . It would be very repetitive work to change individual pages as often as the news changes. A typical strategy to automate the web designer's "repetitive work" using Templates could be as follows:

Style standardization

Separation of concerns
A common goal among experienced web developers is to develop and deploy applications that are flexible and easily maintainable. An important consideration in reaching this goal is the separation of business logic from presentation logic . [2] Developers use web template systems (with varying degrees of success) to maintain this separation. [2]
For the web designer , when each web page comes from a web template , they can think about a modular web page structured with components that can be modified independently of each other. These components may include a header, footer, global navigation bar (GNB), local navigation bar and content such as articles, images, videos etc.
For programmers the template language offers a more restricted logic, only for presentation adaptations and decisions, not for complex (business model ) algorithms . [ citation needed ]
For other members of the "site team", a template system frees webmasters to focus on technical maintenance, content suppliers to focus on content, and gives all of them more reliability .
Moreover, it has the following advantages to its use:
One difficulty in evaluating separation of concerns is the lack of well-defined formalisms to measure when and how well it is actually met. [2] There are, however, fairly standard heuristics that have been borrowed from the domain of software engineering . These include ' inheritance ' (based on principles of object-oriented programming ); and ' templating and generative programming ', (consistent with the principles of MVC separation ). [6] The precise difference between the various guidelines is subject to some debate, and some aspects of the different guidelines share a degree of similarity. [7]

Flexible presentation
One major rationale behind "effective separation" is the need for maximum flexibility in the code and resources dedicated to the presentation logic. [6] Client demands, changing customer preferences and desire to present a "fresh face" for pre-existing content often result in the need to dramatically modify the public appearance of web content while disrupting the underlying infrastructure as little as possible.
The distinction between "presentation" (front end) and " business logic " (infrastructure) is usually an important one, because:

Reusability
Not all potential users of web templates have the willingness and ability to hire developers to design a system for their needs. Additionally, some may wish to use the web but have limited or no technical proficiency. For these reasons, a number of developers and vendors have released web templates specifically for reuse by non-technical people. Although web template reusability is also important for even highly skilled and technically experienced developers, it is especially critical to those who rely on simplicity and "ready-made" web solutions.
Such "ready-made" web templates are sometimes free, and easily made by an individual domestically. However, specialized web templates are sometimes sold online. Although there are numerous commercial sites that offer web templates for a licensing fee, there are also free and "open-source" sources as well.

Example
With the model typically held in a relational database, the remaining components of the MVC architecture are the control and view. In the simplest of systems these two are not separated. However, adapting the separation of concerns principle one can completely decouple the relationship.
For example, the view template may look like this:
Then the control template will load the view and then can use xpath addressing [ original research? ] to insert components from a database, for instance:

Kinds of template systems
A web browser and web server are a client–server architecture; often a web cache is also used to improve performance. Overall, there are five types of templating systems, classified based on when assembly happens - placeholders are substituted for variable information (such as names, addresses, and product info) and sub-templates:
Template languages may be:
The source code of the template engine can be proprietary or open source .
Many template systems are a component of a larger programming platform or framework. They are referred to as the "platform's template system". Some template systems have the option of substituting a different template language or engine. [ citation needed ]
Programming languages such as Perl , Ruby , C , and Java support template processing either natively, or through add-on libraries and modules. JavaServer Pages (JSP), PHP , and Active Server Pages (ASP with VBScript , JScript or other languages) are examples, themselves, of web template engines. These technologies are typically used in server-side templating systems, but could be adapted for use on a "edge-side" proxy or for static page generation.

Static site generators
HTML editors often use web template systems to produce only static web pages . These can be viewed as a ready-made web design , used to mass-produce "cookie-cutter" websites for rapid deployment. They also commonly include themes in place of CSS styles. In general, the template language is to be used only with the editor's software. [8]
FrontPage and Dreamweaver were once the most popular editors with template sub-system. A Flash web template uses Macromedia Flash to create visually interactive sites.
Many server-side template systems have the option to publish the output pages on the server, where the published pages will be static . It is a common feature on content management systems , like Vignette . But this does not have to be considered an out-server generation.
In the majority of the cases, this "publish option" doesn't interfere with the template system , and it can be made by external software, as Wget .

Server-side systems
Server-side dynamic pages began to be generated by templates with pre-existent software adapted for this task. This early software was the preprocessors and macro languages , adapted for the web use, running on CGI . Next, a simple but relevant technology was the direct execution made on extension modules, started with SSI .
Many template systems are typically used as server-side template systems :
Technically, the methodology of embedding programming languages within HTML (or XML, etc.), used in many "server-side included script languages" are also templates. All of them are Embedded complex languages .
There are also preprocessors used as server-side template engines . Examples:

Edge-side systems
Edge-Side template and inclusion systems. “Edge-side” refers to web servers that reside in the space between the client (browser) and the originating server. They are often referred to as “reverse-proxy” servers. These servers are generally tasked with reducing the load and traffic on originating servers by caching content such as images and page fragments, and delivering this to the browser in an efficient manner.
Basic Edge Side Includes (ESI) is an SSI-like language. ESI has been implemented for content delivery networks. The ESI template language may also be implemented in web browsers using JavaScript and Ajax, or via a browser "plug-in".

Client-side systems
Many web browsers can apply an XSLT stylesheet to XML data that transforms the data into an XHTML document, thereby providing template functionality in the browser itself. Other systems implement template functionality in the browser using JavaScript or another client-side scripting language, including:

Distributed systems
The most simple form is transclusions (HTML frames). In other cases dynamic web pages are needed.
Examples:

See also
WebPage index: 00071
Camel case
Camel case (stylized as camelCase or CamelCase ; also known as camel caps or more formally as medial capitals ) is the practice of writing compound words or phrases such that each word or abbreviation in the middle of the phrase begins with a capital letter , with no intervening spaces or punctuation. Common examples include " iPhone ", " eBay ", " FedEx ", and " HarperCollins ". It is also sometimes used in online usernames such as "JohnSmith", and to make multi-word domain names more legible, for example in advertisements.
As the first letter of a compound word in camel case may or may not be capitalized, there is no consensus on whether the term "camel case" implies an uppercase or lowercase initial letter. [1] [2] [3] For clarity, this article calls the two alternatives upper camel case (initial upper case letter, also known as Pascal Case ) and lower camel case (initial lower case letter). Some people and organizations, notably Microsoft , [4] use the term camel case only for lower camel case.
Camel case is distinct from title case , which is traditionally used for book titles and headlines, as the latter retains the spaces between the words. [5] [6] [7] Camel case is also distinct from Tall Man lettering , which uses capitals to emphasize the differences between similar-looking words.
The name "CamelCase" is not related to the "Camel Book", the popular nickname of the book Programming Perl , which uses all-lowercase identifiers with underscores (sometimes called snake case ) in its sample code.

Variations and synonyms
The original name of the practice, used in media studies , grammars and the Oxford English Dictionary , was "medial capitals". Other names such as "InterCaps" or "CamelCase" are relatively recent and more common in computer-related communities. Other synonyms include:
StudlyCaps encompasses both styles of camel case, but includes even randomly mixed capitalization, as in MiXeD CaPitALiZaTioN (typically a stereotyped allusion to online culture ). [8]
The earliest known occurrence of the term "InterCaps" on Usenet is in an April 1990 post to the group alt.folklore.computers by Avi Rappoport. [12] The earliest use of the name "CamelCase" occurs in 1995, in a post by Newton Love. [22] Love has since said, "With the advent of programming languages having these sorts of constructs, the humpiness of the style made me call it HumpyCase at first, before I settled on CamelCase. I had been calling it CamelCase for years. ... The citation above was just the first time I had used the name on USENET." [23]

Traditional use in natural language

In word combinations
The use of medial capitals as a convention in the regular spelling of everyday texts is rare, but is used in some languages as a solution to particular problems which arise when two words or segments are combined.
In Italian, pronouns can be suffixed to verbs, and because the honorific form of second-person pronouns is capitalized, this can produce a sentence like non ho trovato il tempo di risponderLe ("I haven't found time to answer you" - where Le means "you").
In German , the medial capital letter I , called Binnen-I , is sometimes used in a word like StudentInnen ("students") to indicate that both Studenten ("male students") and Studentinnen ("female students") are intended simultaneously. However, mid-word capitalisation does not conform to German orthography . The previous example could be correctly written using parentheses as Student(inn)en , analogous to "congress(wo)man" in English. [24]
In Irish , they are used when an inflectional prefix is attached to a proper noun, for example i nGaillimh ("in Galway "), from Gaillimh ("Galway"); an tAlbanach ("the Scottish person"), from Albanach ("Scottish person"); and go hÉireann ("to Ireland "), from Éire ("Ireland"). In recent Scots Gaelic orthography , a hyphen has been inserted: an t-Albannach .
This convention is also used by several Bantu languages (e.g., kiSwahili , " Swahili language "; isiZulu , " Zulu language ") and several indigenous languages of Mexico (e.g. Nahuatl , Totonacan , Mixe–Zoque , and some Oto-Manguean languages ).
In English, medial capitals are usually only found in Scottish or Irish "Mac-" or "Mc-" names, where for example MacDonald, McDonald, and Macdonald are common spelling variants of the same name, and in Anglo-Norman "Fitz-" names, where for example both FitzGerald and Fitzgerald are found.
In their English style guide The King's English , first published in 1906, H. W. Fowler and F. G. Fowler suggested that medial capitals could be used in triple compound words where hyphens would cause ambiguity—the examples they give are KingMark-like (as against King Mark-like ) and Anglo-SouthAmerican (as against Anglo-South American ). However, they described the system as "too hopelessly contrary to use at present." [25]

In transliterations
In the scholarly transliteration of languages written in other scripts, medial capitals are used in similar situations. For example, in transliterated Hebrew , ha I vri means "the Hebrew person" and biYerushalayim means "in Jerusalem". In Tibetan proper names like rLobsang , the "r" stands for a prefix glyph in the original script that functions as tone marker rather than a normal letter. Another example is ts I urku , a Latin transcription of the Chechen term for the capping stone of the characteristic Medieval defensive towers of Chechenia and Ingushetia ; the capital letter " I " here denoting a phoneme distinct from the one transcribed as "i".

In abbreviations and acronyms
Medial capitals are traditionally used in abbreviations to reflect the capitalization that the words would have when written out in full, for example in the academic titles PhD or BSc . In German, the names to statutes are abbreviated using embedded capitals, e.g. StGB (Strafgesetzbuch) for Criminal Code, PatG (Patentgesetz) for Patent Act, BVerfG (Bundesverfassungsgericht) for Federal Constitutional Court , or the very common GmbH (Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung) for Company with Limited Liability . In this context, there can even be three or more "CamelCase" capitals, e.g. in TzBfG for Teilzeit- und Befristungsgesetz (Act on Part-Time and Limited Term Occupations). In French, camel case acronyms such as OuLiPo (1960) were favored for a time as alternatives to initialisms.
Camel case is often used to transliterate initialisms into alphabets where two letters may be required to represent a single character of the original alphabet, e.g., DShK from Cyrillic ДШК.

History of modern technical use

Chemical formulae
The first systematic and widespread use of medial capitals for technical purposes was the notation for chemical formulae invented by the Swedish chemist Berzelius in 1813. To replace the multitude of naming and symbol conventions used by chemists until that time, he proposed to indicate each chemical element by a symbol of one or two letters, the first one being capitalized. The capitalization allowed formulae like "NaCl" to be written without spaces and still be parsed without ambiguity. [26] [27]
Berzelius' system remains in use to this day, augmented with three-letter symbols like " Uue " for unconfirmed or unknown elements and abbreviations for some common substituents (especially in the field of organic chemistry, for instance " Et " for "ethyl-"). This has been further extended to describe the amino acid sequences of proteins and other similar domains.

Early use in trademarks
Since the early 20th century, medial capitals have occasionally been used for corporate names and product trademarks , such as

Computer programming
In the 1970s and 1980s, medial capitals were adopted as a standard or alternative naming convention for multi-word identifiers in several programming languages . The precise origin of the convention in computer programming has not yet been settled. A 1954 conference proceedings [30] informally referred to IBM's Speedcoding system as "SpeedCo". Christopher Strachey 's paper on GPM (1965), [31] shows a program that includes some medial capital identifiers, including " NextCh " and " WriteSymbol ".
Multiple-word descriptive identifiers such as end of file or char table cannot be used in most popular programming languages because the spaces between the words would be parsed as delimiters between tokens . The alternative of running the words together as in endoffile or chartable may result in identifiers that are difficult to understand and perhaps even misleading; for example, chartable is ambiguous as it could mean "chart-able" (able to be charted) or "char table" (a table of characters).
Some early programming languages, notably Lisp (1958) and COBOL (1959), addressed this problem by allowing a hyphen ("-") to be used between words of compound identifiers, as in "END-OF-FILE": Lisp because it worked well with prefix notation (a Lisp parser would not treat a hyphen in the middle of a symbol as a subtraction operator) and COBOL because its operators were individual English words. This convention remains in use in these languages, and is also common in program names entered on a command line , as in Unix.
However, this solution was not adequate for mathematically-oriented languages such as FORTRAN (1955) and ALGOL (1958), which used the hyphen as an infix subtraction operator. These early languages instead allowed identifiers to have spaces in them, determining the end of the identifier by context. This approach was abandoned in later languages due to the complexity it adds to tokenization . (FORTRAN initially restricted identifiers to six characters or fewer, effectively preventing multi-word identifiers except those made of very short words.)
Exacerbating the problem was the fact that common punched card character sets of the time were uppercase only and lacked other special characters. It was only in the late 1960s that the widespread adoption of the ASCII character set made both lower case and the underscore character _ universally available. Some languages, notably C , promptly adopted underscores as word separators, and identifiers such as end_of_file are still prevalent in C programs and libraries (as well as in later languages influenced by C, like Perl and Python ). However, some languages and programmers chose to avoid underscores—among other reasons to prevent confusing them with whitespace —and adopted camel case instead.
Charles Simonyi , who worked at Xerox PARC in the 1970s and later oversaw the creation of Microsoft's Office suite of applications, invented and taught the use of Hungarian Notation , in which the lower case letter at the start of a (capitalized) variable name denotes its type. One account [ citation needed ] claims that the camel case style first became popular at Xerox PARC around 1978, with the Mesa programming language developed for the Xerox Alto computer. This machine lacked an underscore key, and the hyphen and space characters were not permitted in identifiers, leaving camel case as the only viable scheme for readable multiword names. The PARC Mesa Language Manual (1979) included a coding standard with specific rules for upper and lower camel case that was strictly followed by the Mesa libraries and the Alto operating system.
The Smalltalk language, which was developed originally on the Alto and became quite popular in the early 1980s, may [ according to whom? ] have been instrumental in spreading the style outside PARC. Camel case was also used by convention for many names in the PostScript page description language (invented by Adobe Systems founder and ex-PARC scientist John Warnock ), as well as for the language itself. In addition, Niklaus Wirth , the inventor of Pascal , came to appreciate camel case during a sabbatical at PARC and used it in Modula , his next programming language.

Spread to mainstream usage
Whatever its origins within the computing world, the practice spread in the 1980s and 1990s, when the advent of the personal computer exposed hacker culture to the world. Camel case then became fashionable for corporate trade names , initially in technical fields; mainstream usage was well established by 1990:
During the dot-com bubble of the late 1990s, the lowercase prefixes "e" (for " electronic ") and "i" (for " Internet ", [33] " information ", " intelligent ", etc.) became quite common, giving rise to names like Apple 's iMac and the eBox software platform.
In 1998, Dave Yost suggested that chemists use medial capitals to aid readability of long chemical names, e.g. write AmidoPhosphoRibosylTransferase instead of amidophosphoribosyltransferase . [34] This usage was still rare in 2012.
The practice is sometimes used for abbreviated names of certain neighborhoods, e.g. New York City neighborhoods SoHo ( So uth of Ho uston Street) and TriBeCa ( Tri angle Be low Ca nal Street) and San Francisco's SoMa ( So uth of Ma rket). Such usages erode quickly, so the neighborhoods are now typically rendered as Soho , Tribeca , and Soma .
Internal capitalization has also been used for other technical codes like HeLa (1983).

Current usage in computing

Programming and coding
The use of medial caps for compound identifiers is recommended by the coding style guidelines of many organizations or software projects. For some languages (such as Mesa , Pascal , Modula , Java and Microsoft 's .NET ) this practice is recommended by the language developers or by authoritative manuals and has therefore become part of the language's "culture".
Style guidelines often distinguish between upper and lower camel case, typically specifying which variety should be used for specific kinds of entities: variables , record fields , methods , procedures , types , etc. These rules are sometimes supported by static analysis tools that check source code for adherence.
The original Hungarian notation for programming, for example, specifies that a lowercase abbreviation for the "usage type" (not data type) should prefix all variable names, with the remainder of the name in upper camel case; as such it is a form of lower camel case.
Programming identifiers often need to contain acronyms and initialisms that are already in upper case, such as "old HTML file". By analogy with the title case rules, the natural camel case rendering would have the abbreviation all in upper case, namely "oldHTMLFile". However, this approach is problematic when two acronyms occur together (e.g., "parse DBM XML" would become "parseDBMXML") or when the standard mandates lower camel case but the name begins with an abbreviation (e.g. "SQL server" would become "sQLServer"). For this reason, some programmers prefer to treat abbreviations as if they were lower case words and write "oldHtmlFile", "parseDbmXml" or "sqlServer". However, this can make it harder to recognise that a given word is intended as an acronym. [35]

Wiki link markup
Camel case is used in some wiki markup languages for terms that should be automatically linked to other wiki pages. This convention was originally used in Ward Cunningham 's original wiki software , WikiWikiWeb , and can be activated in most other wikis. Some wiki engines such as TiddlyWiki , Trac and PmWiki make use of it in the default settings, but usually also provide a configuration mechanism or plugin to disable it. Wikipedia formerly used camel case linking as well, but switched to explicit link markup using square brackets and many other wiki sites have done the same. Some wikis that do not use camel case linking may still use the camel case as a naming convention, such as AboutUs .

Other uses
The NIEM registry requires that XML data elements use upper camel case and XML attributes use lower camel case.
Most popular command-line interfaces and scripting languages cannot easily handle file names that contain embedded spaces (usually requiring the name to be put in quotes). Therefore, users of those systems often resort to camel case (or underscores, hyphens and other "safe" characters) for compound file names like MyJobResume.pdf .
Microblogging and social networking sites that limit the number of characters in a message (most famously Twitter , where the 140-character limit can be quite restrictive in languages that rely on alphabets, including English) are potential outlets for medial capitals. Using camel case between words reduces the number of spaces, and thus the number of characters, in a given message, allowing more content to fit into the limited space. Hashtags , especially long ones, often use camel case to maintain readability (e.g. #CollegeStudentProblems is easier to read than #collegestudentproblems).
In website URLs, spaces are percent-encoded as "%20", making the address longer and less human readable . By omitting spaces, camel case does not have this problem.

Readability studies
Camel case has been criticised as negatively impacting readability due to the removal of spaces and uppercasing of every word. [36]
A 2009 study comparing snake case to camel case found that camel case identifiers could be recognised with higher accuracy among both programmers and non-programmers, and that programmers already trained in camel case were able to recognise those identifiers faster than underscored snake-case identifiers. [37]
A 2010 follow-up study, under the same conditions but using an improved measurement method with use of eye-tracking equipment, indicates: "While results indicate no difference in accuracy between the two styles, subjects recognize identifiers in the underscore style more quickly." [38]

See also
WebPage index: 00072
Apache Lucene
Apache Lucene is a free and open-source information retrieval software library , originally written completely in Java by Doug Cutting . It is supported by the Apache Software Foundation and is released under the Apache Software License .
Lucene has been ported to other programming languages including Object Pascal , Perl , C# , C++ , Python , Ruby and PHP . [1]

History
Doug Cutting originally wrote Lucene in 1999. [2] It was initially available for download from its home at the SourceForge web site. It joined the Apache Software Foundation's Jakarta family of open-source Java products in September 2001 and became its own top-level Apache project in February 2005.
Lucene formerly included a number of sub-projects, such as Lucene.NET, Mahout , Tika and Nutch . These three are now independent top-level projects.
In March 2010, the Apache Solr search server joined as a Lucene sub-project, merging the developer communities.
Version 4.0 was released on October 12, 2012. [3]
The latest version of Lucene is 6.5.1 which was released on April 27, 2017. [4]

Features and common use
While suitable for any application that requires full text indexing and searching capability, Lucene has been widely recognized [5] [6] for its utility in the implementation of Internet search engines and local, single-site searching.
Lucene includes a feature to perform a fuzzy search based on edit distance . [7]
Lucene has also been used to implement recommendation systems. [8] For example, Lucene's 'MoreLikeThis' Class can generate recommendations for similar documents. In a comparison of the term vector-based similarity approach of 'MoreLikeThis' with citation-based document similarity measures, such as Co-citation and Co-citation Proximity Analysis Lucene's approach excelled at recommending documents with very similar structural characteristics and more narrow relatedness. [9] In contrast, citation-based document similarity measures, tended to be more suitable for recommending more broadly related documents, [9] meaning citation-based approaches may be more suitable for generating serendipitous recommendations, as long as documents to be recommended contain in-text citations.
At the core of Lucene's logical architecture is the idea of a document containing fields of text. This flexibility allows Lucene's API to be independent of the file format . Text from PDFs , HTML , Microsoft Word , Mind Maps , and OpenDocument documents, as well as many others (except images), can all be indexed as long as their textual information can be extracted. [10]

Lucene-based projects
Lucene itself is just an indexing and search library and does not contain crawling and HTML parsing functionality. However, several projects extend Lucene's capability:

Users
For a list of companies that use Lucene (rather than extend), see Lucene's "Powered By" page. [26] As an example, Twitter is using Lucene for its real time search. [27]

See also
WebPage index: 00073
WikiProject
A WikiProject (or Wikiproject ) is the organization of a group of participants in a wiki established in order to achieve specific editing goals, or to achieve goals relating to a specific field of knowledge. [1] [2] [3] WikiProjects are prevalent within the largest wiki, Wikipedia , and exist to varying degrees within sister projects such as Wiktionary , Wikiquote , and Wikisource .

On Wikipedia
Some Wikipedia WikiProjects are substantial enough to engage in cooperative activities with outside organizations relevant to the field at issue. For example, in 2014 the Cochrane Collaboration announced that it had entered into a partnership with Wikipedia's WikiProject Medicine , "to improve the reliability and accessibility of Wikipedia medical information online". [4]
Wikipedia has hundreds of WikiProjects, primarily divided between specific topical areas and performing specific maintenance tasks. [1] [3] One task commonly performed by topical WikiProjects in Wikipedia is the assessment of the quality of articles that fall within that topic area. [5] In Wikipedia and sister projects, WikiProject pages are located in project space, [1] and the meta information regarding the association between the article and the WikiProject is usually included on the talk page of the article. [5] WikiProjects provide an additional avenue for engagement between editors with similar interests, and have thereby been found to increase the productivity of such editors. [2] In order to spur participation and concentrate effectiveness, WikiProjects in Wikipedia may engage in activities like having a "collaboration of the week", [6] or designating one article to be improved to the point of achieving "featured" status. [7] The WikiProject Council is a group of editors that assists with the development of active WikiProjects.
A 2008 academic study of Wikipedia concluded that participation in WikiProjects substantially improved the chances of an editor becoming an administrator, finding that one Wikipedia policy edit or WikiProject edit is worth ten article edits, [8] and concluding:
WebPage index: 00074
Squid (software)
Squid is a caching and forwarding HTTP web proxy . It has a wide variety of uses, from speeding up a web server by caching repeated requests; to caching web , DNS and other computer network lookups for a group of people sharing network resources, to aiding security by filtering traffic. Although primarily used for HTTP and FTP , Squid includes limited support for several other protocols including TLS , SSL , Internet Gopher and HTTPS . [6] Squid does not support the SOCKS protocol.
Squid was originally designed to run as a daemon on Unix-like systems. A Windows port was maintained up to version 2.7. New versions available on Windows use the Cygwin environment. [7] Squid is free software released under the GNU General Public License .

History
Squid was originally developed as the Harvest object cache , [8] part of the Harvest project at the University of Colorado Boulder . [9] [10] Further work on the program was completed at the University of California, San Diego and funded via two grants from the National Science Foundation . [11] Duane Wessels forked the "last pre-commercial version of Harvest" and renamed it to Squid to avoid confusion with the commercial fork called Cached 2.0, which became NetCache . [12] [13] Squid version 1.0.0 was released in July 1996. [12]
Squid is now developed almost exclusively through volunteer efforts.

Basic functionality
After a Squid proxy server is installed, web browsers can be configured to use it as a proxy HTTP server, allowing Squid to retain copies of the documents returned, which, on repeated requests for the same documents, can reduce access time as well as bandwidth consumption. This is often useful for Internet service providers to increase speed to their customers, and LANs that share an Internet connection. Because the caching servers are controlled by the web service operator, caching proxies do not anonymize the user and should not be confused with anonymizing proxies.
A client program (e.g. browser) either has to specify explicitly the proxy server it wants to use (typical for ISP customers), or it could be using a proxy without any extra configuration: "transparent caching", in which case all outgoing HTTP requests are intercepted by Squid and all responses are cached. The latter is typically a corporate set-up (all clients are on the same LAN) and often introduces the privacy concerns mentioned above.
Squid has some features that can help anonymize connections, such as disabling or changing specific header fields in a client's HTTP requests. Whether these are set, and what they are set to do, is up to the person who controls the computer running Squid. People requesting pages through a network which transparently uses Squid may not know whether this information is being logged. [14] Within UK organisations at least, users should be informed if computers or internet connections are being monitored. [15]

Reverse proxy
The above setup—caching the contents of an unlimited number of webservers for a limited number of clients—is the classical one. Another setup is " reverse proxy " or "webserver acceleration" (using http_port 80 accel vhost ). In this mode, the cache serves an unlimited number of clients for a limited number of—or just one—web servers.
As an example, if slow.example.com is a "real" web server, and www.example.com is the Squid cache server that "accelerates" it, the first time any page is requested from www.example.com , the cache server would get the actual page from slow.example.com , but later requests would get the stored copy directly from the accelerator (for a configurable period, after which the stored copy would be discarded). The end result, without any action by the clients, is less traffic to the source server, meaning less CPU and memory usage, and less need for bandwidth. This does, however, mean that the source server cannot accurately report on its traffic numbers without additional configuration, as all requests would seem to have come from the reverse proxy. A way to adapt the reporting on the source server is to use the X-Forwarded-For HTTP header reported by the reverse proxy, to get the real client's IP address.
It is possible for a single Squid server to serve both as a normal and a reverse proxy simultaneously. For example, a business might host its own website on a web server, with a Squid server acting as a reverse proxy between clients (customers accessing the website from outside the business) and the web server. The same Squid server could act as a classical web cache, caching HTTP requests from clients within the business (i.e., employees accessing the internet from their workstations), so accelerating web access and reducing bandwidth demands.

Media-range limitations
This feature is used extensively by video streaming websites such as YouTube , so that if a user clicks to the middle of the video progress bar, the server can begin to send data from the middle of the file, rather than sending the entire file from the beginning and the user waiting for the preceding data to finish loading.
Partial downloads are also extensively used by Microsoft Windows Update so that extremely large update packages can download in the background and pause halfway through the download, if the user turns off their computer or disconnects from the Internet.
The Metalink download format enables clients to do segmented downloads by issuing partial requests and spreading these over a number of mirrors.
Squid can relay partial requests to the origin web server. In order for a partial request to be satisfied at a fast speed from cache, Squid requires a full copy of the same object to already exist in its storage.
If a proxy video user is watching a video stream and browses to a different page before the video completely downloads, Squid cannot keep the partial download for reuse and simply discards the data. Special configuration is required to force such downloads to continue and be cached. [16]

Supported operating systems
Squid can run on the following operating systems :

See also
WebPage index: 00075
Amsterdam
Amsterdam ( / ˈ æ m s t ər d æ m , ˌ æ m s t ər ˈ d æ m / ; [9] [10] Dutch: [ɑmstərˈdɑm] ( listen ) ) is the capital and most populous municipality of the Kingdom of the Netherlands . Its status as the capital is mandated by the Constitution of the Netherlands , [11] although it is not the seat of the government, which is The Hague . [12] Amsterdam has a population of 851,373 within the city proper , 1,351,587 in the urban area, [13] and 2,410,960 in the Amsterdam metropolitan area . [8] The city is located in the province of North Holland in the west of the country. The metropolitan area comprises much of the northern part of the Randstad , one of the larger conurbations in Europe, with a population of approximately 7 million. [14]
Amsterdam's name derives from Amstelredamme , [15] indicative of the city's origin around a dam in the river Amstel . Originating as a small fishing village in the late 12th century, Amsterdam became one of the most important ports in the world during the Dutch Golden Age (17th century), a result of its innovative developments in trade. During that time, the city was the leading centre for finance and diamonds. [16] In the 19th and 20th centuries the city expanded, and many new neighborhoods and suburbs were planned and built. The 17th-century canals of Amsterdam and the 19–20th century Defence Line of Amsterdam are on the UNESCO World Heritage List .
As the commercial capital of the Netherlands and one of the top financial centres in Europe, Amsterdam is considered an alpha world city by the Globalization and World Cities (GaWC) study group . The city is also the cultural capital of the Netherlands. [17] Many large Dutch institutions have their headquarters there, and seven of the world's 500 largest companies, including Philips and ING , are based in the city. [18] In 2012, Amsterdam was ranked the second best city to live in by the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) [19] and 12th globally on quality of living for environment and infrastructure by Mercer. [20] The city was ranked 3rd in innovation by Australian innovation agency 2thinknow in their Innovation Cities Index 2009. [21] The Amsterdam seaport to this day remains the second in the country, and the fifth largest seaport in Europe. [22]
Famous Amsterdam residents include the diarist Anne Frank , artists Rembrandt van Rijn and Vincent van Gogh , and philosopher Baruch Spinoza .
The Amsterdam Stock Exchange , the oldest stock exchange in the world, is located in the city center. Amsterdam's main attractions , including its historic canals , the Rijksmuseum , the Van Gogh Museum , Stedelijk Museum , Hermitage Amsterdam , Anne Frank House , Amsterdam Museum , its red-light district , and its many cannabis coffee shops draw more than 5 million international visitors annually. [23]

Etymology
After the floods of 1170 and 1173, locals near the river Amstel built a bridge over the river and a dam across it, giving its name to the village: "Aemstelredamme". The earliest recorded use of that name is in a document dated October 27, 1275, which exempted inhabitants of the village from paying bridge tolls to Count Floris V . [24] [25] This allowed the inhabitants of the village of Aemstelredamme to travel freely through the County of Holland , paying no tolls at bridges, locks and dams. The certificate describes the inhabitants as homines manentes apud Amestelledamme (people residing near Amestelledamme). [26] By 1327, the name had developed into Aemsterdam . [24] [27]

History

Founding and Middle Ages
Amsterdam is much younger than Dutch cities such as Nijmegen , Rotterdam , and Utrecht . In October 2008, historical geographer Chris de Bont suggested that the land around Amsterdam was being reclaimed as early as the late 10th century. This does not necessarily mean that there was already a settlement then, since reclamation of land may not have been for farming—it may have been for peat , for use as fuel. [28]
Amsterdam was granted city rights in either 1300 or 1306. [29] From the 14th century on, Amsterdam flourished, largely from trade with the Hanseatic League . In 1345, an alleged Eucharistic miracle in the Kalverstraat rendered the city an important place of pilgrimage until the adoption of the Protestant faith . The Miracle devotion went underground but was kept alive. In the 19th century, especially after the jubilee of 1845, the devotion was revitalized and became an important national point of reference for Dutch Catholics. The Stille Omgang —a silent walk or procession in civil attire—is the expression of the pilgrimage within the Protestant Netherlands since the late 19th century. [30] In the heyday of the Silent Walk, up to 90,000 pilgrims came to Amsterdam. In the 21st century this has reduced to about 5000.

Conflict with Spain
In the 16th century, the Dutch rebelled against Philip II of Spain and his successors. The main reasons for the uprising were the imposition of new taxes, the tenth penny, and the religious persecution of Protestants by the newly introduced Inquisition . The revolt escalated into the Eighty Years' War , which ultimately led to Dutch independence. [31] Strongly pushed by Dutch Revolt leader William the Silent , the Dutch Republic became known for its relative religious tolerance. Jews from the Iberian Peninsula , Huguenots from France, prosperous merchants and printers from Flanders , and economic and religious refugees from the Spanish-controlled parts of the Low Countries found safety in Amsterdam. The influx of Flemish printers and the city's intellectual tolerance made Amsterdam a centre for the European free press . [32]

Centre of the Dutch Golden Age
The 17th century is considered Amsterdam's Golden Age , during which it became the wealthiest city in the western world. [33] Ships sailed from Amsterdam to the Baltic Sea , North America, and Africa, as well as present-day Indonesia, India, Sri Lanka, and Brazil, forming the basis of a worldwide trading network. Amsterdam's merchants had the largest share in both the Dutch East India Company and the Dutch West India Company . These companies acquired overseas possessions that later became Dutch colonies . Amsterdam was Europe's most important point for the shipment of goods and was the leading Financial centre of the western world. [34] In 1602, the Amsterdam office of the international trading Dutch East India Company became the world's first stock exchange by trading in its own shares. [35] The Bank of Amsterdam started operations in 1609, acting as a full service bank for Dutch merchant bankers and as a reserve bank.

Decline and modernisation
Amsterdam's prosperity declined during the 18th and early 19th centuries. The wars of the Dutch Republic with England and France took their toll on Amsterdam. During the Napoleonic Wars , Amsterdam's significance reached its lowest point, with Holland being absorbed into the French Empire . However, the later establishment of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands in 1815 marked a turning point.
The end of the 19th century is sometimes called Amsterdam's second Golden Age. [36] New museums, a railway station, and the Concertgebouw were built; in this same time, the Industrial Revolution reached the city. The Amsterdam–Rhine Canal was dug to give Amsterdam a direct connection to the Rhine , and the North Sea Canal was dug to give the port a shorter connection to the North Sea . Both projects dramatically improved commerce with the rest of Europe and the world. In 1906, Joseph Conrad gave a brief description of Amsterdam as seen from the seaside, in The Mirror of the Sea .

20th century
Shortly before the First World War, the city started to expand again, and new suburbs were built. Even though the Netherlands remained neutral in this war, Amsterdam suffered a food shortage, and heating fuel became scarce. The shortages sparked riots in which several people were killed. These riots are known as the Aardappeloproer (Potato rebellion). People started looting stores and warehouses in order to get supplies, mainly food. [37]
On 1 January 1921, after a flood in 1916, the depleted municipalities of Durgerdam, Holysloot, Zunderdorp and Schellingwoude , all lying north of Amsterdam, were, at their own request, annexed to the city. [38] [39]
Between the wars, the city continued to expand, most notably to the west of the Jordaan district in the Frederik Hendrikbuurt and surrounding neighbourhoods.
Germany invaded the Netherlands on 10 May 1940 and took control of the country. Some Amsterdam citizens sheltered Jews, thereby exposing themselves and their families to a high risk of being imprisoned or sent to concentration camps. More than 100,000 Dutch Jews were deported to Nazi concentration camps , of whom some 60,000 lived in Amsterdam. Perhaps the most famous deportee was the young Jewish girl Anne Frank , who died in the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp . [40] At the end of the Second World War, communication with the rest of the country broke down, and food and fuel became scarce. Many citizens travelled to the countryside to forage. Dogs, cats, raw sugar beets, and Tulip bulbs—cooked to a pulp—were consumed to stay alive. [41] Most of the trees in Amsterdam were cut down for fuel, and all the wood was taken from the apartments of deported Jews.
Many new suburbs, such as Osdorp , Slotervaart , Slotermeer and Geuzenveld, were built in the years after the Second World War. [42] These suburbs contained many public parks and wide open spaces, and the new buildings provided improved housing conditions with larger and brighter rooms, gardens, and balconies. Because of the war and other events of the 20th century, almost the entire city centre had fallen into disrepair. As society was changing, [ clarification needed ] politicians and other influential figures made plans to redesign large parts of it. There was an increasing demand for office buildings, and also for new roads, as the automobile became available to most people. [43] A metro started operating in 1977 between the new suburb of Bijlmer and the centre of Amsterdam. Further plans were to build a new highway above the metro to connect the Central Station and city centre with other parts of the city.
The required large-scale demolitions began in Amsterdam's former Jewish neighbourhood. Smaller streets, such as the Jodenbreestraat, were widened and almost all of their houses were demolished. At the peak of the demolition, the Nieuwmarktrellen ( Nieuwmarkt Riots ) broke out; [44] the rioters expressed their fury about the demolition caused by the restructuring of the city.
As a result, the demolition was stopped, and the highway was never built; only the metro was completed. Only a few streets remained widened. The new city hall was built on the almost completely demolished Waterlooplein. Meanwhile, large private organisations, such as Stadsherstel Amsterdam , were founded with the aim of restoring the entire city centre. Although the success of this struggle is visible today, efforts for further restoration are still ongoing. [43] The entire city centre has reattained its former splendour and, as a whole, is now a protected area . Many of its buildings have become monuments, and in July 2010 the Grachtengordel (the three concentric canals, Herengracht , Keizersgracht , and Prinsengracht ) was added to the UNESCO World Heritage List . [45]

21st century
In the early years of the 21st century, the Amsterdam city centre has attracted large numbers of tourists: between 2012 and 2015, the annual number of visitors rose from 10 million to 17 million. Real estate prices have surged, and local shops are making way for tourist-oriented ones, making the centre unaffordable for the city's inhabitants. [46] These developments have evoked comparisons with Venice , a city thought to be overwhelmed by the tourist influx. [47]
Construction of a metro line connecting the part of the city north of the river (or lake) IJ to the centre was started in 2003. The project is controversial because its cost had exceeded its budget by a factor three by 2008, [48] because of fears of damage to buildings in the centre, and because construction had to be halted and restarted multiple times. [49]
Since 2014, renewed focus has been given to urban regeneration and renewal, especially in areas directly bordering the city centre, such as Frederik Hendrikbuurt . This urban renewal and expansion of the traditional centre of the city is part of the Structural Vision Amsterdam 2040 initiative. [50] [51]

Geography
Amsterdam is in the western Netherlands, in the province of North Holland . The river Amstel ends in the city centre and connects to a large number of canals that eventually terminate in the IJ . Amsterdam is about 2 metres (6.6 feet) below sea level . [52] The surrounding land is flat as it is formed of large polders . A man-made forest, Amsterdamse Bos , is in the southwest. Amsterdam is connected to the North Sea through the long North Sea Canal .
Amsterdam is intensely urbanised, as is the Amsterdam Metropolitan Area surrounding the city. Comprising 219.4 square kilometres (84.7 square miles) of land, the city proper has 4,457 inhabitants per km 2 and 2,275 houses per km 2 . [53] Parks and nature reserves make up 12% of Amsterdam's land area. [54]

Canals
Amsterdam has more than 100 kilometres (60 miles) of canals , most of which are navigable by boat. The three main canals are Prinsengracht , Herengracht , and Keizersgracht . In the Middle Ages , Amsterdam was surrounded by a moat, called the Singel , which now forms the innermost ring in the city, and makes the city centre a horseshoe shape. The city is also served by a seaport . It has been compared with Venice , due to its division into about 90 islands, which are linked by more than 1,200 bridges. [55]

Climate
Amsterdam has an oceanic climate ( Köppen climate classification Cfb ) strongly influenced by its proximity to the North Sea to the west, with prevailing westerly winds. Both winters and summers are considered mild, although occasionally quite cool. Amsterdam, as well as most of the North Holland province, lies in USDA Hardiness zone 8b. Frosts mainly occur during spells of easterly or northeasterly winds from the inner European continent. Even then, because Amsterdam is surrounded on three sides by large bodies of water, as well as having a significant heat-island effect , nights rarely fall below −5 °C (23 °F), while it could easily be −12 °C (10 °F) in Hilversum, 25 kilometres (16 miles) southeast. Summers are moderately warm but rarely hot. The average daily high in August is 22.1 °C (71.8 °F), and 30 °C (86 °F) or higher is only measured on average on 2.5 days, placing Amsterdam in AHS Heat Zone 2. The record extremes range from −24 °C (−11 °F) to 36.8 °C (98.2 °F). [56] Days with more than 1 millimetre (0.04 in) of precipitation are common, on average 133 days per year. Amsterdam's average annual precipitation is 838 millimetres (33 in), [57] more than what is measured at Amsterdam Schiphol Airport. A large part of this precipitation falls as light rain or brief showers. Cloudy and damp days are common during the cooler months of October through March.

Demographics

Historical population
Compared to other important towns in the County of Holland , such as Dordrecht , Leiden , Haarlem , Delft and Alkmaar , Amsterdam is a relatively young city. In stark contrast to the relative decline of those other towns, Amsterdam's population grew in the 15th and 16th centuries, mainly due to the rise of the profitable Baltic maritime trade after the Burgundian victory in the Dutch–Hanseatic War . Still, the population of Amsterdam and other towns in Holland was only modest compared to the towns and cities of Flanders and Brabant , which comprised the most urbanised area of the Low Countries.
This changed when, during the Dutch Revolt , many people from the Southern Netherlands fled to the North, especially after Antwerp fell to Spanish forces in 1585. In thirty years, Amsterdam's population more than doubled from 41,362 inhabitants in 1590 to 106,500 inhabitants in 1620. During the 1660s, Amsterdam's population reached 200,000. The city's growth levelled off and the population stabilised around 240,000 for most of the 18th century.
At the turn of the 18th century, Amsterdam was the fourth largest city in Europe , behind Constantinople (about 700,000), London (550,000) and Paris (530,000). This was all the more remarkable as Amsterdam was neither the capital city nor the seat of government of the Dutch Republic , which itself was a much smaller state than England, France or the Ottoman Empire . In contrast to those other metropolises, Amsterdam was also surrounded by large towns such as Leiden (about 67,000), Rotterdam (45,000), Haarlem (38,000), and Utrecht (30,000). [61]
The city's population declined in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, dipping under 200,000 in 1820. By the second half of the 19th century, industrialisation spurred renewed growth. Amsterdam's population hit an all-time high of 872,000 in 1959, before declining in the following decades due to government-sponsored suburbanisation to so-called groeikernen (growth centres) such as Purmerend and Almere . Between 1970 and 1980, Amsterdam experienced its sharpest population decline ever, and by 1985 the city had only 675,570 residents. This was soon followed by reurbanisation and gentrification , however, leading to renewed population growth in the 2010s. The municipal department for Research, Information and Statistics expects a new record population to be set in 2020. [62]

Immigration
In the 16th and 17th century non-Dutch immigrants to Amsterdam were mostly Huguenots , Flemings , Sephardi Jews and Westphalians . Huguenots came after the Edict of Fontainebleau in 1685, while the Flemish Protestants came during the Eighty Years' War . The Westphalians came to Amsterdam mostly for economic reasons – their influx continued through the 18th and 19th centuries. Before the Second World War, 10% of the city population was Jewish . Just twenty per cent of them survived the Shoah . [ citation needed ]
The first mass immigration in the 20th century were by people from Indonesia, who came to Amsterdam after the independence of the Dutch East Indies in the 1940s and 1950s. In the 1960s guest workers from Turkey, Morocco, Italy and Spain emigrated to Amsterdam. After the independence of Suriname in 1975, a large wave of Surinamese settled in Amsterdam, mostly in the Bijlmer area. Other immigrants, including refugees asylum seekers and illegal immigrants , came from Europe, America , Asia, and Africa. In the 1970s and 1980s, many 'old' Amsterdammers moved to 'new' cities like Almere and Purmerend , prompted by the third planological bill of the Dutch government. This bill promoted suburbanisation and arranged for new developments in so-called "groeikernen", literally cores of growth . Young professionals and artists moved into neighbourhoods de Pijp and the Jordaan abandoned by these Amsterdammers. The non-Western immigrants settled mostly in the social housing projects in Amsterdam-West and the Bijlmer. Today, people of non-Western origin make up approximately one-third of the population of Amsterdam, and more than 50% of the city' s children. [64] [65] [66] Segregation along ethnic lines is clearly visible, with people of non-Western origin, considered a separate group by Statistics Netherlands , concentrating in specific neighbourhoods especially in Nieuw-West , Zeeburg , Bijlmer and in certain areas of Amsterdam-Noord . [67] [68]
In 2000, Christians formed the largest religious group in the city (27% of the population). The next largest religion was Islam (14%), most of whose followers were Sunni . [69] [70]
There is a Japanese population resident in Amsterdam. The Japanese School of Amsterdam serves elementary and junior high school students. As of 2014 [update] 8% of the student body of the International School Amsterdam in nearby Amstelveen was Japanese; [71] this figure was 40% in 1997. As of 1997 most Japanese children who lived in the Netherlands attended high schools and universities located in Japan. [72]

Religions
In 1578 the previously Roman Catholic city of Amsterdam joined the revolt against Spanish rule, late in comparison to other major northern Dutch cities. In line with Protestant procedure of that time, all churches were converted to Protestant worship. Calvinism became the dominant religion, and although Catholicism was not forbidden and priests allowed to serve, the Catholic hierarchy was prohibited. This led to the establishment of schuilkerken , covert churches, behind seemingly ordinary canal side house fronts. One example is the current debate centre de Rode Hoed. A large influx of foreigners of many religions came to 17th-century Amsterdam, in particular Sefardic Jews from Spain and Portugal, Huguenots from France, and Protestants from the Southern Netherlands . This led to the establishment of many non-Dutch-speaking religious churches. In 1603, the first notification was made of Jewish religious service. In 1639, the first synagogue was consecrated. The Jews came to call the town Jerusalem of the West , a reference to their sense of belonging there.
As they became established in the city, other Christian denominations used converted Catholic chapels to conduct their own services. The oldest English-language church congregation in the world outside the United Kingdom is found at the Begijnhof . Regular services there are still offered in English under the auspices of the Church of Scotland . [73] The Huguenots accounted for nearly 20% of Amsterdam's inhabitants in 1700. Being Calvinists, they soon integrated into the Dutch Reformed Church , though often retaining their own congregations. Some, commonly referred by the moniker 'Walloon', are recognisable today as they offer occasional services in French.
In the second half of the 17th century, Amsterdam experienced an influx of Ashkenazim , Jews from Central and Eastern Europe , which continued into the 19th century. Jews often fled the pogroms in those areas. The first Ashkenazi who arrived in Amsterdam were refugees from the Chmielnicki Uprising in Poland and the Thirty Years' War . They not only founded their own synagogues, but had a strong influence on the 'Amsterdam dialect' adding a large Yiddish local vocabulary.
Despite an absence of an official Jewish ghetto , most Jews preferred to live in the eastern part of the old medieval heart of the city. The main street of this Jewish neighbourhood was the Jodenbreestraat . The neighbourhood comprised the Waterlooplein and the Nieuwmarkt . [74] Buildings in this neighbourhood fell into disrepair after the Second World War, and a large section of the neighbourhood was demolished during the construction of the subway. This led to riots, and as a result the original plans for large-scale reconstruction were abandoned and the neighbourhood was rebuilt with smaller-scale residence buildings on the basis of its original layout.
Catholic churches in Amsterdam have been constructed since the restoration of the episcopal hierarchy in 1853. One of the principal architects behind the city's Catholic churches, Cuypers , was also responsible for the Amsterdam Central Station and the Rijksmuseum , which led to a refusal of Protestant King William III to open 'that monastery'. In 1924, the Roman Catholic Church of the Netherlands hosted the International Eucharistic Congress in Amsterdam, and numerous Catholic prelates visited the city, where festivities were held in churches and stadiums. Catholic processions on the public streets, however, were still forbidden under law at the time. Only in the 20th century was Amsterdam's relation to Catholicism normalised, but despite its far larger population size , the Catholic clergy chose to place its episcopal see of the city in the nearby provincial town of Haarlem . [75]
In recent times, religious demographics in Amsterdam have been changed by large-scale immigration from former colonies. Immigrants from Suriname have introduced Evangelical Protestantism and Lutheranism , from the Hernhutter variety; Hinduism has been introduced mainly from Suriname; and several distinct branches of Islam have been brought from various parts of the world. Islam is now the largest non-Christian religion in Amsterdam. The large community of Ghanaian and Nigerian immigrants have established African churches, often in parking garages in the Bijlmer area, where many have settled. In addition, a broad array of other religious movements have established congregations, including Buddhism , Confucianism and Hinduism . Jews make up about 2% of the city's total population.

Tolerance and ethnic tension
Although the saying "Leef en laat leven" or "Live and let live" summarises the Dutch and especially the Amsterdam open and tolerant society, the increased influx of religions and cultures after the Second World War, has on a number of occasions strained social relations . With 180 different nationalities, [77] Amsterdam is home to one of the widest varieties of nationalities of any city in the world. [78] The proportion of the population of immigrant origin in the city proper is about 50% [79] and 88% of the population are Dutch citizens. [80]
The city has been at times marked by ethnic tension. In 2004 film director Theo van Gogh was murdered in Amsterdam. Among others, in line with attitude changes [ citation needed ] in Dutch politics towards certain minorities Turkish-language and Arabic-language TV channels have been dropped from the basic cable TV package [ citation needed ] . In recent years, politicians are actively discouraged against campaigning in minority languages to encourage assimilation. In the previous local elections politicians were criticised by current Amsterdam mayor Mr van der Laan (then minister of Integration) for distributing election leaflets in minority languages and in some cases leaflets were collected. Due to this alleged anti-Multicultural stand, van der Laan has been accused of hypocrisy by his own party's PvdA main candidate. [81] Also during the same period, possibly due to his belief in integration via (possibly not always voluntary) assimilation, Amsterdam has been one of the municipalities in the Netherlands which provided immigrants with extensive and free Dutch-language courses, which have benefited many immigrants. [82]

Cityscape and architecture
Amsterdam fans out south from the Amsterdam Centraal railway station and Damrak , the main street off the station. The oldest area of the town is known as de Wallen (the quays). It lies to the east of Damrak and contains the city's famous red light district. To the south of de Wallen is the old Jewish quarter of Waterlooplein. The medieval and colonial age canals of Amsterdam , known as Grachten , embraces the heart of the city where homes have interesting gables. Beyond the Grachtengordel are the former working class areas of Jordaan and de Pijp. The Museumplein with the city's major museums, the Vondelpark , a 19th-century park named after the Dutch writer Joost van den Vondel , and the Plantage neighbourhood, with the zoo , are also located outside the Grachtengordel.
Several parts of the city and the surrounding urban area are polders . This can be recognised by the suffix -meer which means lake , as in Aalsmeer , Bijlmermeer , Haarlemmermeer , and Watergraafsmeer .

Canals
The Amsterdam canal system is the result of conscious city planning . [83] In the early 17th century, when immigration was at a peak, a comprehensive plan was developed that was based on four concentric half-circles of canals with their ends emerging at the IJ bay. Known as the Grachtengordel , three of the canals were mostly for residential development: the Herengracht (where "Heren" refers to Heren Regeerders van de stad Amsterdam (ruling lords of Amsterdam), and gracht means canal, so the name can be roughly translated as "Canal of the lords"), Keizersgracht (Emperor's Canal), and Prinsengracht (Prince's Canal). [84] The fourth and outermost canal is the Singelgracht , which is often not mentioned on maps, because it is a collective name for all canals in the outer ring. The Singelgracht should not be confused with the oldest and most inner canal Singel . The canals served for defence, water management and transport. The defences took the form of a moat and earthen dikes , with gates at transit points, but otherwise no masonry superstructures . [85] The original plans have been lost, so historians, such as Ed Taverne, need to speculate on the original intentions: it is thought that the considerations of the layout were purely practical and defensive rather than ornamental. [86]
Construction started in 1613 and proceeded from west to east, across the breadth of the layout, like a gigantic windshield wiper as the historian Geert Mak calls it – and not from the centre outwards, as a popular myth has it. The canal construction in the southern sector was completed by 1656. Subsequently, the construction of residential buildings proceeded slowly. The eastern part of the concentric canal plan, covering the area between the Amstel river and the IJ bay, has never been implemented. In the following centuries, the land was used for parks, senior citizens' homes, theatres, other public facilities, and waterways without much planning. [87]
Over the years, several canals have been filled in, becoming streets or squares, such as the Nieuwezijds Voorburgwal and the Spui . [88]

Expansion
After the development of Amsterdam's canals in the 17th century, the city did not grow beyond its borders for two centuries. During the 19th century, Samuel Sarphati devised a plan based on the grandeur of Paris and London at that time. The plan envisaged the construction of new houses, public buildings and streets just outside the grachtengordel . The main aim of the plan, however, was to improve public health. Although the plan did not expand the city, it did produce some of the largest public buildings to date, like the Paleis voor Volksvlijt . [89] [90] [91]
Following Sarphati, Van Niftrik and Kalff designed an entire ring of 19th-century neighbourhoods surrounding the city's centre, with the city preserving the ownership of all land outside the 17th-century limit, thus firmly controlling development. [92] Most of these neighbourhoods became home to the working class. [93]
In response to overcrowding, two plans were designed at the beginning of the 20th century which were very different from anything Amsterdam had ever seen before: Plan Zuid , designed by the architect Berlage , and West . These plans involved the development of new neighbourhoods consisting of housing blocks for all social classes. [94] [95]
After the Second World War, large new neighbourhoods were built in the western, southeastern, and northern parts of the city. These new neighbourhoods were built to relieve the city's shortage of living space and give people affordable houses with modern conveniences. The neighbourhoods consisted mainly of large housing blocks situated among green spaces, connected to wide roads, making the neighbourhoods easily accessible by motor car . The western suburbs which were built in that period are collectively called the Westelijke Tuinsteden . The area to the southeast of the city built during the same period is known as the Bijlmer . [96] [97]

Architecture
Amsterdam has a rich architectural history . The oldest building in Amsterdam is the Oude Kerk (Old Church), at the heart of the Wallen, consecrated in 1306. [98] The oldest wooden building is het Houten Huys [99] at the Begijnhof . It was constructed around 1425 and is one of only two existing wooden buildings. It is also one of the few examples of Gothic architecture in Amsterdam. In the 16th century, wooden buildings were razed and replaced with brick ones. During this period, many buildings were constructed in the architectural style of the Renaissance . Buildings of this period are very recognisable with their stepped gable façades, which is the common Dutch Renaissance style. Amsterdam quickly developed its own Renaissance architecture . These buildings were built according to the principles of the architect Hendrick de Keyser . [100] One of the most striking buildings designed by Hendrick de Keyer is the Westerkerk . In the 17th century baroque architecture became very popular, as it was elsewhere in Europe. This roughly coincided with Amsterdam's Golden Age . The leading architects of this style in Amsterdam were Jacob van Campen , Philips Vingboons and Daniel Stalpaert . [101]
Philip Vingboons designed splendid merchants' houses throughout the city. A famous building in baroque style in Amsterdam is the Royal Palace on Dam Square . Throughout the 18th century, Amsterdam was heavily influenced by French culture . This is reflected in the architecture of that period. Around 1815, architects broke with the baroque style and started building in different neo-styles. [102] Most Gothic style buildings date from that era and are therefore said to be built in a neo-gothic style. At the end of the 19th century, the Jugendstil or Art Nouveau style became popular and many new buildings were constructed in this architectural style. Since Amsterdam expanded rapidly during this period, new buildings adjacent to the city centre were also built in this style. The houses in the vicinity of the Museum Square in Amsterdam Oud-Zuid are an example of Jugendstil. The last style that was popular in Amsterdam before the modern era was Art Deco . Amsterdam had its own version of the style, which was called the Amsterdamse School . Whole districts were built this style, such as the Rivierenbuurt . [103] A notable feature of the façades of buildings designed in Amsterdamse School is that they are highly decorated and ornate, with oddly shaped windows and doors.
The old city centre is the focal point of all the architectural styles before the end of the 19th century. Jugendstil and Georgian are mostly found outside the city's centre in the neighbourhoods built in the early 20th century, although there are also some striking examples of these styles in the city centre. Most historic buildings in the city centre and nearby are houses, such as the famous merchants' houses lining the canals.

Parks and recreational areas
Amsterdam has many parks, open spaces, and squares throughout the city. Vondelpark , the largest park in the city, is located in the Oud-Zuid borough and is named after the 17th century Amsterdam author, Joost van den Vondel . Yearly, the park has around 10 million visitors. In the park is an open-air theatre, a playground and several horeca facilities. In the Zuid borough, is Beatrixpark , named after Queen Beatrix . Between Amsterdam and Amstelveen is the Amsterdamse Bos (Amsterdam Forest), the largest recreational area in Amsterdam. Annually, almost 4.5 million people visit the park, which has a size of 1.000 hectares and is approximately three times the size of Central Park . [104] Amstelpark in the Zuid borough houses the Rieker windmill, which dates to 1636. Other parks include Sarphatipark in the De Pijp neighbourhood, Oosterpark in the Oost borough, and Westerpark in the Westerpark neighbourhood . The city has four beaches, the Nemo Beach, Citybeach "Het stenen hoofd" (Silodam), Blijburg, and one in Amsterdam-Noord .
The city has many open squares (plein in Dutch). The namesake of the city as the site of the original dam, Dam Square , is the main town square and has the Royal Palace and National Monument . Museumplein hosts various museums, including the Rijksmuseum , Van Gogh Museum , and Stedelijk Museum . Other squares include Rembrandtplein , Muntplein , Nieuwmarkt , Leidseplein , Spui , and Waterlooplein . Also, near to Amsterdam is the Nekkeveld estate conservation project.

Economy
Amsterdam is the financial and business capital of the Netherlands. [105] Amsterdam is currently one of the best European cities in which to locate an international business . [ by whom? ] It is ranked fifth in this category and is only surpassed by London, Paris, Frankfurt and Barcelona . [106] Many large corporations and banks have their headquarters in Amsterdam, including Akzo Nobel , Heineken International , ING Group , ABN AMRO , TomTom , Delta Lloyd Group , Booking.com and Philips . KPMG International's global headquarters is located in nearby Amstelveen, where many non-Dutch companies have settled as well, because surrounding communities allow full land ownership, contrary to Amsterdam's land-lease system.
Though many small offices are still located on the old canals, companies are increasingly relocating outside the city centre. The Zuidas (English: South Axis) has become the new financial and legal hub. [107] The five largest law firms of the Netherlands, a number of Dutch subsidiaries of large consulting firms like Boston Consulting Group and Accenture , and the World Trade Center Amsterdam are also located in Zuidas.
There are three other smaller financial districts in Amsterdam. The first is the area surrounding Amsterdam Sloterdijk railway station , where several newspapers like De Telegraaf have their offices. Also, Deloitte , the Gemeentelijk Vervoerbedrijf (municipal public transport company) and the Dutch tax offices ( Belastingdienst ) are located there. The second Financial District is the area surrounding Amsterdam Arena . The third is the area surrounding Amsterdam Amstel railway station . The tallest building in Amsterdam, the Rembrandt Tower , is situated there, as is the headquarters of Philips . [108] [109]

Port of Amsterdam
The Port of Amsterdam is the fourth largest port in Europe, the 38th largest port in the world and the second largest port in the Netherlands by metric tons of cargo. In 2014 the Port of Amsterdam had a cargo throughput of 97,4 million tons of cargo, which was mostly bulk cargo . Amsterdam has the biggest cruise port in the Netherlands with more than 150 cruise ships every year. In 2019 the new lock in IJmuiden will open; the port will then be able to grow to 125 million tonnes in capacity.
The Amsterdam Stock Exchange (AEX), now part of Euronext , is the world's oldest stock exchange and is one of Europe's largest bourses. It is near Dam Square in the city centre.
Together with Eindhoven ( Brainport ) and Rotterdam ( Seaport ), Amsterdam (Airport) forms the foundation of the Dutch economy. [110]

Tourism
Amsterdam is one of the most popular tourist destinations in Europe, receiving more than 4.63 million international visitors annually, this is excluding the 16 million day trippers visiting the city every year. [111] The number of visitors has been growing steadily over the past decade. This can be attributed to an increasing number of European visitors. Two-thirds of the hotels are located in the city's centre. Hotels with 4 or 5 stars contribute 42% of the total beds available and 41% of the overnight stays in Amsterdam. The room occupation rate was 78% in 2006, up from 70% in 2005. [112] The majority of tourists (74%) originate from Europe. The largest group of non-European visitors come from the United States, accounting for 14% of the total. [112] Certain years have a theme in Amsterdam to attract extra tourists. For example, the year 2006 was designated "Rembrandt 400", to celebrate the 400th birthday of Rembrandt van Rijn . Some hotels offer special arrangements or activities during these years. The average number of guests per year staying at the four campsites around the city range from 12,000 to 65,000. [112]

Red light district
De Wallen , also known as Walletjes or Rosse Buurt , is a designated area for legalised prostitution and is Amsterdam's largest and most well known red-light district . This neighbourhood has become a famous attraction for tourists. It consists of a network of roads and alleys containing several hundred small, one-room apartments rented by sex workers who offer their services from behind a window or glass door, typically illuminated with red lights.

Retail
Shops in Amsterdam range from large high end department stores such as De Bijenkorf founded in 1870 to small specialty shops. Amsterdam's high-end shops are found in the streets P.C. Hooftstraat and Cornelis Schuytstraat , which are located in the vicinity of the Vondelpark . One of Amsterdam's busiest high streets is the narrow, medieval Kalverstraat in the heart of the city. Other shopping areas include the Negen Straatjes and Haarlemmerdijk and Haarlemmerstraat. Negen Straatjes are nine narrow streets within the Grachtengordel , the concentric canal system of Amsterdam. The Negen Straatjes differ from other shopping districts with the presence of a large diversity of privately owned shops. The Haarlemmerstraat and Haarlemmerdijk were voted best shopping street in the Netherlands in 2011. These streets have as the Negen Straatjes a large diversity of privately owned shops. But as the Negen Straatjes are dominated by fashion stores the Haarlemmerstraat and Haarlemmerdijk offer a very wide variety of all kinds of stores, just to name some specialties: candy and other food related stores, lingerie, sneakers, wedding clothing, interior shops, books, Italian deli's, racing and mountain bikes, skatewear, etc.
The city also features a large number of open-air markets such as the Albert Cuyp Market , Westerstraat-markt, Ten Katemarkt, and Dappermarkt . Some of these markets are held on a daily basis, like the Albert Cuypmarkt and the Dappermarkt. Others, like the Westerstraatmarkt, are held on a weekly basis.

Fashion
Fashion brands like G-star , Gsus, BlueBlood, PICHICHI, Iris van Herpen, fair trade denim brand MUD Jeans , 10 feet and Warmenhoven & Venderbos , and fashion designers like Mart Visser , Viktor & Rolf , Sheila de Vries, Marlies Dekkers and Frans Molenaar are based in Amsterdam. Modelling agencies Elite Models , Touche models and Tony Jones have opened branches in Amsterdam. Fashion models like Yfke Sturm , Doutzen Kroes and Kim Noorda started their careers in Amsterdam. Amsterdam has its garment centre in the World Fashion Center. Buildings which formerly housed brothels in the red light district have been converted to ateliers for young fashion designers, AKA eagle fuel. [ citation needed ] Fashion photographers Inez van Lamsweerde and Vinoodh Matadin were born in Amsterdam(Netherland).

Culture
During the later part of the 16th-century Amsterdam's Rederijkerskamer ( Chamber of rhetoric ) organised contests between different Chambers in the reading of poetry and drama. In 1638, Amsterdam opened its first theatre. Ballet performances were given in this theatre as early as 1642. In the 18th century, French theatre became popular. While Amsterdam was under the influence of German music in the 19th century there were few national opera productions; the Hollandse Opera of Amsterdam was built in 1888 for the specific purpose of promoting Dutch opera. [113] In the 19th century, popular culture was centred on the Nes area in Amsterdam (mainly vaudeville and music-hall ). [ citation needed ] The metronome , one of the most important advances in European classical music, was invented here in 1812 by Dietrich Nikolaus Winkel . At the end of this century, the Rijksmuseum and Stedelijk Museum were built. [ citation needed ] In 1888, the Concertgebouworkest was established. With the 20th century came cinema, radio and television. [ citation needed ] Though most studios are located in Hilversum and Aalsmeer , Amsterdam's influence on programming is very strong. Many people who work in the television industry live in Amsterdam. Also, the headquarters of the Dutch SBS Broadcasting Group is located in Amsterdam. [114]

Museums
The most important museums of Amsterdam are located on the Museumplein (Museum Square), located at the southwestern side of the Rijksmuseum. It was created in the last quarter of the 19th century on the grounds of the former World's fair . The northeastern part of the square is bordered by the very large Rijksmuseum. In front of the Rijksmuseum on the square itself is a long, rectangular pond. This is transformed into an ice rink in winter. [115] The northwestern part of the square is bordered by the Van Gogh Museum, Stedelijk Museum, House of Bols Cocktail & Genever Experience and Coster Diamonds. The southwestern border of the Museum Square is the Van Baerlestraat, which is a major thoroughfare in this part of Amsterdam. The Concertgebouw is situated across this street from the square. To the southeast of the square are situated a number of large houses, one of which contains the American consulate. A parking garage can be found underneath the square, as well as a supermarket. The Museumplein is covered almost entirely with a lawn, except for the northeastern part of the square which is covered with gravel. The current appearance of the square was realised in 1999, when the square was remodelled. The square itself is the most prominent site in Amsterdam for festivals and outdoor concerts, especially in the summer. Plans were made in 2008 to remodel the square again, because many inhabitants of Amsterdam are not happy with its current appearance. [116]
The Rijksmuseum possesses the largest and most important collection of classical Dutch art . [117] It opened in 1885. Its collection consists of nearly one million objects. [118] The artist most associated with Amsterdam is Rembrandt , whose work, and the work of his pupils, is displayed in the Rijksmuseum. Rembrandt's masterpiece The Night Watch is one of top pieces of art of the museum. It also houses paintings from artists like Van der Helst , Vermeer , Frans Hals , Ferdinand Bol , Albert Cuyp , Jacob van Ruisdael and Paulus Potter . Aside from paintings, the collection consists of a large variety of decorative art . This ranges from Delftware to giant doll-houses from the 17th century. The architect of the gothic revival building was P.J.H. Cuypers. The museum underwent a 10-year, 375 million euro renovation starting in 2003. The full collection was reopened to the public on 13 April 2013 and the Rijksmuseum has established itself as the most visited museum in Amsterdam with 2.2 million visitors in 2013. [119]
Van Gogh lived in Amsterdam for a short while and there is a museum dedicated to his work . The museum is housed in one of the few modern buildings in this area of Amsterdam. The building was designed by Gerrit Rietveld . This building is where the permanent collection is displayed. A new building was added to the museum in 1999. This building, known as the performance wing, was designed by Japanese architect Kisho Kurokawa . Its purpose is to house temporary exhibitions of the museum. [120] [121] Some of Van Gogh's most famous paintings, like The Potato Eaters and Sunflowers , are in the collection. [122] The Van Gogh museum is the second most visited museum in Amsterdam, with 1.4 million annual visitors. [123]
Next to the Van Gogh museum stands the Stedelijk Museum . This is Amsterdam's most important museum of modern art. The museum is as old as the square it borders and was opened in 1895. The permanent collection consists of works of art from artists like Piet Mondriaan , Karel Appel , and Kazimir Malevich . After renovations lasting several years the museum opened in September 2012 with a new composite extension that has been called 'The Bathtub' due to its resemblance to one.
Amsterdam contains many other museums throughout the city. They range from small museums such as the Verzetsmuseum (Resistance Museum), the Anne Frank House , and the Rembrandt House Museum , to the very large, like the Tropenmuseum (Museum of the Tropics), Amsterdam Museum (formerly known as Amsterdam Historical Museum), Hermitage Amsterdam (a dependency of the Hermitage Museum in Saint Petersburg) and the Joods Historisch Museum (Jewish Historical Museum). The modern-styled Nemo is dedicated to child-friendly science exhibitions.

Music
Amsterdam's musical culture includes a large collection of songs which treat the city nostalgically and lovingly. The 1949 song "Aan de Amsterdamse grachten" ("On the canals of Amsterdam") was performed and recorded by many artists, including John Kraaijkamp sr. ; the best-known version is probably that by Wim Sonneveld (1962). In the 1950s Johnny Jordaan rose to fame with "Geef mij maar Amsterdam" ("I prefer Amsterdam"), which praises the city above all others (explicitly Paris); Jordaan sang especially about his own neighbourhood, the Jordaan ("Bij ons in de Jordaan"). Colleagues and contemporaries of Johnny include Tante Leen , Zwarte Riek , and Manke Nelis . Other notable Amsterdam songs are " Amsterdam " by Jacques Brel (1964) and "Deze Stad" by De Dijk (1989). [124] A 2011 poll by Amsterdam paper Het Parool found, somewhat surprisingly, that Trio Bier 's "Oude Wolf" was voted "Amsterdams lijflied". [125] Notable Amsterdam bands from the modern era include the Osdorp Posse and The Ex .
AFAS Live (formerly known as the Heineken Music Hall) is a concert hall located near the Amsterdam Arena . Its main purpose is to serve as a podium for pop concerts for big audiences. Many famous international artists have performed there. Two other notable venues, Paradiso and the Melkweg are located near the Leidseplein . Both focus on broad programming, ranging from indie rock to hip hop , R&B , and other popular genres. Other more subcultural music venues are OCCII , OT301 , De Nieuwe Anita, Winston Kingdom and Zaal 100 . Jazz has a strong following in Amsterdam, with the Bimhuis being the premier venue. In 2012, Ziggo Dome was opened, also near Amsterdam ArenA, a state of the art indoor music arena.
AFAS Live is also host to many electronic dance music festivals, alongside many other venues. Armin van Buuren and Tiesto , some of the world's leading Trance DJ's hail from the Netherlands and perform frequently in Amsterdam. Each year in October, the city hosts the Amsterdam Dance Event (ADE) which is one of the leading electronic music conferences and one of the biggest club festivals for electronic music in the world, attracting over 350,000 visitors each year. [126] Another popular dance festival is 5daysoff, which takes place in the venues Paradiso and Melkweg . In summer time there are several big outdoor dance parties in or nearby Amsterdam, such as Awakenings, Dance Valley , Mystery Land , Loveland, A Day at the Park, Welcome to the Future, and Valtifest.
Amsterdam has a world-class symphony orchestra, the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra . Their home is the Concertgebouw , which is across the Van Baerlestraat from the Museum Square. It is considered by critics to be a concert hall with some of the best acoustics in the world. The building contains three halls, Grote Zaal, Kleine Zaal, and Spiegelzaal. Some nine hundred concerts and other events per year take place in the Concertgebouw, for a public of over 700,000, making it one of the most-visited concert halls in the world. [127] The opera house of Amsterdam is situated adjacent to the city hall. Therefore, the two buildings combined are often called the Stopera , (a word originally coined by protesters against it very construction: Stop the Opera[-house] ). This huge modern complex, opened in 1986, lies in the former Jewish neighbourhood at Waterlooplein next to the river Amstel . The Stopera is the homebase of Dutch National Opera , Dutch National Ballet and the Holland Symfonia . Muziekgebouw aan 't IJ is a concert hall, which is situated in the IJ near the central station. Its concerts perform mostly modern classical music . Located adjacent to it, is the Bimhuis , a concert hall for improvised and Jazz music.

Performing arts
Amsterdam has three main theatre buildings.
The Stadsschouwburg Amsterdam at the Leidseplein is the home base of Toneelgroep Amsterdam . The current building dates from 1894. Most plays are performed in the Grote Zaal (Great Hall). The normal programme of events encompasses all sorts of theatrical forms. The Stadsschouwburg is currently being renovated and expanded. The third theatre space, to be operated jointly with next door Melkweg , will open in late 2009 or early 2010.
Dutch National Opera and Ballet (formerly known as Het Muziektheater ), dating from 1986, is the principal opera house and home to Dutch National Opera and Dutch National Ballet .
Royal Theatre Carré was built as a permanent circus theatre in 1887 and is currently mainly used for musicals, cabaret performances and pop concerts.
The recently re-opened DeLaMar Theater houses the more commercial plays and musicals.
Also a new theatre has moved into Amsterdam scene in 2014, joining other established venues. Theater Amsterdam , situated in the west part of Amsterdam, Danzigerkade 5 / Westpoortnummer 2036 1013 AP Amsterdam. It's a modern building with a panoramic view over the harbour. The theatre is the first ever purpose-built venue to showcase a single play entitled ANNE, the play based on Anne Frank's life.
On the east side of town there is a small theatre in a converted bath house, the Badhuistheater . The theatre often has English programming.
The Netherlands has a tradition of cabaret or kleinkunst , which combines music, storytelling, commentary, theatre and comedy. Cabaret dates back to the 1930s and artists like Wim Kan , Wim Sonneveld and Toon Hermans were pioneers of this form of art in the Netherlands. In Amsterdam is the Kleinkunstacademie (English: Cabaret Academy). Contemporary popular artists are Youp van 't Hek , Freek de Jonge , Herman Finkers , Hans Teeuwen , Theo Maassen , Herman van Veen , Najib Amhali , Raoul Heertje , Jörgen Raymann , Brigitte Kaandorp and Comedytrain . The English spoken comedy scene was established with the founding of Boom Chicago in 1993. They have their own theatre at Leidseplein.

Nightlife
Amsterdam is famous for its vibrant and diverse nightlife. Amsterdam has many cafés (bars). They range from large and modern to small and cozy. The typical Bruine Kroeg (brown café ) breathe a more old fashioned atmosphere with dimmed lights, candles, and somewhat older clientele. Most cafés have terraces in summertime. A common sight on the Leidseplein during summer is a square full of terraces packed with people drinking beer or wine. Many restaurants can be found in Amsterdam as well. Since Amsterdam is a multicultural city, a lot of different ethnic restaurants can be found. Restaurants range from being rather luxurious and expensive to being ordinary and affordable. Amsterdam also possesses many discothèques . The two main nightlife areas for tourists are the Leidseplein and the Rembrandtplein . The Paradiso , Melkweg and Sugar Factory are cultural centres, which turn into discothèques on some nights. Examples of discothèques near the Rembrandtplein are the Escape, Air, John Doe and Club Abe. Also noteworthy are Panama, Hotel Arena (East), TrouwAmsterdam and Studio 80. Bimhuis located near the Central Station, with its rich programming hosting the best in the field is considered one of the best jazz clubs in the world. The Reguliersdwarsstraat is the main street for the LGBT community and nightlife.

Festivals
In 2008, there were 140 festivals and events in Amsterdam. [128] Famous festivals and events in Amsterdam include: Koningsdag (which was named Koninginnedag until the crowning of king Willem-Alexander in 2013) (King's Day – Queen's Day); the Holland Festival for the performing arts; the yearly Prinsengrachtconcert (classical concerto on the Prinsen canal) in August; the ' Stille Omgang ' (a silent Roman Catholic evening procession held every March); Amsterdam Gay Pride ; The Cannabis Cup ; and the Uitmarkt . On Koninginnedag—that was held each year on 30 April—hundreds of thousands of people travel to Amsterdam to celebrate with the city's residents and Koningsdag is held on 27 April. The entire city becomes overcrowded with people buying products from the freemarket, or visiting one of the many music concerts.
The yearly Holland Festival attracts international artists and visitors from all over Europe. Amsterdam Gay Pride is a yearly local LGBT parade of boats in Amsterdam's canals, held on the first Saturday in August. [129] The annual Uitmarkt is a three-day cultural event at the start of the cultural season in late August. It offers previews of many different artists, such as musicians and poets, who perform on podia . [130]

Sports
Amsterdam is home of the Eredivisie football club Ajax Amsterdam . The stadium Amsterdam Arena is the home of Ajax. It is located in the south-east of the city next to the new Amsterdam Bijlmer ArenA railway station . Before moving to their current location in 1996, Ajax played their regular matches in De Meer Stadion . [131] In 1928, Amsterdam hosted the Summer Olympics . The Olympic Stadium built for the occasion has been completely restored and is now used for cultural and sporting events, such as the Amsterdam Marathon . [132] In 1920, Amsterdam assisted in hosting some of the sailing events for the Summer Olympics held in neighbouring Antwerp , Belgium by hosting events at Buiten Y .
The city holds the Dam to Dam Run , a 16-kilometre (10 mi) race from Amsterdam to Zaandam , as well as the Amsterdam Marathon .
The ice hockey team Amstel Tijgers play in the Jaap Eden ice rink. The team competes in the Dutch ice hockey premier league. Speed skating championships have been held on the 400-metre lane of this ice rink.
Amsterdam holds two American football franchises: the Amsterdam Crusaders and the Amsterdam Panthers . The Amsterdam Pirates baseball team competes in the Dutch Major League . There are three field hockey teams: Amsterdam, Pinoké and Hurley, who play their matches around the Wagener Stadium in the nearby city of Amstelveen . The basketball team MyGuide Amsterdam competes in the Dutch premier division and play their games in the Sporthallen Zuid. [133]
There is one rugbyclub in Amsterdam, which also hosts sports training classes such as RTC(Rugby Talenten Centrum or Rugby Talent Centre) and the National Rugby stadium.
Since 1999 the city of Amsterdam honours the best sportsmen and women at the Amsterdam Sports Awards . Boxer Raymond Joval and field hockey midfielder Carole Thate were the first to receive the awards, in 1999.

Government
The city of Amsterdam is a municipality under the Dutch Municipalities Act. It is governed by a directly elected municipal council , a municipal executive board and a mayor . Since 1981, the municipality of Amsterdam has gradually been divided into semi-autonomous boroughs , called stadsdelen or 'districts'. Over time, a total of 15 boroughs were created. In May 2010, under a major reform, the number of Amsterdam boroughs was reduced to eight: Amsterdam-Centrum covering the city centre including the canal belt , Amsterdam-Noord consisting of the neighbourhoods north of the IJ lake , Amsterdam-Oost in the east, Amsterdam-Zuid in the south, Amsterdam-West in the west, Amsterdam Nieuw-West in the far west, Amsterdam Zuidoost in the southeast, and Westpoort covering the Port of Amsterdam area. [134]

City government
As with all Dutch municipalities, Amsterdam is governed by a directly elected municipal council , a municipal executive board and a mayor ( burgemeester ). The mayor is a member of the municipal executive board, but also has individual responsibilies in maintaining public order. In July 2010, Eberhard van der Laan ( Labour Party ) was appointed mayor of Amsterdam by the national government for a six-year term after being nominated by the Amsterdam municipal council . After the 2014 municipal council elections , a governing majority of D66 , VVD and SP was formed – the first coalition without the Labour Party since World War II . [135] Next to the mayor , the municipal executive board consists of eight wethouders ('alderpersons') appointed by the municipal council : four D66 alderpersons, two VVD alderpersons and two SP alderpersons. [136]
Unlike most other Dutch municipalities, Amsterdam is subdivided into eight boroughs , called stadsdelen or 'districts', a system that was implemented gradually in the 1980s to improve local governance. The boroughs are responsible for many activities that had previously been run by the central city. In 2010, the number of Amsterdam boroughs reached fifteen. Fourteen of those had their own district council ( deelraad ), elected by a popular vote. The fifteenth, Westpoort , covers the harbour of Amsterdam and had very few residents. Therefore, it was governed by the central municipal council. Under the borough system, municipal decisions are made at borough level, except for those affairs pertaining to the whole city such as major infrastructure projects, which are the jurisdiction of the central municipal authorities. In 2010, the borough system was restructured, in which many smaller boroughs merged into larger boroughs. In 2014, under a reform of the Dutch Municipalities Act, the Amsterdam boroughs lost much of their autonomous status, as their district councils were abolished. The municipal council of Amsterdam voted to maintain the borough system by replacing the district councils with smaller, but still directly elected district committees ( bestuurscommissies ). Under a municipal ordinance, the new district committees were granted responsibilities through delegation of regulatory and executive powers by the central municipal council.

Metropolitan area
"Amsterdam" is usually understood to refer to the municipality of Amsterdam. Colloquially, some areas within the municipality, such as the town of Durgerdam , may not be considered part of Amsterdam.
Statistics Netherlands uses three other definitions of Amsterdam: metropolitan agglomeration Amsterdam ( Grootstedelijke Agglomeratie Amsterdam , not to be confused with Grootstedelijk Gebied Amsterdam , a synonym of Groot Amsterdam ), Greater Amsterdam ( Groot Amsterdam , a COROP region) and the urban region Amsterdam ( Stadsgewest Amsterdam ). [7] The Amsterdam Department for Research and Statistics uses a fourth conurbation, namely the Stadsregio Amsterdam ('City Region of Amsterdam'). The city region is similar to Greater Amsterdam but includes the municipalities of Zaanstad and Wormerland . It excludes Graft-De Rijp .
The smallest of these areas is the municipality of Amsterdam with a population of 802,938 in 2013. [7] The conurbation had a population of 1,096,042 in 2013. [7] It includes the municipalities of Zaanstad, Wormerland, Oostzaan, Diemen and Amstelveen only, as well as the municipality of Amsterdam. [7] Greater Amsterdam includes 15 municipalities, [7] and had a population of 1,293,208 in 2013. [7] Though much larger in area, the population of this area is only slightly larger, because the definition excludes the relatively populous municipality of Zaanstad . The largest area by population, the Amsterdam Metropolitan Area (Dutch: Metropoolregio Amsterdam), has a population of 2,33 million. [137] It includes for instance Zaanstad, Wormerveer, Muiden, Abcoude, Haarlem, Almere and Lelystad but excludes Graft-De Rijp. Amsterdam is part of the conglomerate metropolitan area Randstad , with a total population of 6,659,300 inhabitants. [138]
Of these various metropolitan area configurations, only the Stadsregio Amsterdam (City Region of Amsterdam) has a formal governmental status. Its responsibities include regional spatial planning and the metropolitan public transport concessions. [139]

National capital
Under the Dutch Constitution , Amsterdam is the capital of the Netherlands . Since the 1983 constitutional revision, the constitution mentions "Amsterdam" and "capital" in chapter 2, article 32: The king's confirmation by oath and his coronation take place in "the capital Amsterdam" (" de hoofdstad Amsterdam "). [11] Previous versions of the constitution only mentioned "the city of Amsterdam" (" de stad Amsterdam "). [140] For a royal investiture, therefore, the States General of the Netherlands (the Dutch Parliament) meets for a ceremonial joint session in Amsterdam. The ceremony traditionally takes place at the Nieuwe Kerk on Dam Square , immediately after the former monarch has signed the act of abdication at the nearby Royal Palace of Amsterdam . Normally, however, the Parliament sits in The Hague , the city which has historically been the seat of the Dutch government , the Dutch monarchy , and the Dutch supreme court . Foreign embassies are also located in The Hague.

Symbols
The coat of arms of Amsterdam is composed of several historical elements. First and centre are three St Andrew's crosses , aligned in a vertical band on the city's shield (although Amsterdam's patron saint was Saint Nicholas ). These St Andrew's crosses can also be found on the cityshields of neighbours Amstelveen and Ouder-Amstel . This part of the coat of arms is the basis of the flag of Amsterdam , flown by the city government, but also as civil ensign for ships registered in Amsterdam. Second is the Imperial Crown of Austria . In 1489, out of gratitude for services and loans, Maximilian I awarded Amsterdam the right to adorn its coat of arms with the king's crown. Then, in 1508, this was replaced with Maximilian's imperial crown when he was crowned Holy Roman Emperor . In the early years of the 17th century, Maximilian's crown in Amsterdam's coat of arms was again replaced, this time with the crown of Emperor Rudolph II , a crown that became the Imperial Crown of Austria . The lions date from the late 16th century, when city and province became part of the Republic of the Seven United Netherlands . Last came the city's official motto: Heldhaftig, Vastberaden, Barmhartig ("Heroic, Determined, Merciful"), bestowed on the city in 1947 by Queen Wilhelmina , in recognition of the city's bravery during the Second World War.

Transport

Metro, tram, bus
Currently, there are sixteen tram routes and four metro routes , with a fifth route to be added when the North/South metro line is completed (due in 2017). All are operated by municipal public transport operator GVB , which also runs the city bus network.
Four fare-free GVB ferries carry pedestrians and cyclists across the IJ lake to the borough of Amsterdam-Noord , and two fare-charging ferries run east and west along the harbour. There are also privately operated water taxis, a water bus, a boat sharing operation, electric rental boats (Boaty) and canal cruises, that transport people along Amsterdam's waterways.
Regional buses, and some suburban buses, are operated by Connexxion and EBS . International coach services are provided by Eurolines from Amsterdam Amstel railway station , IDBUS from Amsterdam Sloterdijk railway station , and Megabus from Zuiderzeeweg in the east of the city.

Car
Amsterdam was intended in 1932 to be the hub, a kind of Kilometre Zero , of the highway system of the Netherlands , [141] with freeways numbered One to Eight planned to originate from the city. [141] The outbreak of the Second World War and shifting priorities led to the current situation, where only roads A1 , A2 , and A4 originate from Amsterdam according to the original plan. The A3 road to Rotterdam was cancelled in 1970 in order to conserve the Groene Hart . Road A8 , leading north to Zaandam and the A10 Ringroad were opened between 1968 and 1974. [142] Besides the A1, A2, A4 and A8, several freeways, such as the A7 and A6 , carry traffic mainly bound for Amsterdam.
The A10 ringroad surrounding the city connects Amsterdam with the Dutch national network of freeways . Interchanges on the A10 allow cars to enter the city by transferring to one of the 18 city roads , numbered S101 through to S118. These city roads are regional roads without grade separation , and sometimes without a central reservation . Most are accessible by cyclists. The S100 Centrumring is a smaller ringroad circumnavigating the city's centre.
In the city centre, driving a car is discouraged. Parking fees are expensive, and many streets are closed to cars or are one-way . [143] The local government sponsors carsharing and carpooling initiatives such as Autodelen and Meerijden.nu . [144]

National rail
Amsterdam is served by ten stations of the Nederlandse Spoorwegen (Dutch Railways). [145] Six are intercity stops: Sloterdijk , Zuid , Amstel , Bijlmer ArenA , Lelylaan and Amsterdam Centraal . The stations for local services are: RAI , Holendrecht , Muiderpoort and Science Park . Amsterdam Centraal is also an international railway station. From the station there are regular services to destinations such as Austria, Belarus, Belgium, the Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Russia and Switzerland. Among these trains are international trains of the Nederlandse Spoorwegen (Amsterdam-Berlin) and the Thalys (Amsterdam-Brussels-Paris/Lille), CityNightLine , and InterCityExpress (Amsterdam–Cologne–Frankfurt). [146] Future line: Highspeed train Amsterdam/London opening end of 2017. [147]

Airport
Amsterdam Airport Schiphol ( IATA : AMS , ICAO : EHAM ) is less than 20 minutes by train from Amsterdam Centraal railway station and is served by domestic and international intercity trains, such as Thalys and Intercity Brussel. Schiphol is the largest airport in the Netherlands, the third largest in Europe, and the 14th-largest in the world in terms of passengers. It handles over 60 million passengers per year and is the home base of five airlines, KLM , transavia.com , Martinair , Arkefly and easyJet . [148] As of 2014 [update] , Schiphol was the fifth busiest airport in the world measured by international passenger numbers. [149]

Cycling
Amsterdam is one of the most bicycle-friendly large cities in the world and is a centre of bicycle culture with good facilities for cyclists such as bike paths and bike racks , and several guarded bike storage garages ( fietsenstalling ) which can be used for a nominal fee. In 2013, there were about 1,200,000 bicycles in Amsterdam outnumbering the amount of citizens in the city. [150] Theft is widespread – in 2011, about 83,000 bicycles were stolen in Amsterdam. [151] Bicycles are used by all socio-economic groups because of their convenience, Amsterdam's small size, the 400 kilometres (249 miles) of bike paths, [152] the flat terrain, and the arguable inconvenience of driving an automobile. [153]

Education
Amsterdam has two universities: the University of Amsterdam (Universiteit van Amsterdam), and the VU University Amsterdam (Vrije Universiteit or "VU"). Other institutions for higher education include an art school – Gerrit Rietveld Academie , a university of applied sciences – the Hogeschool van Amsterdam , and the Amsterdamse Hogeschool voor de Kunsten . Amsterdam's International Institute of Social History is one of the world's largest documentary and research institutions concerning social history , and especially the history of the labour movement . Amsterdam's Hortus Botanicus , founded in the early 17th century, is one of the oldest botanical gardens in the world, [154] with many old and rare specimens, among them the coffee plant that served as the parent for the entire coffee culture in Central and South America. [155]
There are over 200 primary schools in Amsterdam. [156] Some of these primary schools base their teachings on particular pedagogic theories like the various Montessori schools. The biggest Montessori high school in Amsterdam is the Montessori Lyceum Amsterdam . Many schools, however, are based on religion. This used to be primarily Roman Catholicism and various Protestant denominations, but with the influx of Muslim immigrants there has been a rise in the number of Islamic schools. Jewish schools can be found in the southern suburbs of Amsterdam.
Amsterdam is noted for having five independent grammar schools (Dutch: gymnasia), the Vossius Gymnasium , Barlaeus Gymnasium , St. Ignatius Gymnasium , Het 4e Gymnasium and the Cygnus Gymnasium where a classical curriculum including Latin and classical Greek is taught. Though believed until recently by many to be an anachronistic and elitist concept that would soon die out, the gymnasia have recently experienced a revival, leading to the formation of a fourth and fifth grammar school in which the three aforementioned schools participate. Most secondary schools in Amsterdam offer a variety of different levels of education in the same school. The city also has various colleges ranging from art and design to politics and economics which are mostly also available for students coming from other countries.

Notable people

Entertainment

Sport

Originating from elsewhere

Media
Amsterdam is a prominent centre for national and international media. Some locally based newspapers include Het Parool , a national daily paper; De Telegraaf , the largest Dutch daily newspaper; the daily newspapers Trouw , De Volkskrant and NRC Handelsblad ; De Groene Amsterdammer , a weekly newspaper; the free newspapers Sp!ts , Metro , and The Holland Times (printed in English).
Amsterdam is home to the Dutch second-largest commercial TV group SBS Broadcasting Group , consisting of TV-stations SBS 6 , Net 5 and Veronica . However, Amsterdam is not considered 'the media city of the Netherlands'. The town of Hilversum , 30 kilometres (19 miles) south-east of Amsterdam, has been crowned with this unofficial title. Hilversum is the principal centre for radio and television broadcasting in the Netherlands. Radio Netherlands , heard worldwide via shortwave radio since the 1920s, is also based there. Hilversum is home to an extensive complex of audio and television studios belonging to the national broadcast production company NOS, as well as to the studios and offices of all the Dutch public broadcasting organisations and many commercial TV production companies.
In 2012, the music video of Far East Movement, 'Live My Life', was filmed in various parts of Amsterdam.
Amsterdam is also featured in John Green 's book 'The Fault in Our Stars,' which has also been made into a film, and part of the film takes place in Amsterdam.

Housing
The housing market is heavily regulated. In Amsterdam, 55% of existing housing and 30% of new housing is owned by Housing Associations, which are Government sponsored entities.
Squat properties are common throughout Amsterdam, due to property law strongly favouring tenants. A number of these squats have become well known, such as OT301 , Paradiso , Vrankrijk (closed down by city government), and the Binnenpret, and several are now businesses, such as health clubs and licensed restaurants.

See also

Notes and references

Literature

Further reading

External links
WebPage index: 00076
Copyleft
Copyleft (a play on the word copyright ) is the practice of offering people the right to freely distribute copies and modified versions of a work with the stipulation that the same rights be preserved in derivative works down the line. [1] Copyleft software licenses are considered protective or reciprocal , as contrasted with permissive free software licenses. [2]
Copyleft is a form of licensing , and can be used to maintain copyright conditions for works ranging from computer software , to documents , to art , to scientific discoveries and instruments in medicine [3] . In general, copyright law is used by an author to prohibit recipients from reproducing, adapting, or distributing copies of their work. In contrast, under copyleft, an author may give every person who receives a copy of the work permission to reproduce, adapt , or distribute it, with the accompanying requirement that any resulting copies or adaptations are also bound by the same licensing agreement.
Copyleft licenses for software require that information necessary for reproducing and modifying the work must be made available to recipients of the binaries . The source code files will usually contain a copy of the license terms and acknowledge the authors.
Copyleft type licenses are a novel use of existing copyright law to ensure a work remains freely available. The GNU General Public License (GPL), originally written by Richard Stallman , was the first software copyleft license to see extensive use, and continues to dominate in that area. [4] Creative Commons , a non-profit organization founded by Lawrence Lessig , provides a similar license provision condition called share-alike . [5]

Reciprocity
Copyleft is a copyright licensing scheme in which an author surrenders some, but not all, rights under copyright law. Instead of allowing a work to fall completely into the public domain (where no ownership of copyright is claimed), copyleft allows an author to impose some restrictions on those who want to engage in activities that would more usually be reserved by the copyright holder. Under copyleft, derived works may be produced provided they are released under the compatible copyleft scheme.
The underlying principle is that one benefits freely from the work of others, but any modifications one makes public must be released under similar terms. For this reason some copyleft licenses are also known as reciprocal licenses, they have also been described as " viral " due to their self-perpetuating terms. [6] Under fair use , however, the copyleft license may be superseded, just like regular copyrights. Therefore, any person utilizing a copyleft-licensed source for their own work is free to choose any other license provided they meet the fair use standard. [7]
According to Free Software Foundation compliance engineer David Turner, the term viral license creates a misunderstanding and a fear of using copylefted free software . [8] David McGowan has written that there is no reason to believe the GPL could force proprietary software to become free software, but could "try to enjoin the firm from distributing commercially a program that combined with the GPL'd code to form a derivative work, and to recover damages for infringement ." If the firm "actually copied code from a GPL'd program, such a suit would be a perfectly ordinary assertion of copyright, which most private firms would defend if the shoe were on the other foot." [9] Richard Stallman has described this view with an analogy, saying, "The GPL's domain does not spread by proximity or contact, only by deliberate inclusion of GPL-covered code in your program. It spreads like a spider plant , not like a virus." [10]
While copyright law gives software authors control over copying, distribution and modification of their works, the goal of copyleft is to give all users of the software the freedom to carry out these activities. In this way, copyleft licenses are distinct from other types of free software licenses, which do not guarantee that all subsequent recipients of the program receive these rights, or the source code needed to make them effective. In particular, permissive free software licenses such as BSD allow re-distributors to remove some or all these rights, and do not require the distribution of source code.
Reuses of open source software which subvert the freedom of the software by adding extra restrictions are called open source hijacking. Other forms of open source licensing are susceptible to hijacking, so creators who desire that their work remain free may choose to use copyleft. The Open Directory Project (ODP, also known as DMOZ) , which is created and maintained entirely by volunteer editors, can be considered an example of open-source hijacking. Since all of the top search engines use DMOZ, it is an extremely important public commodity which is entirely built by volunteer contributions. Despite this, the DMOZ has remained a commercial product for its entire existence. [11]
The economic incentives to work on copyleft content can vary. Traditional copyright law is designed to promote progress by providing economic benefits to creators. When choosing to copyleft their work, content creators may seek complementary benefits like recognition from their peers. The open-source culture had been described as a gift culture, where social status is determined by an individual's contributions. [12] Working on free software may also be an outlet for programmers to fill a need they have noticed. For some creators, keeping their work open is an incentive in and of itself. For these programmers, preventing commercial enterprises from absorbing and selling their product is another incentive.
Copyleft software has economic effects beyond the individual creators. The presence of quality copyleft software can force commercial producers to increase the quality of their products, which must compete with free software. [13] This may also have the effect of preventing large commercial entities from applying monopoly prices. However, competition with proprietary software can also be a reason to forego copyleft. The Free Software Foundation recommends that when “widespread use of the code is vital for advancing the cause of free software,” [14] allowing the code to be copied and used freely is more important than a copyleft.

History
An early use of the word "copyleft" was in Li-Chen Wang 's Palo Alto Tiny BASIC 's distribution notice "@COPYLEFT ALL WRONGS RESERVED" in June 1976, but Tiny BASIC was not distributed under any form of copyleft distribution terms, so the wordplay is the only similarity. [15] [16]
The concept of copyleft was described in Richard Stallman 's GNU Manifesto in 1985, where he wrote:
Stallman worked a few years earlier on a Lisp interpreter. Symbolics asked to use the Lisp interpreter, and Stallman agreed to supply them with a public domain version of his work. Symbolics extended and improved the Lisp interpreter, but when Stallman wanted access to the improvements that Symbolics had made to his interpreter, Symbolics refused. Stallman then, in 1984, proceeded to work towards eradicating this emerging behavior and culture of proprietary software , which he named software hoarding . This was not the first time Stallman had dealt with proprietary software, but he deemed this interaction as a "turning point". He justified software sharing, protesting that when sharing, the software online can be copied without the loss of the original piece of work. Everyone is a winner. The software can be used multiple times without ever being damaged or wearing out. [17] [18]
As Stallman deemed it impractical in the short term to eliminate current copyright law and the wrongs he perceived it perpetuated, he decided to work within the framework of existing law ; in 1985, [19] he created his own copyright license, the Emacs General Public License, [20] the first copyleft license. This later evolved into the GNU General Public License , which is now one of the most popular Free Software licenses. For the first time a copyright holder had taken steps to ensure that the maximal number of rights be perpetually transferred to a program's users, no matter what subsequent revisions anyone made to the original program. This original GPL did not grant rights to the public at large, only those who had already received the program; but it was the best that could be done under existing law.
The new license was not at this time given the copyleft label. [21] Richard Stallman stated that the use of "Copyleft" comes from Don Hopkins , who mailed him a letter in 1984 or 1985, on which was written: "Copyleft – all rights reversed." [21] The term "kopyleft" with the notation " All Rites Reversed " was also in use in the early 1970s, within the Principia Discordia , which may have inspired Hopkins or influenced other usage. And in the arts Ray Johnson had earlier coined the term independently as it pertained to his making of and distribution of his mixed media imagery in his mail art and ephemeral gifts, for which he encouraged the making of derivative works . (While the phrase appears briefly as (or on) one of his pieces in the 2002 documentary How to Draw a Bunny , Johnson himself is not referenced in the 2001 documentary Revolution OS .)
Some [ who? ] have suggested that copyleft became a divisive issue in the ideological strife between the Open Source Initiative and the free software movement . [22] However, there is evidence that copyleft is both accepted and proposed by both parties:

Applying copyleft
Common practice for using copyleft is to codify the copying terms for a work with a license . Any such license typically gives each person possessing a copy of the work the same freedoms as the author, including (from the Free Software Definition ):
(Note that the list begins from 0 as a reference to computer programming, where zero-based numbering is prevalent.)
These freedoms do not ensure that a derivative work will be distributed under the same liberal terms. In order for the work to be truly copyleft, the license has to ensure that the author of a derived work can only distribute such works under the same or equivalent license.
In addition to restrictions on copying, copyleft licenses address other possible impediments. These include ensuring the rights cannot be later revoked and requiring the work and its derivatives to be provided in a form that facilitates modification. In software , this requires that the source code of the derived work be made available together with the software itself.
Copyleft licenses necessarily make creative use of relevant rules and laws. For example, when using copyright law, those who contribute to a work under copyleft usually must gain, defer or assign copyright holder status. By submitting the copyright of their contributions under a copyleft license, they deliberately give up some of the rights that normally follow from copyright, including the right to be the unique distributor of copies of the work.
Some laws used for copyleft licenses vary from one country to another, and may also be granted in terms that vary from country to country. For example, in some countries it is acceptable to sell a software product without warranty, in standard GNU GPL style (see articles 11 and 12 of the GNU GPL version 2 ), while in most European countries it is not permitted for a software distributor to waive all warranties regarding a sold product. For this reason the extent of such warranties are specified in most European copyleft licenses. Regarding that, see the European Union Public Licence EUPL , [28] or the CeCILL license , [29] a license that allows one to use GNU GPL (see article 5 of the EUPL and article 5.3.4 of CeCILL) in combination with a limited warranty (see article 7 and 8 of the EUPL and 9 of CeCILL).For projects which will be run over a network, a variation of the GPL is provided in the Affero General Public License , which ensures that the source code is available to users of network software.

Types and relation to other licenses
Copyleft is a distinguishing feature of some free software licenses. Many free software licenses are not copyleft licenses because they do not require the licensee to distribute derivative works under the same license. There is an ongoing debate as to which class of license provides the greater degree of freedom. This debate hinges on complex issues such as the definition of freedom and whose freedoms are more important, or whether to maximize the freedom of all potential future recipients of a work ( freedom from the creation of proprietary software). Non-copyleft free software licenses maximize the freedom of the initial recipient ( freedom to create proprietary software).
In common with the Creative Commons share-alike licensing system, GNU's Free Documentation License allows authors to apply limitations to certain sections of their work, exempting some parts of their creation from the full copyleft mechanism. In the case of the GFDL, these limitations include the use of invariant sections, which may not be altered by future editors. The initial intention of the GFDL was as a device for supporting the documentation of copylefted software. However, the result is that it can be used for any kind of document.

Strong and weak copyleft
The strength of the copyleft governing a work is an expression of the extent that the copyleft provisions can be efficiently imposed on all kinds of derived works. "Weak copyleft" refers to licenses where not all derived works inherit the copyleft license; whether a derived work inherits or not often depends on the manner in which it was derived.
"Weak copyleft" licenses are generally used for the creation of software libraries , to allow other software to link to the library, and then be redistributed without the legal requirement for the work to be distributed under the library's copyleft license. Only changes to the weak-copylefted software itself become subject to the copyleft provisions of such a license, not changes to the software that links to it. This allows programs of any license to be compiled and linked against copylefted libraries such as glibc (the GNU project 's implementation of the C standard library ), and then redistributed without any re-licensing required.
The most well known free software license that uses strong copyleft is the GNU General Public License. Free software licenses that use "weak" copyleft include the GNU Lesser General Public License and the Mozilla Public License . Examples of non-copyleft free software licenses include the X11 license , Apache license and the BSD licenses .
The Design Science License is a strong copyleft license that can apply to any work that is not software or documentation, such as art, music, sports photography, and video. It is hosted on the Free Software Foundation website's license list, [30] but it is not considered compatible with the GPL by the Free Software Foundation.
The concrete effect of strong vs. weak copyleft has yet to be tested in court. [31]

Full and partial copyleft
"Full" and "partial" copyleft relate to another issue: Full copyleft exists when all parts of a work (except the license itself) may only be modified and distributed under the terms of the work's copyleft license. Partial copyleft exempts some parts of the work from the copyleft provisions, thus permitting distribution of some modifications under terms other than the copyleft license, or in some other way does not impose all the principles of copylefting on the work. For example, the GPL linking exception made for some software packages (see below).

Share-alike
Share-alike imposes the requirement that any freedom that is granted regarding the original work must be granted on exactly the same or compatible terms in any derived work: this implies that any copyleft license is automatically a share-alike license, but not the other way around, as some share-alike licenses include further restrictions, for instance prohibiting commercial use. Another restriction is that not everyone wants to share their work and some share-alike agreements require that the whole body of work be shared, even if the author only wants to share a certain part. The plus side for the author of the source code is that any modification to the code will not only benefit the company, but the author will be recognized and hold equal claim over the changed code. [32] [33] Some permutations of the Creative Commons licenses are examples of share-alike.

Viral licensing
Viral license is a pejorative name for copyleft licenses. [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] It originates from the terms 'General Public Virus' or 'GNU Public Virus' (GPV), which dates back to 1990, a year after the GPLv1 was released. [39] [40] [41] The name " viral licenses " refers to the fact that any works derived from a copyleft work must preserve the copyleft permissions when distributed.
Some BSD License advocates used the term derisively in regards to the GPL's tendency to absorb BSD licensed code without allowing the original BSD work to benefit from it, while at the same time promoting itself as "freer" than other licenses. [42] [43] [44] Microsoft vice-president Craig Mundie remarked, "This viral aspect of the GPL poses a threat to the intellectual property of any organization making use of it." [45] In another context, Steve Ballmer declared that code released under GPL is useless to the commercial sector, since it can only be used if the resulting surrounding code is licensed under a GPL compatible license, and described it thus as "a cancer that attaches itself in an intellectual property sense to everything it touches". [46]
In response to Microsoft's attacks on the GPL, several prominent Free Software developers and advocates released a joint statement supporting the license. [47] According to FSF compliance engineer David Turner, it creates a misunderstanding and a fear of using copylefted free software. [48] David McGowan has written that there is no reason to believe the GPL could force proprietary software to become free software, but could "try to enjoin the firm from distributing commercially a program that combined with the GPL’d code to form a derivative work, and to recover damages for infringement." If the firm "actually copied code from a GPL’d program, such a suit would be a perfectly ordinary assertion of copyright, which most private firms would defend if the shoe were on the other foot." [49]
Popular copyleft licenses, such as the GPL, have a clause allowing components to interact with non-copyleft components as long as the communication is abstract, such as executing a command-line tool with a set of switches or interacting with a Web server. [50] As a consequence, even if one module of an otherwise non-copyleft product is placed under the GPL, it may still be legal for other components to communicate with it normally. This allowed communication may or may not include reusing libraries or routines via dynamic linking – some commentators say it does, [51] the FSF asserts it does not and explicitly adds an exception allowing it in the license for the GNU Classpath re-implementation of the Java library. This ambiguity is an important difference between the GPL and the LGPL , in that the LGPL specifically allows linking or compiling with the covered work. [52]

Symbol
The copyleft symbol is a backwards C in a circle ( copyright symbol © mirrored). It has no legal significance. [53] Because it is currently unavailable on Unicode , it can be approximated with character U+2184 ↄ LATIN SMALL LETTER REVERSED C or the more widely available character U+0254 ɔ LATIN SMALL LETTER OPEN O between parenthesis '(ɔ)' or, if supported by the application, by combining it with the character U+20DD ↄ⃝ COMBINING ENCLOSING CIRCLE : 'ↄ⃝'. [54] In 2016, a proposal [55] to add the symbol to a future version of Unicode was accepted by the Unicode Technical Committee . [56] The planned code point is U+1F12F 🄯 COPYLEFT SYMBOL . [56]

See also

Notes and references

External links
WebPage index: 00077
Creative Commons
Creative Commons ( CC ) is an American non-profit organization devoted to expanding the range of creative works available for others to build upon legally and to share. [2] The organization has released several copyright - licenses known as Creative Commons licenses free of charge to the public. These licenses allow creators to communicate which rights they reserve, and which rights they waive for the benefit of recipients or other creators. An easy-to-understand one-page explanation of rights, with associated visual symbols, explains the specifics of each Creative Commons license. Creative Commons licenses do not replace copyright, but are based upon it. They replace individual negotiations for specific rights between copyright owner (licensor) and licensee , which are necessary under an "all rights reserved" copyright management, with a "some rights reserved" management employing standardized licenses for re-use cases where no commercial compensation is sought by the copyright owner. The result is an agile, low-overhead and low-cost copyright-management regime, profiting both copyright owners and licensees. Wikipedia uses one of these licenses. [3]
The organization was founded in 2001 by Lawrence Lessig , Hal Abelson , and Eric Eldred [4] with the support of Center for the Public Domain . The first article in a general interest publication about Creative Commons, written by Hal Plotkin , was published in February 2002. [5] The first set of copyright licenses was released in December 2002. [6] The founding management team that developed the licenses and built the Creative Commons infrastructure as we know it today included Molly Shaffer Van Houweling , Glenn Otis Brown, Neeru Paharia, and Ben Adida. [7]
In 2003 the Open Content Project , a 1998 precursor project by David A. Wiley , announced the Creative Commons as successor project and Wiley joined as CC director. [8] [9] Matthew Haughey and Aaron Swartz [10] also played a role in the early stages of the [ which? ] project. [ citation needed ]
As of January 2016 there were an estimated 1.1 billion works licensed under the various Creative Commons licenses. [11] As of March 2015, Flickr alone hosts over 306 million Creative Commons licensed photos. [12] Creative Commons is governed by a board of directors. Their licenses have been embraced by many as a way for creators to take control of how they choose to share their copyrighted works.

Aim and influence
Creative Commons has been described as being at the forefront of the copyleft movement, which seeks to support the building of a richer public domain by providing an alternative to the automatic "all rights reserved" copyright , and has been dubbed "some rights reserved." [13] David Berry and Giles Moss have credited Creative Commons with generating interest in the issue of intellectual property and contributing to the re-thinking of the role of the " commons " in the " information age ". Beyond that, Creative Commons has provided "institutional, practical and legal support for individuals and groups wishing to experiment and communicate with culture more freely." [14]
Creative Commons attempts to counter what Lawrence Lessig, founder of Creative Commons, considers to be a dominant and increasingly restrictive permission culture . Lessig describes this as "a culture in which creators get to create only with the permission of the powerful, or of creators from the past". [15] Lessig maintains that modern culture is dominated by traditional content distributors in order to maintain and strengthen their monopolies on cultural products such as popular music and popular cinema, and that Creative Commons can provide alternatives to these restrictions. [16] [17]

Governance and staff
Creative Commons staff include two full-time legal counsel, as well as a number of open education, free culture and free software veterans including:
As of 2015 [update] , the Board of Creative Commons consists of: [18]
The Advisory Board consists of: [18]
CC's Audit Committee has three members, who are also members of the Board. As of 2017 [update] , they are Paul Keller, Jonathan Nightingale, Chris Thorne.

Affiliate network
As of 2015, there are more than 100 affiliates working in over 75 jurisdictions to support and promote CC activities around the world. [19]

South Korea
Creative Commons Korea ( CC Korea ) is the affiliated network of Creative Commons in South Korea. In March 2005, CC Korea was initiated by Jongsoo Yoon (in Korean: 윤종수), a Presiding Judge of Incheon District Court, as a project of Korea Association for Infomedia Law (KAFIL). The major Korean portal sites, including Daum and Naver, have been participating in the use of Creative Commons licences. In January 2009, the Creative Commons Korea Association was consequently founded as a non-profit incorporated association. Since then, CC Korea has been actively promoting the liberal and open culture of creation as well as leading the diffusion of Creative Common in the country.

Bassel Khartabil
Bassel Khartabil is a Palestinian Syrian open source software developer and has served as project lead and public affiliate for Creative Commons Syria. [22] Since March 15, 2012 he has been detained by the Syrian government in Damascus at Adra Prison. On October 17, 2015 Creative Commons Board of Directors approved a resolution calling for Bassel Khartabil's release. [23]

Criticism
All current CC licenses (except the CC0 Public Domain Dedication tool) require attribution, which can be inconvenient for works based on multiple other works. [24] Critics feared that Creative Commons could erode the copyright system over time [25] or allow "some of our most precious resources — the creativity of individuals — to be simply tossed into the commons to be exploited by whomever has spare time and a magic marker." [26]
Critics also worried that the lack of rewards for content producers will dissuade artists from publishing their work, and questioned whether Creative Commons is the commons that it purports to be. [27]
Creative Commons founder Lawrence Lessig countered that copyright laws have not always offered the strong and seemingly indefinite protection that today's law provides. Rather, the duration of copyright used to be limited to much shorter terms of years, and some works never gained protection because they did not follow the now-abandoned compulsory format. [28]
The maintainers of Debian , a GNU and Linux distribution known for its rigid adherence to a particular definition of software freedom , [29] rejected the Creative Commons Attribution License prior to version 3 as incompatible with the Debian Free Software Guidelines (DFSG) due to the license's anti- DRM provisions (which might, due to ambiguity, be covering more than DRM) and its requirement that downstream users remove an author's credit upon request from the author. [30] Version 3.0 of the Creative Commons licenses addressed these concerns [31] and is considered to be compatible with the DFSG. [32]

License proliferation and incompatibility
Mako Hill asserted that Creative Commons fails to establish a "base level of freedom" that all Creative Commons licenses must meet, and with which all licensors and users must comply. "By failing to take any firm ethical position and draw any line in the sand, CC is a missed opportunity.... CC has replaced what could have been a call for a world where 'essential rights are unreservable' with the relatively hollow call for 'some rights reserved. ' " He also argued that Creative Commons worsens license proliferation , by providing multiple licenses that are incompatible . [33]
The Creative Commons website states, "Since each of the six CC licenses functions differently, resources placed under different licenses may not necessarily be combined with one another without violating the license terms." [34] Works licensed under incompatible licenses may not be recombined in a derivative work without obtaining permission from the copyright owner. [35] [36] [37]
Richard Stallman of the FSF stated in 2005 that he couldn’t support Creative Commons as an activity because "it adopted some additional licenses which do not give everyone that minimum freedom", that freedom being "the freedom to share, noncommercially, any published work". [38] Those licenses have since been retired by Creative Commons. [39]

License misuse
Creative Commons is only a service provider for standardized license text, not a party in any agreement. Abusive users can brand the copyrighted works of legitimate copyright holders with Creative Commons licenses and re-upload these works to the internet. No central database of Creative Commons works is controlling all licensed works and the responsibility of the Creative Commons system rests entirely with those using the licences. [40] This situation is, however, not specific to Creative Commons. All copyright owners must individually defend their rights and no central database of copyrighted works or existing license agreements exists. The United States Copyright Office does keep a database of all works registered with it, but absence of registration does not imply absence of copyright.
Although Creative Commons offers multiple licenses for different uses, some critics suggested that the licenses still do not address the differences among the media or among the various concerns that different authors have. [27]
Lessig wrote that the point of Creative Commons is to provide a middle ground between two extreme views of copyright protection—one demanding that all rights be controlled, and the other arguing that none should be controlled. Creative Commons provides a third option that allows authors to pick and choose which rights they want to control and which they want to grant to others. The multitude of licenses reflects the multitude of rights that can be passed on to subsequent creators. [28]

Criticism of the non-commercial license
Erik Möller raised concerns about the use of Creative Commons' non-commercial license. Works distributed under the Creative Commons Non-Commercial license are not compatible with many open-content sites, including Wikipedia, which explicitly allow and encourage some commercial uses. Möller explained that "the people who are likely to be hurt by an -NC license are not large corporations, but small publications like weblogs, advertising-funded radio stations, or local newspapers." [41]
Lessig responded that the current copyright regime also harms compatibility and that authors can lessen this incompatibility by choosing the least restrictive license. [42] Additionally, the non-commercial license is useful for preventing someone else from capitalizing on an author's work when the author still plans to do so in the future. [42] [43] The non-commercial licenses have also been criticized for being too vague about which uses count as "commercial" and "non-commercial". [44] [45]
Bright Minds, a non-profit educational publisher that released works under an -NC license, sued FedEx for violating the license because a school had used its services to mass-produce photocopies of the work, thus commercially exploiting the works. An U.S. judge dismissed the case in February 2017, ruling that FedEx was an intermediary, and that the provision of the license "does not limit a licensee's ability to use third parties in exercising the rights granted [by the licensor]." [46]

Personality rights
In 2007, Virgin Mobile Australia launched a bus stop advertising campaign which promoted its mobile phone text messaging service using the work of amateur photographers who uploaded their work to photo-sharing site Flickr using a Creative Commons by Attribution license. Users licensing their images this way freed their work for use by any other entity, as long as the original creator was attributed credit, without any other compensation being required. Virgin upheld this single restriction by printing a URL, leading to the photographer's Flickr page, on each of their ads. However, one picture depicted 15-year-old Alison Chang posing for a photo at her church's fund-raising carwash, with the superimposed, mocking slogan "Dump Your Pen Friend". [47] [48] Chang sued Virgin Mobile and Creative Commons. The photo was taken by Alison's church youth counsellor, Justin Ho-Wee Wong, who uploaded the image to Flickr under the Creative Commons license. [48]
On 27 November 2007, Chang filed for a voluntary dismissal of the lawsuit against Creative Commons, focusing their lawsuit against Virgin Mobile. [49] The case was thrown out of court due to lack of jurisdiction and subsequently Virgin Mobile did not incur any damages towards the defendant. [50]

See also
WebPage index: 00078
Mobile device
A mobile device (or handheld computer ) is a computing device small enough to hold and operate in the hand. Typically, the device has a either flatscreen display with a small numeric keypad or alphanumeric keyboard , or a touchscreen providing a virtual keyboard and buttons ( icons ) on-screen. Many such devices can connect to the Internet and interconnect with other devices such as car entertainment systems or headsets via Wi-Fi , Bluetooth or near field communication (NFC). Integrated cameras, digital media players , mobile phone and Global Positioning System (GPS) capabilities are common. Power is typically provided by a lithium battery . Mobile devices may run mobile operating systems that allow third-party apps specialized for said capabilities to be installed and run.
Early pocket-sized devices were joined in the late 2000s by larger but otherwise similar tablet computers . Input and output is now usually via a touch-screen interface . Smartphones and personal digital assistants may provide much of the functionality of a laptop or desktop computer but more conveniently. Enterprise digital assistants can provide additional business functionality such as integrated data capture via barcode , RFID and smart card readers By 2010, mobile devices often contained sensors such as accelerometers , compasses , magnetometers and gyroscopes allowing detection of orientation and motion. Mobile devices may provide biometric user authentication such as face recognition or fingerprint recognition .
Manufacturers include Apple , Samsung , Sony , HTC , LG , and Motorola Mobility .

Characteristics
Device mobility can be viewed in the context of several dimensions: [1]
Strictly speaking, many so-called mobile devices are not mobile. It is the host that is mobile, i.e., a mobile human host carries a non-mobile smart phone device. An example of a true mobile computing device, where the device itself is mobile, is a robot . Another example is an autonomous vehicle . There are three basic ways mobile devices can be physically bound to mobile hosts: accompanied, surface-mounted or embedded into the fabric of a host, e.g., an embedded controller embedded in a host device. Accompanied refers to an object being loosely bound and accompanying a mobile host, e.g., a mobile phone can be carried in a bag or pocket but can easily be misplaced. [1] Hence, mobile hosts with embedded devices such as an autonomous vehicle can appear larger than pocket-sized.
As stated earlier, the most common size of mobile computing device is pocket-sized that can be hand-held, but other sizes for mobile devices exist too. Mark Weiser , known [ by whom? ] as the father of ubiquitous computing , computing everywhere, referred to device sizes that are tab-sized, pad and board sized, [2] where tabs are defined as accompanied or wearable centimetre-sized devices, e.g. smartphones and smart cards , and pads are defined as hand-held decimetre-sized devices, e.g., laptops and tablet computers. If one changes the form of the mobile devices in terms of being non-planar, one can also have skin devices and tiny dust-sized devices. [1] Dust refers to miniaturised devices without direct HCI interfaces, e.g., micro electro-mechanical systems ( MEMS ), ranging from nanometres through micrometers to millimetres. See also Smart dust . Skin : fabrics based upon light emitting and conductive polymers and organic computer devices. These can be formed into more flexible non-planar display surfaces and products such as clothes and curtains, see OLED display . See also smart device .
Although mobility is often regarded [ by whom? ] as synonymous with having wireless connectivity, these terms are different. Not all network access by mobile users, applications and devices need be via wireless networks and vice versa. Wireless access devices can be static and mobile users can move in between wired and wireless hotspots such as in Internet cafés. [1] Some mobile devices can be used as mobile Internet devices to access the Internet while moving but they do not need to do this and many phone functions or applications are still operational even while disconnected to the Internet . What makes the mobile device unique compared to other technologies is the inherent flexibility in the hardware and also the software. Flexible applications include video chat, Web browsing, payment systems, NFC, audio recording etc. [3] As mobile devices become ubiquitous there, will be a proliferation of services which include the use of the cloud . [ citation needed ] Although a common form of mobile device, a smartphone, has a display, another perhaps even more common form of smart computing device, the smart card , e.g., used as a bank card or travel card, does not have a display. This mobile device often has a CPU and memory but needs to connect, or be inserted into a reader in order to display its internal data or state.

Types
Mobile devices have been designed for many applications. They include:

Uses
Handheld devices have become ruggedized for use in mobile field management . Uses include digitizing notes, sending and receiving invoices , asset management , recording signatures, managing parts, and scanning barcodes . In 2009, developments in mobile collaboration systems enabled the use of handheld devices that combine video, audio and on-screen drawing capabilities to enable multi-party conferencing in real-time, independent of location. [4] Handheld computers are available in a variety of form factors, including smartphones on the low end, handheld PDAs , Ultra-Mobile PCs and Tablet PCs ( Palm OS , WebOS ). [5] Users can watch television through Internet by IPTV on some mobile devices. Mobile television receivers have existed since the 1960s, and in the 21st century mobile phone providers began making television available on cellular phones. [6]
In the 2010s, mobile devices can create, sync , and share many despite of distance or specifications of mobile devices. In the medical field, mobile devices are quickly becoming essential tools for accessing clinical information such as drugs, treatment, even medical calculation. [7] Due to the popularity of Candy Crush Saga and other mobile device games, online casinos are also offering casino games on mobile devices. The casino games are available on iOS , Android , Windows Phone and Windows . Available games are roulette , blackjack and several different types of slots . Most casinos have a play for free option. In the military, mobile devices have created new opportunities for the armed forces to deliver training and educational materials to soldiers, regardless of where they are stationed. [8]

See also
WebPage index: 00079
Powerset (company)
Powerset was an American company based in San Francisco, California , that, in 2006, was developing a natural language search engine for the Internet . [1] On July 1, 2008, Powerset was acquired by Microsoft for an estimated $100 million. [2]
Powerset was working on building a natural language search engine that could find targeted answers to user questions (as opposed to keyword based search). For example, when confronted with a question like "Which U.S. state has the highest income tax ?", conventional search engines ignore the question phrasing and instead do a search on the keywords "state", "highest", "income", and "tax". Powerset on the other hand, attempts to use natural language processing to understand the nature of the question and return pages containing the answer.
The company was in the process of "building a natural language search engine that reads and understands every sentence on the Web". [3] The company has licensed natural language technology from PARC , the former Xerox Palo Alto Research Center . [4]
On May 11, 2008, the company unveiled a tool for searching a fixed subset of English Wikipedia using conversational phrases rather than keywords. [5]

Powerlabs
In a form of beta testing , Powerset opened an online community called Powerlabs on September 17, 2007. Business Week said: "The company hopes the site will marshal thousands of people to help build and improve its search engine before it goes public next year." [6] Said The New York Times : "[Powerset Labs] goes far beyond the 'alpha' or 'beta' testing involved in most software projects, when users put a new product through rigorous testing to find its flaws. Powerset doesn’t have a product yet, but rather a collection of promising natural language technologies, which are the fruit of years of research at Xerox PARC." [7]
Powerlabs' initial search results are taken from Wikipedia . [8]

People
Barney Pell (born March 18, 1968, in Hollywood , California ) [9] is co-founder and CTO of Powerset. Pell received his bachelor of science degree in symbolic systems from Stanford University in 1989, where he graduated Phi Beta Kappa and was a National Merit Scholar . Pell received a PhD in computer science from Cambridge University in 1993, where he was a Marshall Scholar . [10] He has worked at NASA , as chief strategist and vice president of business development at StockMaster.com (acquired by Red Herring in March, 2000) and at Whizbang! Labs. Prior to joining Powerset, Pell was an Entrepreneur-in-Residence at Mayfield Fund , a venture capital firm in Silicon Valley. [11] Pell is also a founder of Moon Express , Inc., a U.S. company awarded a $10M commercial lunar contract by NASA and a competitor in the Google Lunar X PRIZE . [12]
Steve Newcomb was the COO and co-founder of Powerset. Prior to joining Powerset, he was a co-founder of Loudfire, General Manager at Promptu, and was on the board of directors at Jaxtr . He left Powerset in October 2007 to form Virgance, a social startup incubator.
Lorenzo Thione (born in Como, Italy ) was the product architect and co-founder of Powerset. Prior to joining Powerset, he worked at FXPAL [11] in natural language processing and related research fields. Thione earned his master's degree in software engineering from the University of Texas at Austin . [11]
Ronald Kaplan , former manager of research in Natural Language Theory and Technology at PARC, served as the company's CTO and CSO. [13]
Ryan Ferrier is a member of the founding team of Powerset. He managed personnel and internal operations. After 2008 he went on to co-found Serious Business, which made Facebook applications and was later bought by Zynga .
Another Powerset alumnus, Alex Le , became CTO of Serious Business and went on to become an executive producer at Zynga when it bought the company. Siqi Chen founded a stealth startup in mobile computing after leaving Powerset. [14]

Investors
Powerset attracted a wide range of investors, many of whom had considerable experience in the venture capital field. [15] The company received $12.5 million in Series A funding during November 2007, co-led by the venture capital firms Foundation Capital and The Founders Fund . [16] [17]
Among the better-known investors:

See also
WebPage index: 00080
National Curriculum (England, Wales and Northern Ireland)
The National Curriculum was introduced into England , Wales and Northern Ireland as a nationwide curriculum for primary and secondary state schools following the Education Reform Act (1988) . Notwithstanding its name, it does not apply to independent schools. Academies and free schools may also set their own curricula, though many choose to follow the National Curriculum.
The purpose of the National Curriculum was to standardise the content taught across schools to enable assessment, which in turn enabled the compilation of league tables detailing the assessment statistics for each school. These league tables, together with the provision to parents of some degree of choice in assignment of the school for their child (also legislated in the same act) were intended to encourage a ' free market ' by allowing parents to choose schools based on their measured ability to teach the National Curriculum.
Whilst only certain subjects were included at first, in subsequent years the curriculum grew to fill the entire teaching time of most state schools.
The requirement for state schools to teach Religious Education predates the National Curriculum as this was introduced in the Education Act (1944) .

Principal aims and purposes
There are two principal aims and four main purposes set out in the National Curriculum documentation: [1]
It should be noted that even though the national curriculum sets compulsory scholastic and educational national standards; parents who decide for their children to follow home-schooling may opt for alternative curricula. [2]

Statutory subjects

Core and foundation subjects
The table below lists those subjects which form a statutory part of the National Curriculum under the Education Act (Part 6) as updated. [3] [4] [5]
1 English is not statutory in Key Stage 1 in Welsh-medium schools in Wales
2 New Computing curriculum replaced ICT in schools (computing is now counted as a science in EBACC).
3 Computing is not statutory at KS4 in Wales or Northern Ireland.
4 Simply "Foreign Languages" at KS2.

Additional entitlements
In all maintained schools , provision is made for the requirement to offer a course in Religious Education under the Education Act. Parents have the right to withdraw pupils from this if they wish. [6] In addition, at all Key Stages, the Department for Children, Schools and Families suggests that pupils are offered provision in Personal, Social and Health Education , although this is not statutory. [3]

Primary education
The National Curriculum in the Primary Phase provides a broad and balanced curriculum which is relevant to children. Incorporating the subject areas listed above the curriculum design ensures:

Secondary education
The Education Act requires that all pupils in secondary education are provided with a programme of Sex education , including education about AIDS, HIV and other sexually-transmitted diseases . While a statutory provision, this does not form part of the National Curriculum, and parents have a right to remove their children from this provision. [6]
The Education Act (as amended) requires that all students in Key Stages 3 and 4 be provided with a programme of Careers education . This does not form part of the National Curriculum but is a statutory entitlement for all pupils. [7] [8]
Schools are required, under the amendments to the Education Act, to provide at least one course for those pupils who wish to study it, in each of the entitlement areas at Key Stage 4. These are: the Arts ; Design and Technology ; the Humanities ; and a Modern Foreign Language . [4]

National Curriculum assessment
Assessments are carried out at three ages: seven (school year 2, at the end of Key Stage 1 ), eleven (Year 6, the end of Key Stage 2 ) and fourteen (Year 9, the end of Key Stage 3 ). Some aspects of subjects are teacher-assessed, whilst others involve sitting an examination paper. The results are considered when school and LEA performance league tables are being compiled, but they do not lead to any formal qualification for the candidates taking them.

Criticism

Academic restriction
The study of most subjects under the National Curriculum would usually culminate in the sitting of a GCSE at the end of Key Stage 4 . Although the GCSE examinations replaced the earlier, separate GCE O-level and CSE examinations, the syllabuses were still initially devised entirely by the examination boards , whereas since the implementation of the National Curriculum the syllabus outline is determined by law. Thus much of the attention surrounding the claimed dumbing down of GCSEs [9] is, indirectly, a criticism of the National Curriculum.
Public schools are free to choose their own curriculum and examinations and many have opted for the more demanding [10] [11] IGCSEs [1] , which are not tied to the National Curriculum. It is claimed that this is creating a two-tier system with state school pupils losing out. From time to time ministers have suggested that state schools may be given funding to enter pupils for IGCSE examinations [12] but a study was undertaken by QCA , [13] which concluded that IGCSEs do not follow the programmes of study required by the Key Stage 4 of the National Curriculum and therefore could not be offered as a state-funded alternative.

Failure and adverse effects of the 'free market' objective
Although the primary purpose for the National Curriculum was to enable league tables and inform parental choice, many parents or guardians still fail to get the school of their choice [14] and there is concern that the league tables have a detrimental effect on pupils:
"The focus on league tables had resulted in pupils being pressured to attain high grades and so opt for subjects that are seen as easier to get good marks in such as art, drama and history."
The result has been for the more difficult mathematics in subjects such as chemistry and physics being dropped. [15]
But not only the drop of mathematics as a subject has been a major issue; according to the BBC, Scotland's Education Secretary Angela Constance has also expressed her concern over "poor pupil literacy" within the education system and the National Curriculum of England, Wales and Northern Ireland. [16]

See also
WebPage index: 00081
DBpedia
DBpedia (from "DB" for " database ") is a project aiming to extract structured content from the information created in the Wikipedia project. This structured information is made available on the World Wide Web . [2] DBpedia allows users to semantically query relationships and properties of Wikipedia resources, including links to other related datasets . [3] Tim Berners-Lee described DBpedia as one of the most famous parts of the decentralized Linked Data effort. [4]

Background
The project was started by people at the Free University of Berlin and Leipzig University , in collaboration with OpenLink Software , [5] and the first publicly available dataset was published in 2007. It is made available under free licences ( CC-BY-SA ), allowing others to reuse the dataset; it doesn't however use an open data license to waive the sui generis database rights .
Wikipedia articles consist mostly of free text, but also include structured information embedded in the articles, such as " infobox " tables (the pull-out panels that appear in the top right of the default view of many Wikipedia articles, or at the start of the mobile versions ), categorisation information, images, geo-coordinates and links to external Web pages . This structured information is extracted and put in a uniform dataset which can be queried.

Dataset
In September 2014, version 2014 was released. [6] Compared to previous versions, one of the main changes was the way abstract texts got extracted. By running a local mirror of Wikipedia and retrieving the rendered abstracts from it, the extracted texts got considerably cleaner. Furthermore, a new data set containing contents extracted from Wikimedia Commons was introduced. The whole DBpedia data set describes 4.58 million entities, out of which 4.22 million are classified in a consistent ontology , including 1,445,000 persons, 735,000 places, 123,000 music albums, 87,000 films, 19,000 video games, 241,000 organizations, 251,000 species and 6,000 diseases. [7] The data set features labels and abstracts for these entities in up to 125 different languages; 25.2 million links to images and 29.8 million links to external web pages. In addition, it contains around 50 million links into other RDF datasets, 80.9 million links to Wikipedia categories, and 41.2 million YAGO2 categories. [7] The DBpedia project uses the Resource Description Framework (RDF) to represent the extracted information and consists of 3 billion RDF triples, 580 million extracted from the English edition of Wikipedia and 2.46 billion from other language editions. [7]
From this data set, information spread across multiple pages can be extracted, for example book authorship can be put together from pages about the work, or the author. [ further explanation needed ]
One of the challenges in extracting information from Wikipedia is that the same concepts can be expressed using different parameters in infobox and other templates, such as |birthplace= and |placeofbirth= . Because of this, queries about where people were born would have to search for both of these properties in order to get more complete results. As a result, the DBpedia Mapping Language has been developed to help in mapping these properties to an ontology while reducing the number of synonyms. Due to the large diversity of infoboxes and properties in use on Wikipedia, the process of developing and improving these mappings has been opened to public contributions. [8]

Examples
DBpedia extracts factual information from Wikipedia pages, allowing users to find answers to questions where the information is spread across many different Wikipedia articles. Data is accessed using an SQL -like query language for RDF called SPARQL . For example, imagine you were interested in the Japanese shōjo manga series Tokyo Mew Mew , and wanted to find the genres of other works written by its illustrator. DBpedia combines information from Wikipedia's entries on Tokyo Mew Mew , Mia Ikumi and on works such as Super Doll Licca-chan and Koi Cupid . Since DBpedia normalises information into a single database, the following query can be asked without needing to know exactly which entry carries each fragment of information, and will list related genres:

Use cases
DBpedia has a broad scope of entities covering different areas of human knowledge. This makes it a natural hub for connecting datasets, where external datasets could link to its concepts. [9] The DBpedia dataset is interlinked on the RDF level with various other Open Data datasets on the Web. This enables applications to enrich DBpedia data with data from these datasets. As of September 2013 [update] , there are more than 45 million interlinks between DBpedia and external datasets including: Freebase , OpenCyc , UMBEL , GeoNames , MusicBrainz , CIA World Fact Book , DBLP , Project Gutenberg , DBtune Jamendo , Eurostat , UniProt , Bio2RDF , and US Census data. [10] [11] The Thomson Reuters initiative OpenCalais , the Linked Open Data project of the New York Times , the Zemanta API and DBpedia Spotlight also include links to DBpedia. [12] [13] [14] The BBC uses DBpedia to help organize its content. [15] [16] Faviki uses DBpedia for semantic tagging. [17] Samsung also includes DBpedia in its "Knowledge Sharing Platform" .
Such a rich source of structured cross-domain knowledge is fertile ground for Artificial Intelligence systems. DBpedia was used as one of the knowledge sources in IBM Watson 's Jeopardy! winning system [18]
Amazon provides a DBpedia Public Data Set that can be integrated into Amazon Web Services applications. [19]

DBpedia Spotlight
In June 2010 researchers from the Web Based Systems Group at the Free University of Berlin started a project named DBpedia Spotlight, a tool for annotating mentions of DBpedia resources in text. This provides a solution for linking unstructured information sources to the Linked Open Data cloud through DBpedia. DBpedia Spotlight performs named entity extraction , including entity detection and name resolution (in other words, disambiguation). It can also be used for named entity recognition , amongst other information extraction tasks. DBpedia Spotlight aims to be customizable for many use cases. Instead of focusing on a few entity types, the project strives to support the annotation of all 3.5 million entities and concepts from more than 320 classes in DBpedia.
DBpedia Spotlight is publicly available as a web service for testing purposes or a Java / Scala API licensed via the Apache License . The DBpedia Spotlight distribution also includes a jQuery plugin that allows developers to annotate pages anywhere on the Web by adding one line to their page. [20] Clients are also available in Java or PHP . [21] The tool handles various languages through its demo page [22] and web services. Internationalization is supported for any language that has a Wikipedia. [23]

See also
WebPage index: 00082
Web crawler
A Web crawler , sometimes called a spider , is an Internet bot that systematically browses the World Wide Web , typically for the purpose of Web indexing ( web spidering ).
Web search engines and some other sites use Web crawling or spidering software to update their web content or indices of others sites' web content. Web crawlers can copy all the pages they visit for later processing by a search engine which indexes the downloaded pages so the users can search much more efficiently.
Crawlers consume resources on the systems they visit and often visit sites without approval. Issues of schedule, load, and "politeness" come into play when large collections of pages are accessed. Mechanisms exist for public sites not wishing to be crawled to make this known to the crawling agent. For instance, including a robots.txt file can request bots to index only parts of a website , or nothing at all.
As the number of pages on the internet is extremely large, even the largest crawlers fall short of making a complete index. For that reason search engines were bad at giving relevant search results in the early years of the World Wide Web, before the year 2000. This is improved greatly by modern search engines; nowadays very good results are given instantly.
Crawlers can validate hyperlinks and HTML code. They can also be used for web scraping (see also data-driven programming ).

Nomenclature
A Web crawler may also be called a Web spider , [1] an ant , an automatic indexer , [2] or (in the FOAF software context) a Web scutter . [3]

Overview
A Web crawler starts with a list of URLs to visit, called the seeds . As the crawler visits these URLs, it identifies all the hyperlinks in the page and adds them to the list of URLs to visit, called the crawl frontier . URLs from the frontier are recursively visited according to a set of policies. If the crawler is performing archiving of websites it copies and saves the information as it goes. The archives are usually stored in such a way they can be viewed, read and navigated as they were on the live web, but are preserved as ‘snapshots'. [4]
The archive is known as the repository and is designed to store and manage the collection of web pages . The repository only stores HTML pages and these pages are stored as distinct files. A repository is similar to any other system that stores data, like a modern day database. The only difference is that a repository does not need all the functionality offered by a database system. The repository stores the most recent version of the web page retrieved by the crawler. [5]
The large volume implies the crawler can only download a limited number of the Web pages within a given time, so it needs to prioritize its downloads. The high rate of change can imply the pages might have already been updated or even deleted.
The number of possible URLs crawled being generated by server-side software has also made it difficult for web crawlers to avoid retrieving duplicate content . Endless combinations of HTTP GET (URL-based) parameters exist, of which only a small selection will actually return unique content. For example, a simple online photo gallery may offer three options to users, as specified through HTTP GET parameters in the URL. If there exist four ways to sort images, three choices of thumbnail size, two file formats, and an option to disable user-provided content, then the same set of content can be accessed with 48 different URLs, all of which may be linked on the site. This mathematical combination creates a problem for crawlers, as they must sort through endless combinations of relatively minor scripted changes in order to retrieve unique content.
As Edwards et al. noted, "Given that the bandwidth for conducting crawls is neither infinite nor free, it is becoming essential to crawl the Web in not only a scalable, but efficient way, if some reasonable measure of quality or freshness is to be maintained." [6] A crawler must carefully choose at each step which pages to visit next.

Crawling policy
The behavior of a Web crawler is the outcome of a combination of policies: [7]

Selection policy
Given the current size of the Web, even large search engines cover only a portion of the publicly available part. A 2009 study showed even large-scale search engines index no more than 40-70% of the indexable Web; [8] a previous study by Steve Lawrence and Lee Giles showed that no search engine indexed more than 16% of the Web in 1999. [9] As a crawler always downloads just a fraction of the Web pages , it is highly desirable for the downloaded fraction to contain the most relevant pages and not just a random sample of the Web.
This requires a metric of importance for prioritizing Web pages. The importance of a page is a function of its intrinsic quality, its popularity in terms of links or visits, and even of its URL (the latter is the case of vertical search engines restricted to a single top-level domain , or search engines restricted to a fixed Web site). Designing a good selection policy has an added difficulty: it must work with partial information, as the complete set of Web pages is not known during crawling.
Cho et al. made the first study on policies for crawling scheduling. Their data set was a 180,000-pages crawl from the stanford.edu domain, in which a crawling simulation was done with different strategies. [10] The ordering metrics tested were breadth-first , backlink count and partial Pagerank calculations. One of the conclusions was that if the crawler wants to download pages with high Pagerank early during the crawling process, then the partial Pagerank strategy is the better, followed by breadth-first and backlink-count. However, these results are for just a single domain. Cho also wrote his Ph.D. dissertation at Stanford on web crawling. [11]
Najork and Wiener performed an actual crawl on 328 million pages, using breadth-first ordering. [12] They found that a breadth-first crawl captures pages with high Pagerank early in the crawl (but they did not compare this strategy against other strategies). The explanation given by the authors for this result is that "the most important pages have many links to them from numerous hosts, and those links will be found early, regardless of on which host or page the crawl originates."
Abiteboul designed a crawling strategy based on an algorithm called OPIC (On-line Page Importance Computation). [13] In OPIC, each page is given an initial sum of "cash" that is distributed equally among the pages it points to. It is similar to a Pagerank computation, but it is faster and is only done in one step. An OPIC-driven crawler downloads first the pages in the crawling frontier with higher amounts of "cash". Experiments were carried in a 100,000-pages synthetic graph with a power-law distribution of in-links. However, there was no comparison with other strategies nor experiments in the real Web.
Boldi et al. used simulation on subsets of the Web of 40 million pages from the .it domain and 100 million pages from the WebBase crawl, testing breadth-first against depth-first, random ordering and an omniscient strategy. The comparison was based on how well PageRank computed on a partial crawl approximates the true PageRank value. Surprisingly, some visits that accumulate PageRank very quickly (most notably, breadth-first and the omniscient visit) provide very poor progressive approximations. [14] [15]
Baeza-Yates et al. used simulation on two subsets of the Web of 3 million pages from the .gr and .cl domain, testing several crawling strategies. [16] They showed that both the OPIC strategy and a strategy that uses the length of the per-site queues are better than breadth-first crawling, and that it is also very effective to use a previous crawl, when it is available, to guide the current one.
Daneshpajouh et al. designed a community based algorithm for discovering good seeds. [17] Their method crawls web pages with high PageRank from different communities in less iteration in comparison with crawl starting from random seeds. One can extract good seed from a previously-crawled-Web graph using this new method. Using these seeds a new crawl can be very effective.

Restricting followed links
A crawler may only want to seek out HTML pages and avoid all other MIME types . In order to request only HTML resources, a crawler may make an HTTP HEAD request to determine a Web resource's MIME type before requesting the entire resource with a GET request. To avoid making numerous HEAD requests, a crawler may examine the URL and only request a resource if the URL ends with certain characters such as .html, .htm, .asp, .aspx, .php, .jsp, .jspx or a slash. This strategy may cause numerous HTML Web resources to be unintentionally skipped.
Some crawlers may also avoid requesting any resources that have a "?" in them (are dynamically produced) in order to avoid spider traps that may cause the crawler to download an infinite number of URLs from a Web site. This strategy is unreliable if the site uses URL rewriting to simplify its URLs.

URL normalization
Crawlers usually perform some type of URL normalization in order to avoid crawling the same resource more than once. The term URL normalization , also called URL canonicalization , refers to the process of modifying and standardizing a URL in a consistent manner. There are several types of normalization that may be performed including conversion of URLs to lowercase, removal of "." and ".." segments, and adding trailing slashes to the non-empty path component. [18]

Path-ascending crawling
Some crawlers intend to download as many resources as possible from a particular web site. So path-ascending crawler was introduced that would ascend to every path in each URL that it intends to crawl. [19] For example, when given a seed URL of http://llama.org/hamster/monkey/page.html, it will attempt to crawl /hamster/monkey/, /hamster/, and /. Cothey found that a path-ascending crawler was very effective in finding isolated resources, or resources for which no inbound link would have been found in regular crawling.

Focused crawling
The importance of a page for a crawler can also be expressed as a function of the similarity of a page to a given query. Web crawlers that attempt to download pages that are similar to each other are called focused crawler or topical crawlers . The concepts of topical and focused crawling were first introduced by Filippo Menczer [20] [21] and by Soumen Chakrabarti et al. [22]
The main problem in focused crawling is that in the context of a Web crawler, we would like to be able to predict the similarity of the text of a given page to the query before actually downloading the page. A possible predictor is the anchor text of links; this was the approach taken by Pinkerton [23] in the first web crawler of the early days of the Web. Diligenti et al. [24] propose using the complete content of the pages already visited to infer the similarity between the driving query and the pages that have not been visited yet. The performance of a focused crawling depends mostly on the richness of links in the specific topic being searched, and a focused crawling usually relies on a general Web search engine for providing starting points.

Academic-focused crawler
An example of the focused crawlers are academic crawlers, which crawls free-access academic related documents, such as the citeseerxbot , which is the crawler of CiteSeer X search engine. Other academic search engines are Google Scholar and Microsoft Academic Search etc. Because most academic papers are published in PDF formats, such kind of crawler is particularly interested in crawling PDF , PostScript files, Microsoft Word including their zipped formats. Because of this, general open source crawlers, such as Heritrix , must be customized to filter out other MIME types , or a middleware is used to extract these documents out and import them to the focused crawl database and repository. [25] Identifying whether these documents are academic or not is challenging and can add a significant overhead to the crawling process, so this is performed as a post crawling process using machine learning or regular expression algorithms. These academic documents are usually obtained from home pages of faculties and students or from publication page of research institutes. Because academic documents takes only a small fraction in the entire web pages, a good seed selection are important in boosting the efficiencies of these web crawlers. [26] Other academic crawlers may download plain text and HTML files, that contains metadata of academic papers, such as titles, papers, and abstracts. This increases the overall number of papers, but a significant fraction may not provide free PDF downloads.

Re-visit policy
The Web has a very dynamic nature, and crawling a fraction of the Web can take weeks or months. By the time a Web crawler has finished its crawl, many events could have happened, including creations, updates, and deletions.
From the search engine's point of view, there is a cost associated with not detecting an event, and thus having an outdated copy of a resource. The most-used cost functions are freshness and age. [27]
Freshness : This is a binary measure that indicates whether the local copy is accurate or not. The freshness of a page p in the repository at time t is defined as:
Age : This is a measure that indicates how outdated the local copy is. The age of a page p in the repository, at time t is defined as:
Coffman et al. worked with a definition of the objective of a Web crawler that is equivalent to freshness, but use a different wording: they propose that a crawler must minimize the fraction of time pages remain outdated. They also noted that the problem of Web crawling can be modeled as a multiple-queue, single-server polling system, on which the Web crawler is the server and the Web sites are the queues. Page modifications are the arrival of the customers, and switch-over times are the interval between page accesses to a single Web site. Under this model, mean waiting time for a customer in the polling system is equivalent to the average age for the Web crawler. [28]
The objective of the crawler is to keep the average freshness of pages in its collection as high as possible, or to keep the average age of pages as low as possible. These objectives are not equivalent: in the first case, the crawler is just concerned with how many pages are out-dated, while in the second case, the crawler is concerned with how old the local copies of pages are.
Two simple re-visiting policies were studied by Cho and Garcia-Molina: [29]
In both cases, the repeated crawling order of pages can be done either in a random or a fixed order.
Cho and Garcia-Molina proved the surprising result that, in terms of average freshness, the uniform policy outperforms the proportional policy in both a simulated Web and a real Web crawl. Intuitively, the reasoning is that, as web crawlers have a limit to how many pages they can crawl in a given time frame, (1) they will allocate too many new crawls to rapidly changing pages at the expense of less frequently updating pages, and (2) the freshness of rapidly changing pages lasts for shorter period than that of less frequently changing pages. In other words, a proportional policy allocates more resources to crawling frequently updating pages, but experiences less overall freshness time from them.
To improve freshness, the crawler should penalize the elements that change too often. [30] The optimal re-visiting policy is neither the uniform policy nor the proportional policy. The optimal method for keeping average freshness high includes ignoring the pages that change too often, and the optimal for keeping average age low is to use access frequencies that monotonically (and sub-linearly) increase with the rate of change of each page. In both cases, the optimal is closer to the uniform policy than to the proportional policy: as Coffman et al. note, "in order to minimize the expected obsolescence time, the accesses to any particular page should be kept as evenly spaced as possible". [28] Explicit formulas for the re-visit policy are not attainable in general, but they are obtained numerically, as they depend on the distribution of page changes. Cho and Garcia-Molina show that the exponential distribution is a good fit for describing page changes, [30] while Ipeirotis et al. show how to use statistical tools to discover parameters that affect this distribution. [31] Note that the re-visiting policies considered here regard all pages as homogeneous in terms of quality ("all pages on the Web are worth the same"), something that is not a realistic scenario, so further information about the Web page quality should be included to achieve a better crawling policy.

Politeness policy
Crawlers can retrieve data much quicker and in greater depth than human searchers, so they can have a crippling impact on the performance of a site. Needless to say, if a single crawler is performing multiple requests per second and/or downloading large files, a server would have a hard time keeping up with requests from multiple crawlers.
As noted by Koster, the use of Web crawlers is useful for a number of tasks, but comes with a price for the general community. [32] The costs of using Web crawlers include:
A partial solution to these problems is the robots exclusion protocol , also known as the robots.txt protocol that is a standard for administrators to indicate which parts of their Web servers should not be accessed by crawlers. [33] This standard does not include a suggestion for the interval of visits to the same server, even though this interval is the most effective way of avoiding server overload. Recently commercial search engines like Google , Ask Jeeves , MSN and Yahoo! Search are able to use an extra "Crawl-delay:" parameter in the robots.txt file to indicate the number of seconds to delay between requests.
The first proposed interval between successive pageloads was 60 seconds. [34] However, if pages were downloaded at this rate from a website with more than 100,000 pages over a perfect connection with zero latency and infinite bandwidth, it would take more than 2 months to download only that entire Web site; also, only a fraction of the resources from that Web server would be used. This does not seem acceptable.
Cho uses 10 seconds as an interval for accesses, [29] and the WIRE crawler uses 15 seconds as the default. [35] The MercatorWeb crawler follows an adaptive politeness policy: if it took t seconds to download a document from a given server, the crawler waits for 10 t seconds before downloading the next page. [36] Dill et al. use 1 second. [37]
For those using Web crawlers for research purposes, a more detailed cost-benefit analysis is needed and ethical considerations should be taken into account when deciding where to crawl and how fast to crawl. [38]
Anecdotal evidence from access logs shows that access intervals from known crawlers vary between 20 seconds and 3–4 minutes. It is worth noticing that even when being very polite, and taking all the safeguards to avoid overloading Web servers, some complaints from Web server administrators are received. Brin and Page note that: "... running a crawler which connects to more than half a million servers (...) generates a fair amount of e-mail and phone calls. Because of the vast number of people coming on line, there are always those who do not know what a crawler is, because this is the first one they have seen." [39]

Parallelization policy
A parallel crawler is a crawler that runs multiple processes in parallel. The goal is to maximize the download rate while minimizing the overhead from parallelization and to avoid repeated downloads of the same page. To avoid downloading the same page more than once, the crawling system requires a policy for assigning the new URLs discovered during the crawling process, as the same URL can be found by two different crawling processes.

Architectures
A crawler must not only have a good crawling strategy, as noted in the previous sections, but it should also have a highly optimized architecture.
Shkapenyuk and Suel noted that: [40]
Web crawlers are a central part of search engines, and details on their algorithms and architecture are kept as business secrets. When crawler designs are published, there is often an important lack of detail that prevents others from reproducing the work. There are also emerging concerns about " search engine spamming ", which prevent major search engines from publishing their ranking algorithms.

Security
While most of the website owners are keen to have their pages indexed as broadly as possible to have strong presence in search engines , web crawling can also have unintended consequences and lead to a compromise or data breach if search engine indexes resources that shouldn't be publicly available or pages revealing potentially vulnerable versions of software.
Apart from standard web application security recommendations website owners can reduce their exposure to opportunistic hacking by only allowing search engines to index the public parts of their websites (with robots.txt ) and explicitly blocking them from indexing transactional parts (login pages, private pages, etc.).

Crawler identification
Web crawlers typically identify themselves to a Web server by using the User-agent field of an HTTP request. Web site administrators typically examine their Web servers ' log and use the user agent field to determine which crawlers have visited the web server and how often. The user agent field may include a URL where the Web site administrator may find out more information about the crawler. Examining Web server log is tedious task, and therefore some administrators use tools to identify, track and verify Web crawlers. Spambots and other malicious Web crawlers are unlikely to place identifying information in the user agent field, or they may mask their identity as a browser or other well-known crawler.
It is important for Web crawlers to identify themselves so that Web site administrators can contact the owner if needed. In some cases, crawlers may be accidentally trapped in a crawler trap or they may be overloading a Web server with requests, and the owner needs to stop the crawler. Identification is also useful for administrators that are interested in knowing when they may expect their Web pages to be indexed by a particular search engine .

Crawling the deep web
A vast amount of web pages lie in the deep or invisible web . [41] These pages are typically only accessible by submitting queries to a database, and regular crawlers are unable to find these pages if there are no links that point to them. Google's Sitemaps protocol and mod oai [42] are intended to allow discovery of these deep-Web resources.
Deep web crawling also multiplies the number of web links to be crawled. Some crawlers only take some of the URLs in <a href="URL"> form. In some cases, such as the Googlebot , Web crawling is done on all text contained inside the hypertext content, tags, or text.
Strategic approaches may be taken to target deep Web content. With a technique called screen scraping , specialized software may be customized to automatically and repeatedly query a given Web form with the intention of aggregating the resulting data. Such software can be used to span multiple Web forms across multiple Websites. Data extracted from the results of one Web form submission can be taken and applied as input to another Web form thus establishing continuity across the Deep Web in a way not possible with traditional web crawlers. [43]
Pages built on AJAX are among those causing problems to web crawlers. Google has proposed a format of AJAX calls that their bot can recognize and index. [44]

Web crawler bias
A recent study based on a large scale analysis of robots.txt files showed that certain web crawlers were preferred over others, with Googlebot being the most preferred web crawler. [45]

Visual vs programmatic crawlers
There are a number of "visual web scraper/crawler" products available on the web which will crawl pages and structure data into columns and rows based on the users requirements. One of the main difference between a classic and a visual crawler is the level of programming ability required to set up a crawler. The latest generation of "visual scrapers" like Diffbot , [46] outwithub, [47] and import.io [48] remove the majority of the programming skill needed to be able to program and start a crawl to scrape web data.
The visual scraping/crawling methodology relies on the user "teaching" a piece of crawler technology, which then follows patterns in semi-structured data sources. The dominant method for teaching a visual crawler is by highlighting data in a browser and training columns and rows. While the technology is not new, for example it was the basis of Needlebase which has been bought by Google (as part of a larger acquisition of ITA Labs [49] ), there is continued growth and investment in this area by investors and end-users. [50]

Examples
The following is a list of published crawler architectures for general-purpose crawlers (excluding focused web crawlers), with a brief description that includes the names given to the different components and outstanding features:
In addition to the specific crawler architectures listed above, there are general crawler architectures published by Cho [57] and Chakrabarti. [58]

Open-source crawlers

See also
WebPage index: 00083
Bloomberg Businessweek
Bloomberg Businessweek is an American weekly business magazine published by Bloomberg L.P. Businessweek was founded in 1929, the magazine was created to provide information and interpretation about what was happening in the business world. [2] It is headquartered in New York City . Megan Murphy was appointed editor of the magazine in November 2016. [3]

History
Businessweek was first published in September 1929, weeks before the stock market crash of 1929 . The magazine provided information and opinions on what was happening in the business world at the time. Early sections of the magazine included marketing, labor, finance, management and Washington Outlook, which made Businessweek one of the first publications to cover national political issues that directly impacted the business world. [4]
Businessweek was originally published to be a resource for business managers. However, in the 1970s, the magazine shifted its strategy and added consumers outside of the business world. [5] Since 1975, Businessweek has carried more annual advertising pages than any other magazine in the United States. [6]
Stephen B. Shepard served as editor-in-chief from 1984 until 2005 when he was chosen to be the founding dean of the CUNY Graduate School of Journalism . Under Shepard, Businessweek ' s readership grew to more than six million in the late 1980s. [7] He was succeeded by Stephen J. Adler of The Wall Street Journal . [8]

Bloomberg L.P. acquisition
Businessweek suffered a decline during the late-2000s recession as advertising revenues fell one-third by the start of 2009 and the magazine's circulation fell to 936,000. In July 2009, it was reported that McGraw-Hill was trying to sell Businessweek and had hired Evercore Partners to conduct the sale. Because of the magazine's liabilities, it was suggested that it might change hands for the nominal price of $1 to an investor who was willing to incur losses turning the magazine around. [9]
In late 2009, Bloomberg L.P. bought the magazine—for a reported price between $2 million to $5 million plus assumption of liabilities—and renamed it Bloomberg BusinessWeek . [10] [11] It is now believed McGraw-Hill received the high end of the speculated price, at $5 million, along with the assumption of debt. Currently, the magazine still loses $30 million per year, about half of the $60 million it was reported losing in 2009. [12] Adler resigned as editor-in-chief and was replaced by Josh Tyrangiel , who had been deputy managing editor of Time magazine. [13] In early 2010, the magazine title was restyled Bloomberg Businessweek (with a lowercase "w") as part of a redesign. [14]

Recent history
Megan Murphy is the third editor of the magazine in the eight years of Bloomberg ownership. The magazine is reportedly losing between $20-$30 million a year. [3] The magazine is to undergo substantial changes in the second quarter of 2017.

Business school rankings
Since 1988, Businessweek has published annual rankings of United States business school MBA programs. [15] In 2006, it also started publishing annual rankings of undergraduate business programs. [16]

Additional versions
International editions of Businessweek were available on newsstands in Europe and Asia until 2005 when publication of regional editions was suspended to help increase foreign readership of customized European and Asian versions of Businessweek's website. [17] However, the same year the Russian edition was launched in collaboration with Rodionov Publishing House. [18]
At the same time, Businessweek partnered with InfoPro Management, a publishing and market research company based in Beirut, Lebanon , to produce the Arabic version of the magazine in 22 Arab countries. [19]
In 2011, Bloomberg Businessweek continued the magazine's international expansion and announced plans to introduce a Polish-language edition called Bloomberg Businessweek Polska , as well as a Chinese edition which was relaunched in November 2011. [20] [21] [22]
Bloomberg Businessweek launched an iPad version of the magazine using Apple's subscription billing service in 2011. [23] [24] The iPad edition was the first to use this subscription method, which allows one to subscribe via an iTunes account. [25] There are over 100,000 subscribers to the iPad edition of Businessweek . [26]

Honors and awards
In 2011, Adweek named Bloomberg Businessweek as the top business magazine in the country. [27] In 2012, Bloomberg Businessweek won the general excellence award for general-interest magazines at the National Magazine Awards . [28] Also in 2012, Bloomberg Businessweek editor Josh Tyrangiel was named magazine editor of the year by Ad Age . [29] In 2014, Bloomberg Businessweek won a Society of American Business Editors and Writers Best in Business award for magazines, general excellence. [30]

Name and spelling history

See also
WebPage index: 00084
Metadata
Metadata is " data [information] that provides information about other data". [1] Three distinct types of metadata exist: descriptive metadata , structural metadata , and administrative metadata . [2]

History
Metadata was traditionally used in the card catalogs of libraries until the 1980s, when libraries converted their catalog data to digital databases. In the 2000s, as digital formats are becoming the prevalent way of storing data and information, metadata is also used to describe digital data using metadata standards .
There are different metadata standards for each different discipline (e.g., museum collections, digital audio files , websites , etc.). Describing the contents and context of data or data files increases its usefulness. For example, a web page may include metadata specifying what software language the page is written in (e.g., HTML), what tools were used to create it, what subjects the page is about, and where to find more information about the subject. This metadata can automatically improve the reader's experience and make it easier for users to find the web page online. [5] A CD may include metadata providing information about the musicians, singers and songwriters whose work appears on the disc.
A principal purpose of metadata is to help users find relevant information and discover resources. Metadata also helps to organize electronic resources, provide digital identification, and support the archiving and preservation of resources. Metadata assists users in resource discovery by "allowing resources to be found by relevant criteria, identifying resources, bringing similar resources together, distinguishing dissimilar resources, and giving location information." [6] Metadata of telecommunication activities including Internet traffic is very widely collected by various national governmental organizations. This data is used for the purposes of traffic analysis and can be used for mass surveillance . [7]
In many countries, the metadata relating to emails, telephone calls, web pages, video traffic, IP connections and cell phone locations are routinely stored by government organizations. [8]

Definition
Metadata means "data about data". Although the "meta" prefix (from the Greek preposition and prefix μετά-) means "after" or "beyond", it is used to mean "about" in epistemology . Metadata is defined as the data providing information about one or more aspects of the data; it is used to summarize basic information about data which can make tracking and working with specific data easier. [9] Some examples include:
For example, a digital image may include metadata that describes how large the picture is, the color depth, the image resolution, when the image was created, the shutter speed, and other data. [10] A text document's metadata may contain information about how long the document is, who the author is, when the document was written, and a short summary of the document. Metadata within web pages can also contain descriptions of page content, as well as key words linked to the content. [11] These links are often called "Metatags", which were used as the primary factor in determining order for a web search until the late 1990s. [11] The reliance of metatags in web searches was decreased in the late 1990s because of "keyword stuffing". [11] Metatags were being largely misused to trick search engines into thinking some websites had more relevance in the search than they really did. [11]
Metadata can be stored and managed in a database , often called a metadata registry or metadata repository . [12] However, without context and a point of reference, it might be impossible to identify metadata just by looking at it. [13] For example: by itself, a database containing several numbers, all 13 digits long could be the results of calculations or a list of numbers to plug into an equation - without any other context, the numbers themselves can be perceived as the data. But if given the context that this database is a log of a book collection, those 13-digit numbers may now be identified as ISBNs - information that refers to the book, but is not itself the information within the book. The term "metadata" was coined in 1968 by Philip Bagley, in his book "Extension of Programming Language Concepts" where it is clear that he uses the term in the ISO 11179 "traditional" sense, which is "structural metadata" i.e. "data about the containers of data"; rather than the alternate sense "content about individual instances of data content" or metacontent, the type of data usually found in library catalogues. [14] [15] Since then the fields of information management, information science, information technology, librarianship, and GIS have widely adopted the term. In these fields the word metadata is defined as "data about data". [16] [ page needed ] While this is the generally accepted definition, various disciplines have adopted their own more specific explanation and uses of the term.

Types
While the metadata application is manifold, covering a large variety of fields, there are specialized and well-accepted models to specify types of metadata. Bretherton & Singley (1994) distinguish between two distinct classes: structural/control metadata and guide metadata. [17] Structural metadata describes the structure of database objects such as tables, columns, keys and indexes. Guide metadata helps humans find specific items and are usually expressed as a set of keywords in a natural language. According to Ralph Kimball metadata can be divided into 2 similar categories: technical metadata and business metadata. Technical metadata corresponds to internal metadata, and business metadata corresponds to external metadata. Kimball adds a third category, process metadata . On the other hand, NISO distinguishes among three types of metadata: descriptive, structural, and administrative. [16]
Descriptive metadata is typically used for discovery and identification, as information to search and locate an object, such as title, author, subjects, keywords, publisher. Structural metadata describes how the components of an object are organized. An example of structural metadata would be how pages are ordered to form chapters of a book. Finally, administrative metadata gives information to help manage the source. Administrative metadata refers to the technical information, including file type, or when and how the file was created. Two sub-types of administrative metadata are rights management metadata and preservation metadata. Rights management metadata explains intellectual property rights, while preservation metadata contains information to preserve and save a resource. [6] [ page needed ]

Structures
Metadata (metacontent) or, more correctly, the vocabularies used to assemble metadata (metacontent) statements, is typically structured according to a standardized concept using a well-defined metadata scheme, including: metadata standards and metadata models . Tools such as controlled vocabularies , taxonomies , thesauri , data dictionaries , and metadata registries can be used to apply further standardization to the metadata. Structural metadata commonality is also of paramount importance in data model development and in database design .

Syntax
Metadata (metacontent) syntax refers to the rules created to structure the fields or elements of metadata (metacontent). [18] A single metadata scheme may be expressed in a number of different markup or programming languages, each of which requires a different syntax. For example, Dublin Core may be expressed in plain text, HTML , XML , and RDF . [19]
A common example of (guide) metacontent is the bibliographic classification, the subject, the Dewey Decimal class number . There is always an implied statement in any "classification" of some object. To classify an object as, for example, Dewey class number 514 (Topology) (i.e. books having the number 514 on their spine) the implied statement is: "<book><subject heading><514>. This is a subject-predicate-object triple, or more importantly, a class-attribute-value triple. The first two elements of the triple (class, attribute) are pieces of some structural metadata having a defined semantic. The third element is a value, preferably from some controlled vocabulary, some reference (master) data. The combination of the metadata and master data elements results in a statement which is a metacontent statement i.e. "metacontent = metadata + master data". All of these elements can be thought of as "vocabulary". Both metadata and master data are vocabularies which can be assembled into metacontent statements. There are many sources of these vocabularies, both meta and master data: UML, EDIFACT, XSD, Dewey/UDC/LoC, SKOS, ISO-25964, Pantone, Linnaean Binomial Nomenclature, etc. Using controlled vocabularies for the components of metacontent statements, whether for indexing or finding, is endorsed by ISO 25964 : "If both the indexer and the searcher are guided to choose the same term for the same concept, then relevant documents will be retrieved." [20] This is particularly relevant when considering search engines of the internet, such as Google. The process indexes pages then matches text strings using its complex algorithm; there is no intelligence or "inferencing" occurring, just the illusion thereof.

Hierarchical, linear and planar schemata
Metadata schemata can be hierarchical in nature where relationships exist between metadata elements and elements are nested so that parent-child relationships exist between the elements. An example of a hierarchical metadata schema is the IEEE LOM schema, in which metadata elements may belong to a parent metadata element. Metadata schemata can also be one-dimensional, or linear, where each element is completely discrete from other elements and classified according to one dimension only. An example of a linear metadata schema is the Dublin Core schema, which is one dimensional. Metadata schemata are often two dimensional, or planar, where each element is completely discrete from other elements but classified according to two orthogonal dimensions. [21]

Hypermapping
In all cases where the metadata schemata exceed the planar depiction, some type of hypermapping is required to enable display and view of metadata according to chosen aspect and to serve special views. Hypermapping frequently applies to layering of geographical and geological information overlays. [22]

Granularity
The degree to which the data or metadata is structured is referred to as its "granularity" . "Granularity" refers to how much detail is provided. Metadata with a high granularity allows for deeper, more detailed, and more structured information and enables greater levels of technical manipulation. A lower level of granularity means that metadata can be created for considerably lower costs but will not provide as detailed information. The major impact of granularity is not only on creation and capture, but moreover on maintenance costs. As soon as the metadata structures become outdated, so too is the access to the referred data. Hence granularity must take into account the effort to create the metadata as well as the effort to maintain it.

Standards
International standards apply to metadata. Much work is being accomplished in the national and international standards communities, especially ANSI (American National Standards Institute) and ISO (International Organization for Standardization) to reach consensus on standardizing metadata and registries. The core metadata registry standard is ISO / IEC 11179 Metadata Registries (MDR), the framework for the standard is described in ISO/IEC 11179-1:2004. [23] A new edition of Part 1 is in its final stage for publication in 2015 or early 2016. It has been revised to align with the current edition of Part 3, ISO/IEC 11179-3:2013 [24] which extends the MDR to support registration of Concept Systems. (see ISO/IEC 11179 ). This standard specifies a schema for recording both the meaning and technical structure of the data for unambiguous usage by humans and computers. ISO/IEC 11179 standard refers to metadata as information objects about data, or "data about data". In ISO/IEC 11179 Part-3, the information objects are data about Data Elements, Value Domains, and other reusable semantic and representational information objects that describe the meaning and technical details of a data item. This standard also prescribes the details for a metadata registry, and for registering and administering the information objects within a Metadata Registry. ISO/IEC 11179 Part 3 also has provisions for describing compound structures that are derivations of other data elements, for example through calculations, collections of one or more data elements, or other forms of derived data. While this standard describes itself originally as a "data element" registry, its purpose is to support describing and registering metadata content independently of any particular application, lending the descriptions to being discovered and reused by humans or computers in developing new applications, databases, or for analysis of data collected in accordance with the registered metadata content. This standard has become the general basis for other kinds of metadata registries, reusing and extending the registration and administration portion of the standard.
The Geospatial community has a tradition of specialized geospatial metadata standards, particularly building on traditions of map- and image-libraries and catalogues. Formal metadata is usually essential for geospatial data, as common text-processing approaches are not applicable.
The Dublin Core metadata terms are a set of vocabulary terms which can be used to describe resources for the purposes of discovery. The original set of 15 classic [25] metadata terms, known as the Dublin Core Metadata Element Set [26] are endorsed in the following standards documents:
Although not a standard, Microformat (also mentioned in the section metadata on the internet below) is a web-based approach to semantic markup which seeks to re-use existing HTML/XHTML tags to convey metadata. Microformat follows XHTML and HTML standards but is not a standard in itself. One advocate of microformats, Tantek Çelik , characterized a problem with alternative approaches:

Use

Photographs
Metadata may be written into a digital photo file that will identify who owns it, copyright and contact information, what brand or model of camera created the file, along with exposure information (shutter speed, f-stop, etc.) and descriptive information, such as keywords about the photo, making the file or image searchable on a computer and/or the Internet. Some metadata is created by the camera and some is input by the photographer and/or software after downloading to a computer. Most digital cameras write metadata about model number, shutter speed, etc., and some enable you to edit it; [31] this functionality has been available on most Nikon DSLRs since the Nikon D3 , on most new Canon cameras since the Canon EOS 7D , and on most Pentax DSLRs since the Pentax K-3. Metadata can be used to make organizing in post-production easier with the use of key-wording. Filters can be used to analyze a specific set of photographs and create selections on criteria like rating or capture time.
Photographic Metadata Standards are governed by organizations that develop the following standards. They include, but are not limited to:

Telecommunications
Information on the times, origins and destinations of phone calls, electronic messages, instant messages and other modes of telecommunication, as opposed to message content, is another form of metadata. Bulk collection of this call detail record metadata by intelligence agencies has proven controversial after disclosures by Edward Snowden Intelligence agencies such as the NSA are keeping online metadata of millions of internet user for up to a year, regardless of whether or not they are persons of interest to the agency.

Video
Metadata is particularly useful in video, where information about its contents (such as transcripts of conversations and text descriptions of its scenes) is not directly understandable by a computer, but where efficient search of the content is desirable. There are two sources in which video metadata is derived: (1) operational gathered metadata, that is information about the content produced, such as the type of equipment, software, date, and location; (2) human-authored metadata, to improve search engine visibility, discoverability, audience engagement, and providing advertising opportunities to video publishers. [33] In today's society most professional video editing software has access to metadata. Avid's MetaSync and Adobe's Bridge are two prime examples of this. [34]

Web pages
Web pages often include metadata in the form of meta tags . Description and keywords in meta tags are commonly used to describe the Web page's content. Meta elements also specify page description, key words, authors of the document, and when the document was last modified. [11] Web page metadata helps search engines and users to find the types of web pages they are looking for.

Creation
Metadata can be created either by automated information processing or by manual work. Elementary metadata captured by computers can include information about when an object was created, who created it, when it was last updated, file size, and file extension. In this context an object refers to any of the following:

Data virtualization
Data virtualization has emerged in the 2000s as the new software technology to complete the virtualization "stack" in the enterprise. Metadata is used in data virtualization servers which are enterprise infrastructure components, alongside database and application servers. Metadata in these servers is saved as persistent repository and describe business objects in various enterprise systems and applications. Structural metadata commonality is also important to support data virtualization.

Statistics and census services
Standardization work has had a large impact on efforts to build metadata systems in the statistical community [ citation needed ] . Several metadata standards [ which? ] are described, and their importance to statistical agencies is discussed. Applications of the standards [ which? ] at the Census Bureau, Environmental Protection Agency, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Statistics Canada, and many others are described [ citation needed ] . Emphasis is on the impact a metadata registry can have in a statistical agency.

Library and information science
Metadata has been used in various ways as a means of cataloging items in libraries in both digital and analog format. Such data helps classify, aggregate, identify, and locate a particular book, DVD, magazine or any object a library might hold in its collection. Until the 1980s, many library catalogues used 3x5 inch cards in file drawers to display a book's title, author, subject matter, and an abbreviated alpha-numeric string ( call number ) which indicated the physical location of the book within the library's shelves. The Dewey Decimal System employed by libraries for the classification of library materials by subject is an early example of metadata usage. Beginning in the 1980s and 1990s, many libraries replaced these paper file cards with computer databases. These computer databases make it much easier and faster for users to do keyword searches. Another form of older metadata collection is the use by US Census Bureau of what is known as the "Long Form." The Long Form asks questions that are used to create demographic data to find patterns of distribution. [35] Libraries employ metadata in library catalogues , most commonly as part of an Integrated Library Management System . Metadata is obtained by cataloguing resources such as books, periodicals, DVDs, web pages or digital images. This data is stored in the integrated library management system, ILMS , using the MARC metadata standard. The purpose is to direct patrons to the physical or electronic location of items or areas they seek as well as to provide a description of the item/s in question.
More recent and specialized instances of library metadata include the establishment of digital libraries including e-print repositories and digital image libraries. While often based on library principles, the focus on non-librarian use, especially in providing metadata, means they do not follow traditional or common cataloging approaches. Given the custom nature of included materials, metadata fields are often specially created e.g. taxonomic classification fields, location fields, keywords or copyright statement. Standard file information such as file size and format are usually automatically included. [36] Library operation has for decades been a key topic in efforts toward international standardization . Standards for metadata in digital libraries include Dublin Core , METS , MODS , DDI , DOI , URN , PREMIS schema, EML , and OAI-PMH . Leading libraries in the world give hints on their metadata standards strategies. [37] [38]

In museums
Metadata in a museum context is the information that trained cultural documentation specialists, such as archivists , librarians , museum registrars and curators , create to index, structure, describe, identify, or otherwise specify works of art, architecture, cultural objects and their images. [39] [40] [ page needed ] [41] [ page needed ] Descriptive metadata is most commonly used in museum contexts for object identification and resource recovery purposes. [40]

Usage
Metadata is developed and applied within collecting institutions and museums in order to:

Standards
Many museums and cultural heritage centers recognize that given the diversity of art works and cultural objects, no single model or standard suffices to describe and catalogue cultural works. [39] [40] [41] For example, a sculpted Indigenous artifact could be classified as an artwork, an archaeological artifact, or an Indigenous heritage item. The early stages of standardization in archiving, description and cataloging within the museum community began in the late 1990s with the development of standards such as Categories for the Description of Works of Art (CDWA) , Spectrum, the Conceptual Reference Model (CIDOC) , Cataloging Cultural Objects (CCO) and the CDWA Lite XML schema . [40] These standards use HTML and XML markup languages for machine processing, publication and implementation. [40] The Anglo-American Cataloguing Rules (AACR) , originally developed for characterizing books, have also been applied to cultural objects, works of art and architecture. [41] Standards, such as the CCO, are integrated within a Museum's Collection Management System (CMS) , a database through which museums are able to manage their collections, acquisitions, loans and conservation. [41] Scholars and professionals in the field note that the "quickly evolving landscape of standards and technologies" create challenges for cultural documentarians, specifically non-technically trained professionals. [42] [ page needed ] Most collecting institutions and museums use a relational database to categorize cultural works and their images. [41] Relational databases and metadata work to document and describe the complex relationships amongst cultural objects and multi-faceted works of art, as well as between objects and places, people and artistic movements. [40] [41] Relational database structures are also beneficial within collecting institutions and museums because they allow for archivists to make a clear distinction between cultural objects and their images; an unclear distinction could lead to confusing and inaccurate searches. [41]

Cultural objects and art works
An object's materiality, function and purpose, as well as the size (e.g., measurements, such as height, width, weight), storage requirements (e.g., climate-controlled environment) and focus of the museum and collection, influence the descriptive depth of the data attributed to the object by cultural documentarians. [41] The established institutional cataloging practices, goals and expertise of cultural documentarians and database structure also influence the information ascribed to cultural objects, and the ways in which cultural objects are categorized. [39] [41] Additionally, museums often employ standardized commercial collection management software that prescribes and limits the ways in which archivists can describe artworks and cultural objects. [42] As well, collecting institutions and museums use Controlled Vocabularies to describe cultural objects and artworks in their collections. [40] [41] Getty Vocabularies and the Library of Congress Controlled Vocabularies are reputable within the museum community and are recommended by CCO standards. [41] Museums are encouraged to use controlled vocabularies that are contextual and relevant to their collections and enhance the functionality of their digital information systems. [40] [41] Controlled Vocabularies are beneficial within databases because they provide a high level of consistency, improving resource retrieval. [40] [41] Metadata structures, including controlled vocabularies, reflect the ontologies of the systems from which they were created. Often the processes through which cultural objects are described and categorized through metadata in museums do not reflect the perspectives of the maker communities. [39] [43]

Museums and the Internet
Metadata has been instrumental in the creation of digital information systems and archives within museums, and has made it easier for museums to publish digital content online. This has enabled audiences who might not have had access to cultural objects due to geographic or economic barriers to have access to them. [40] In the 2000s, as more museums have adopted archival standards and created intricate databases, discussions about Linked Data between museum databases have come up in the museum, archival and library science communities. [42] Collection Management Systems (CMS) and Digital Asset Management tools can be local or shared systems. [41] Digital Humanities scholars note many benefits of interoperability between museum databases and collections, while also acknowledging the difficulties achieving such interoperability. [42]

Law

United States of America
Problems involving metadata in litigation in the United States are becoming widespread. [ when? ] Courts have looked at various questions involving metadata, including the discoverability of metadata by parties. Although the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure have only specified rules about electronic documents, subsequent case law has elaborated on the requirement of parties to reveal metadata. [44] In October 2009, the Arizona Supreme Court has ruled that metadata records are public record . [45] Document metadata have proven particularly important in legal environments in which litigation has requested metadata, which can include sensitive information detrimental to a certain party in court. Using metadata removal tools to "clean" or redact documents can mitigate the risks of unwittingly sending sensitive data. This process partially (see data remanence ) protects law firms from potentially damaging leaking of sensitive data through electronic discovery .

Australia
In Australia the need to strengthen national security has resulted in the introduction of a new metadata storage law. [46] This new law means that both security and policing agencies will be allowed to access up to two years of an individual's metadata, supposedly to make it easier to stop any terrorist attacks and serious crimes from happening.

In healthcare
Australian medical research pioneered the definition of metadata for applications in health care. That approach offers the first recognized attempt to adhere to international standards in medical sciences instead of defining a proprietary standard under the World Health Organization (WHO) umbrella. The medical community yet did not approve the need to follow metadata standards despite research that supported these standards. [47]

Data warehousing
Data warehouse (DW) is a repository of an organization's electronically stored data. Data warehouses are designed to manage and store the data. Data warehouses differ from business intelligence (BI) systems, because BI systems are designed to use data to create reports and analyze the information, to provide strategic guidance to management. [48] Metadata is an important tool in how data is stored in data warehouses. The purpose of a data warehouse is to house standardized, structured, consistent, integrated, correct, "cleaned" and timely data, extracted from various operational systems in an organization. The extracted data are integrated in the data warehouse environment to provide an enterprise-wide perspective. Data are structured in a way to serve the reporting and analytic requirements. The design of structural metadata commonality using a data modeling method such as entity relationship model diagramming is important in any data warehouse development effort. They detail metadata on each piece of data in the data warehouse. An essential component of a data warehouse / business intelligence system is the metadata and tools to manage and retrieve the metadata. Ralph Kimball [49] [ page needed ] describes metadata as the DNA of the data warehouse as metadata defines the elements of the data warehouse and how they work together.
Kimball et al. [50] refers to three main categories of metadata: Technical metadata, business metadata and process metadata. Technical metadata is primarily definitional , while business metadata and process metadata is primarily descriptive. The categories sometimes overlap.

On the Internet
The HTML format used to define web pages allows for the inclusion of a variety of types of metadata, from basic descriptive text, dates and keywords to further advanced metadata schemes such as the Dublin Core , e-GMS , and AGLS [51] standards. Pages can also be geotagged with coordinates . Metadata may be included in the page's header or in a separate file. Microformats allow metadata to be added to on-page data in a way that regular web users do not see, but computers, web crawlers and search engines can readily access. Many search engines are cautious about using metadata in their ranking algorithms due to exploitation of metadata and the practice of search engine optimization, SEO , to improve rankings. See Meta element article for further discussion. This cautious attitude may be justified as people, according to Doctorow, [52] are not executing care and diligence when creating their own metadata and that metadata is part of a competitive environment where the metadata is used to promote the metadata creators own purposes. Studies show that search engines respond to web pages with metadata implementations, [53] and Google has an announcement on its site showing the meta tags that its search engine understands. [54] Enterprise search startup Swiftype recognizes metadata as a relevance signal that webmasters can implement for their website-specific search engine, even releasing their own extension, known as Meta Tags 2. [55]

In broadcast industry
In broadcast industry, metadata is linked to audio and video broadcast media to:
This metadata can be linked to the video media thanks to the video servers . Most major broadcast sport events like FIFA World Cup or the Olympic Games use this metadata to distribute their video content to TV stations through keywords . It is often the host broadcaster [56] who is in charge of organizing metadata through its International Broadcast Centre and its video servers. This metadata is recorded with the images and are entered by metadata operators ( loggers ) who associate in live metadata available in metadata grids through software (such as Multicam(LSM) or IPDirector used during the FIFA World Cup or Olympic Games). [57] [58]

Geospatial
Metadata that describes geographic objects in electronic storage or format (such as datasets, maps, features, or documents with a geospatial component) has a history dating back to at least 1994 (refer MIT Library page on FGDC Metadata ). This class of metadata is described more fully on the geospatial metadata article.

Ecological and environmental
Ecological and environmental metadata is intended to document the "who, what, when, where, why, and how" of data collection for a particular study. This typically means which organization or institution collected the data, what type of data, which date(s) the data was collected, the rationale for the data collection, and the methodology used for the data collection. Metadata should be generated in a format commonly used by the most relevant science community, such as Darwin Core , Ecological Metadata Language , [59] or Dublin Core . Metadata editing tools exist to facilitate metadata generation (e.g. Metavist, [60] Mercury: Metadata Search System , Morpho [61] ). Metadata should describe provenance of the data (where they originated, as well as any transformations the data underwent) and how to give credit for (cite) the data products.

Digital music
When first released in 1982, Compact Discs only contained a Table Of Contents (TOC) with the number of tracks on the disc and their length in samples. [3] [4] Fourteen years later in 1996, a revision of the CD Red Book standard added CD-Text to carry additional metadata. [5] But CD-Text was not widely adopted. Shortly thereafter, it became common for personal computers to retrieve metadata from external sources (e.g. CDDB , Gracenote ) based on the TOC.
Digital audio formats such as digital audio files superseded music formats such as cassette tapes and CDs in the 2000s. Digital audio files could be labelled with more information than could be contained in just the file name. That descriptive information is called the audio tag or audio metadata in general. Computer programs specializing in adding or modifying this information are called tag editors . Metadata can be used to name, describe, catalogue and indicate ownership or copyright for a digital audio file, and its presence makes it much easier to locate a specific audio file within a group, typically through use of a search engine that accesses the metadata. As different digital audio formats were developed, attempts were made to standardize a specific location within the digital files where this information could be stored.
As a result, almost all digital audio formats, including mp3 , broadcast wav and AIFF files, have similar standardized locations that can be populated with metadata. The metadata for compressed and uncompressed digital music is often encoded in the ID3 tag. Common editors such as TagLib support MP3, Ogg Vorbis, FLAC, MPC, Speex, WavPack TrueAudio, WAV, AIFF, MP4, and ASF file formats.

Cloud applications
With the availability of Cloud applications, which include those to add metadata to content, metadata is increasingly available over the Internet.

Administration and management

Storage
Metadata can be stored either internally , [62] in the same file or structure as the data (this is also called embedded metadata ), or externally , in a separate file or field from the described data. A data repository typically stores the metadata detached from the data, but can be designed to support embedded metadata approaches. Each option has advantages and disadvantages:
Metadata can be stored in either human-readable or binary form. Storing metadata in a human-readable format such as XML can be useful because users can understand and edit it without specialized tools. [63] However, text-based formats are rarely optimized for storage capacity, communication time, or processing speed. A binary metadata format enables efficiency in all these respects, but requires special software to convert the binary information into human-readable content.

Database management
Each relational database system has its own mechanisms for storing metadata. Examples of relational-database metadata include:
In database terminology, this set of metadata is referred to as the catalog . The SQL standard specifies a uniform means to access the catalog, called the information schema , but not all databases implement it, even if they implement other aspects of the SQL standard. For an example of database-specific metadata access methods, see Oracle metadata . Programmatic access to metadata is possible using APIs such as JDBC , or SchemaCrawler. [64]

See also
WebPage index: 00085
Wikipedia community
The Wikipedia community is the community of contributors to the online encyclopedia Wikipedia . Individual contributors are known as " Wikipedians ". The Oxford English Dictionary added the word "Wikipedian" in August 2012. [1]
Almost all Wikipedians are volunteers . With the increased maturity and visibility of Wikipedia, other categories of Wikipedians have emerged, such as Wikipedians in residence and students with assignments related to editing Wikipedia.

Size
Studies of the size of the community of Wikipedia showed an exponential growth in the number of Wikipedia contributors during the early years. In April 2008, writer and lecturer Clay Shirky and computer scientist Martin Wattenberg estimated the total time spent creating Wikipedia at roughly 100 million hours. [2] In November 2011, there were approximately 31.7 million registered user accounts across all language editions, of which around 270,000 were "active" (made at least one edit every month). [3]
The English Wikipedia , the largest language edition, currently has 132,963 editors who have performed an edit in the last 30 days ("active users"), and an unknown number of contributors without an account. About half of the active editors spend at least one hour a day editing, and a fifth spend more than three hours a day. [4]

Motivation
Various studies have been done with regard to the motivations of Wikipedia contributors. In a 2003 study of Wikipedia as a community, economics Ph.D. student Andrea Ciffolilli argued that the low transaction costs of participating in wiki software create a catalyst for collaborative development, and that a "creative construction" approach encourages participation. [5] A paper written by Andrea Forte and Amy Bruckman in 2005, called "Why Do People Write for Wikipedia? Incentives to Contribute to Open-Content Publishing", discussed the possible motivations of Wikipedia contributors. It applied Latour and Woolgar's concept of the cycle of credit to Wikipedia contributors, suggesting that the reason that people write for Wikipedia is to gain recognition within the community. [6]
Oded Nov, in his 2007 paper "What Motivates Wikipedians", related the motivations of volunteers in general to the motivations of people who contribute to Wikipedia. [7] Nov carried out a survey using the six motivations of volunteers, identified in an earlier paper. [8] The six motivations he used were:
To these six motivations he also added:
The survey found that the most commonly indicated motives were "fun", "ideology", and "values", whereas the least frequently indicated motives were "career", "social", and "protective". [7]
The Wikimedia Foundation has carried out several surveys of Wikipedia contributors and users. In 2008, the Wikimedia Foundation, alongside the Collaborative Creativity Group at UNU-Merit , launched a survey of readers and editors of Wikipedia. It was the most comprehensive survey of Wikipedia ever conducted. [9] The results of the survey were published two years later on March 24, 2010. [10] The Wikimedia Foundation began a process in 2011 of semi-annual surveys in order to understand Wikipedia editors more and better cater to their needs. [11] [12]
"Motivations of Wikipedia Content Contributors", a paper by Heng-Li Yang and Cheng-Yu Lai, hypothesised that, because contributing to Wikipedia is voluntary, an individual's enjoyment of participating would be the highest motivator. [13] However, their study showed that although people might initially start editing Wikipedia out of enjoyment, the most likely motivation for continuing to participate is self-concept based motivations such as "I like to share knowledge which gives me a sense of personal achievement." [13]
A further study in 2014 by Cheng-Yu Lai and Heng-Li Yang explored the reasons why people continue editing Wikipedia content. The study used authors of the English-language version of the site and received 288 valid online survey responses. Their results indicated and confirmed that subjective task value, commitment, and procedural justice were significant to satisfaction of Wikipedians; and satisfaction significantly influenced an author’s continued intention to edit Wikipedia content. [14]
Editors of Wikipedia have occasionally given personal testimonials of why they contribute to Wikipedia. A common theme of these testimonials is the enjoyment that editors seem to get from contributing to Wikipedia and being part of the Wikipedia community. Also mentioned is the potential addictive quality of editing Wikipedia. Gina Trapani of Lifehacker said "it turns out editing an article isn't scary at all. It's easy, surprisingly satisfying and can become obsessively addictive." [15] Jimmy Wales has also commented on the addictive quality of Wikipedia, saying "The main thing about Wikipedia ... is that it’s fun and addictive". [16] Wikipedians sometimes award one another " barnstars " for good work. These personalized tokens of appreciation reveal a wide range of valued work extending far beyond simple editing to include social support, administrative actions, and types of articulation work. The barnstar phenomenon has been analyzed by researchers seeking to determine what implications it might have for other communities engaged in large-scale collaborations. [17]

Media
Wikipedia has spawned several community news publications. An online newsletter, The Signpost , has been published weekly since 10 January 2005. [18] Professional cartoonist Greg Williams created a webcomic called " WikiWorld " which ran in The Signpost from 2006 to 2008. [19] A podcast called Wikipedia Weekly was active from 2006 to 2009 and sporadically thereafter, [20] [21] while a series of conference calls titled "Not the Wikipedia Weekly" ran from 2008 to 2009. [21] Some topic-specific communities within Wikipedia called "WikiProjects" have also distributed newsletters and other correspondence.

Socializing
Offline activities are organized by the Wikimedia Foundation or the community of Wikipedia.

Wikimania
Wikimania is an annual international conference for users of the wiki projects operated by the Wikimedia Foundation (such as Wikipedia and other sister projects ). Topics of presentations and discussions include Wikimedia Foundation projects, other wikis, open-source software , free knowledge and free content, and the different social and technical aspects which relate to these topics.

Wiknics

United States
The annual Great American Wiknic is a social gathering that takes place, in major cities of the United States, each year during the summer, usually just prior to the 4th of July. The Wiknic concept allows Wikipedians to bring together picnic food and to interact in a personal way. [22]

Criticism
Wikipedia has been subject to several kinds of criticism. [23] [24] For example, the Seigenthaler and Essjay incidents caused criticism of Wikipedia's reliability and usefulness as a reference. [25] [26] [27] The complaints related to the community include the effects of users' anonymity, the attitudes towards newcomers, the abuse of privileges by administrators , biases in the social structure of the community, in particular, gender bias and lack of female contributors, [28] and the role of the project's co-founder Jimmy Wales , in the community. [29] Sue Gardner , former executive director of the Wikimedia Foundation , described Wikipedians as being like a "crusty old desk guy who knows the style guide backwards." [30] A significant controversy was stirred with paid contributors to Wikipedia, which prompted the Wikimedia Foundation to send a cease and desist letter to the Wiki-PR agency. [31] Wikipedia relies on the efforts of its community members to remove vandalism from articles.
Wikipedia's co-founder Larry Sanger , who later founded Citizendium - a rival project, characterizes the Wikipedia community as ineffective and abusive, stating that "The community does not enforce its own rules effectively or consistently. Consequently, administrators and ordinary participants alike are able essentially to act abusively with impunity, which begets a never-ending cycle of abuse." [32] Oliver Kamm , of The Times , expressed skepticism toward Wikipedia's reliance on consensus in forming its content: "Wikipedia seeks not truth but consensus, and like an interminable political meeting the end result will be dominated by the loudest and most persistent voices." [33]

Recognition
A Wikipedia Monument was erected in Słubice, Poland in 2014 to honor the Wikipedia community. [34]
The 2015 Erasmus Prize was awarded to the Wikipedia community for "[promoting] the dissemination of knowledge through a comprehensive and universally accessible encyclopaedia. To achieve that, the initiators of Wikipedia have designed a new and effective democratic platform. The prize specifically recognizes Wikipedia as a community — a shared project that involves tens of thousands of volunteers around the world." [35]

See also
WebPage index: 00086
Wikipedia Monument
The Wikipedia Monument ( Polish : Pomnik Wikipedii ), located in Słubice , Poland , is a statue designed by Armenian sculptor Mihran Hakobyan honoring Wikipedia contributors . It was unveiled in Frankfurt Square (Plac Frankfurcki) on 22 October 2014 in a ceremony that included representatives from both local Wikimedia chapters and the Wikimedia Foundation .

Description
The monument depicts four figures holding aloft a globe based on the Wikipedia logo , [1] reaching over two meters up. [2] [3] The fiber and resin statue was designed by Armenian-born artist Mihran Hakobyan, who graduated from Collegium Polonicum. [1] [3] [4] It cost about 50,000 złotys (approximately $14,000; 12,000 euros) and was funded by Słubice regional authorities. [1] [4] [5]

History
The monument was suggested around 2010 [5] by Krzysztof Wojciechowski [ pl ] , a university professor and director of the Collegium Polonicum [ pl ] in Słubice. [1] Polish Wikipedia is a popular website in Poland and, with over a million articles, the 12th-largest Wikipedia in the world. [4] [6] According to Piotr Łuczynski, deputy mayor, the memorial "will highlight the town’s importance as an academic centre". [4] A Wikimedia Polska representative stated that the organization hopes that this project will "raise awareness of the website and encourage people to contribute." [3]
It was unveiled on 22 October 2014, [1] on the Plac Frankfurcki [ pl ] , [3] [5] becoming the world's first monument to the online encyclopedia. [4] Representatives from the Wikimedia Foundation as well as from the Wikimedia chapters for Poland and Germany ( Wikimedia Polska and Wikimedia Deutschland , respectively) attended the dedication ceremony. [4] [7] Dariusz Jemielniak , a professor of management, Wikimedia activist, and an author of Common Knowledge? An Ethnography of Wikipedia , delivered an opening ceremony address. [8]

Inscription

Statement from Jimmy Wales
WebPage index: 00087
Civil Marriage Act
The Civil Marriage Act (full title: " An Act respecting certain aspects of legal capacity for marriage for civil purposes ") was legislation legalizing same-sex marriage across Canada. At the time the bill became law, same-sex marriage had already been legalized by court decisions in all Canadian provinces except Alberta and Prince Edward Island , as well as in the territories of Nunavut and the Northwest Territories .
It was introduced as Bill C-38 in the first session of the 38th Canadian Parliament on February 1, 2005. It passed the House of Commons on June 28, 2005, and the Senate on July 19, 2005. The Act became law when it received Royal Assent on July 20, 2005.
As with all federal legislation in Canada, the Act is written in both French and English, with equal force. The French title is Loi sur le mariage civil , or in full, Loi concernant certaines conditions de fond du mariage civil .

The Act
This is the Act's official legislative summary:
The short title of the act ( Civil Marriage Act ) is defined in Section 1. Sections 2 through 4 form the substance of the Act, and were the key points of contention during its debate in the House of Commons and the Senate. Section 3.1 was added with an amendment during the committee stage , and was subsequently adopted by the House of Commons.
The remaining sections are "consequential amendments" that simply adjust the wording of existing acts to conform to this one.

Politics
As a government bill , C-38 represented the official position of Paul Martin 's Liberal government, and the cabinet were thus bound to vote in its favour. Liberal backbenchers and members of the Conservative Party and Bloc Québécois had a free vote. In accordance with its party policy on LGBT rights, the New Democratic Party (NDP) whipped its members in favour. Bev Desjarlais defied the whip and was removed from her critic position. (She was not nominated for the next election by her riding association , and subsequently chose to sit as an independent for the remainder of the session.) Conservatives tended to vote against the Act, while Bloquistes tended to vote in favour. At least two cabinet ministers stepped down to vote against the bill. Joe Comuzzi resigned just hours before the final vote on the Act, and Martin lamented his leaving. As expected, Comuzzi voted against the Act.
The composition of Parliament was such that the prevailing opinion among political commentators indicated the bill would likely pass the House (see a detailed analysis at members of the 38th Canadian Parliament and same-sex marriage ). Although there was some challenge to it, this opinion was verified with a 158-133 vote at third reading in the House of Commons on June 28. The bill passed in the Senate on July 19, with a 47-21 vote, with 3 abstentions.

The legislative process
The bill was given its first reading on February 1, 2005 after its introduction by Justice minister Irwin Cotler . C-38 was written on the basis of a draft bill produced by then-Justice minister Martin Cauchon in 2003, which had been submitted to the Supreme Court of Canada in December 2004 as the reference question Re: Same-Sex Marriage .
Due to the government's tenuous minority position, there was a strong possibility that the government could have fallen on a motion of confidence through the budget bills, causing the bill to die on the order paper. It would then have been up to a new post-election government to re-introduce the bill affirming same-sex marriage (or to introduce a bill, of uncertain constitutionality, defining marriage as one man and one woman). However, the government survived the last of the budget votes on June 23, 2005, and successfully passed a motion to extend the current sitting of Parliament. In order to pass the motion extending the session, the Liberals provided a written promise to the Bloc Québécois that they would bring C-38 to a vote before the end of the current session.
Finally, on June 28, the Act was passed on third reading by the House of Commons; 158 voting in favour, 133 voting against. On July 19, it passed the Senate by a 47-21 vote with 3 abstentions, and received Royal Assent (thereby becoming law) on July 20.
A summary of the legislation's progress is given below. [2]

Chronology

House of Commons

Senate

Royal Assent

See also
WebPage index: 00088
Rfam
Rfam is a database containing information about non-coding RNA (ncRNA) families and other structured RNA elements. It is an annotated , open access database originally developed at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute in collaboration with Janelia Farm , [1] [2] [3] [4] and currently hosted at the European Bioinformatics Institute . [5] Rfam is designed to be similar to the Pfam database for annotating protein families.
Unlike proteins , ncRNAs often have similar secondary structure without sharing much similarity in the primary sequence . Rfam divides ncRNAs into families based on evolution from a common ancestor. Producing multiple sequence alignments (MSA) of these families can provide insight into their structure and function, similar to the case of protein families. These MSAs become more useful with the addition of secondary structure information. Rfam researchers also contribute to Wikipedia 's RNA WikiProject . [4] [6]

Uses
The Rfam database can be used for a variety of functions. For each ncRNA family, the interface allows users to: view and download multiple sequence alignments; read annotation; and examine species distribution of family members. There are also links provided to literature references and other RNA databases. Rfam also provides links to Wikipedia so that entries can be created or edited by users.
The interface at the Rfam website allows users to search ncRNAs by keyword, family name, or genome as well as to search by ncRNA sequence or EMBL accession number . [1] The database information is also available for download, installation and use using the INFERNAL software package. [7] [8] [9] The INFERNAL package can also be used with Rfam to annotate sequences (including complete genomes) for homologues to known ncRNAs.

Methods
In the database, the information of the secondary structure and the primary sequence , represented by the MSA , is combined in statistical models called profile stochastic context-free grammars (SCFGs), also known as covariance models. These are analogous to hidden Markov models used for protein family annotation in the Pfam database. [1] Each family in the database is represented by two multiple sequence alignments in Stockholm format and a SCFG.
The first MSA is the "seed" alignment. It is a hand-curated alignment that contains representative members of the ncRNA family and is annotated with structural information. This seed alignment is used to create the SCFG, which is used with the Rfam software INFERNAL to identify additional family members and add them to the alignment. A family-specific threshold value is chosen to avoid false positives.
Performing Rfam searches using profile SCFG is very computationally expensive, and even for a small ncRNA family takes an unreasonable amount of time for a computer search. To reduce the search time, an initial BLAST search is used to reduce the search space to a manageable size. [1]
The second MSA is the “full” alignment, and is created as a result of a search using the covariance model against the sequence database. All detected homologs are aligned to the model, giving the automatically produced full alignment.

History
Version 1.0 of Rfam was launched in 2003 and contained 25 ncRNA families and annotated about 50 000 ncRNA genes. In 2005, version 6.1 was released and contained 379 families annotating over 280 000 genes. In August 2012, version 11.0 contained 2208 RNA families, while the current version (12.1) annotates 2474 families.

Problems
WebPage index: 00089
Facebook
Facebook is an American for-profit corporation and an online social media and social networking service based in Menlo Park, California . The Facebook website was launched on February 4, 2004, by Mark Zuckerberg , along with fellow Harvard College students and roommates, Eduardo Saverin , Andrew McCollum , Dustin Moskovitz , and Chris Hughes . [6] [7]
The founders had initially limited the website's membership to Harvard students; however, later they expanded it to higher education institutions in the Boston area , the Ivy League schools, and Stanford University . Facebook gradually added support for students at various other universities, and eventually to high school students as well. Since 2006, anyone age 13 and older has been allowed to become a registered user of Facebook, though variations exist in the minimum age requirement, depending on applicable local laws. [8] The Facebook name comes from the face book directories often given to United States university students. [9]
Facebook may be accessed by a large range of desktops , laptops , tablet computers , and smartphones over the Internet and mobile networks . After registering to use the site, users can create a user profile indicating their name, occupation, schools attended and so on. Users can add other users as "friends" , exchange messages, post status updates and digital photos , share digital videos and links, use various software applications ("apps"), and receive notifications when others update their profiles or make posts. Additionally, users may join common-interest user groups organized by workplace, school, hobbies or other topics, and categorize their friends into lists such as "People From Work" or "Close Friends". In groups, editors can pin posts to top. Additionally, users can complain about or block unpleasant people. Because of the large volume of data that users submit to the service, Facebook has come under scrutiny for its privacy policies. Facebook makes most of its revenue from advertisements which appear onscreen.
Facebook, Inc. held its initial public offering (IPO) in February 2012, and began selling stock to the public three months later, reaching an original peak market capitalization of $104 billion. On July 13, 2015, Facebook became the fastest company in the Standard & Poor's 500 Index to reach a market cap of $250 billion. [10] Facebook has more than 1.94 billion monthly active users as of March 31, 2017. [11] As of April 2016, Facebook was the most popular social networking site in the world, based on the number of active user accounts. [12] Facebook classifies users from the ages of 13 to 18 as minors and therefore sets their profiles to share content with friends only. [13]

History

2003–2006: Thefacebook, Thiel investment, and name change
Zuckerberg wrote a program called "Facemash" on October 28, 2003 while attending Harvard University as a sophomore (second year student). According to The Harvard Crimson , the site was comparable to Hot or Not and used "photos compiled from the online facebooks of nine houses, placing two next to each other at a time and asking users to choose the 'hotter' person". [14] [15] [16]
To accomplish this, Zuckerberg hacked into protected areas of Harvard's computer network and copied private dormitory ID images. Harvard did not have a student " face book " (a directory with photos and basic information) at the time, although individual houses had been issuing their own paper facebooks since the mid-1980s, and Harvard's longtime Freshman Yearbook was colloquially referred to as the "Freshman Facebook". Facemash attracted 450 visitors and 22,000 photo-views in its first four hours online. [14] [17]
The site was quickly forwarded to several campus group list-servers, but was shut down a few days later by the Harvard administration. Zuckerberg faced expulsion and was charged by the administration with breach of security, violating copyrights , and violating individual privacy. Ultimately, the charges were dropped. [18] Zuckerberg expanded on this initial project that semester by creating a social study tool ahead of an art history final exam. He uploaded 500 Augustan images to a website, each of which was featured with a corresponding comments section. [17] He shared the site with his classmates, and people started sharing notes.
The following semester, Zuckerberg began writing code for a new website in January 2004. He said that he was inspired by an editorial about the Facemash incident in The Harvard Crimson . [19] On February 4, 2004, Zuckerberg launched "Thefacebook", originally located at thefacebook.com. [20]
Six days after the site launched, Harvard seniors Cameron Winklevoss , Tyler Winklevoss , and Divya Narendra accused Zuckerberg of intentionally misleading them into believing that he would help them build a social network called HarvardConnection.com . They claimed that he was instead using their ideas to build a competing product. [21] The three complained to The Harvard Crimson and the newspaper began an investigation. They later filed a lawsuit against Zuckerberg, subsequently settling in 2008 [22] for 1.2 million shares (worth $300 million at Facebook's IPO ). [23]
Membership was initially restricted to students of Harvard College ; within the first month, more than half the undergraduates at Harvard were registered on the service. [7] Eduardo Saverin (business aspects), Dustin Moskovitz (programmer), Andrew McCollum (graphic artist), and Chris Hughes joined Zuckerberg to help promote the website. In March 2004, Facebook expanded to the universities of Columbia , Stanford , and Yale . [24] It later opened to all Ivy League colleges, Boston University , New York University , MIT , and gradually most universities in the United States and Canada. [25] [26]
In mid-2004, entrepreneur Sean Parker —an informal advisor to Zuckerberg—became the company's president. [27] In June 2004, Facebook moved its operations base to Palo Alto, California . [24] It received its first investment later that month from PayPal co-founder Peter Thiel . [28] In 2005, the company dropped "the" from its name after purchasing the domain name facebook.com for US$ 200,000. [29] The domain facebook.com belonged to AboutFace Corporation before the purchase. This website last appeared on April 8, 2005; [30] from April 10, 2005 to August 4, 2005, this domain gave a 403 error. [31]
In May 2005, Accel Partners invested $12.7 million in Facebook, and Jim Breyer [32] added $1 million of his own money. A high-school version of the site was launched in September 2005, which Zuckerberg called the next logical step. [33] (At the time, high-school networks required an invitation to join.) [34] Facebook also expanded membership eligibility to employees of several companies, including Apple Inc. and Microsoft. [35]

2006–2012: public access, Microsoft alliance and rapid growth
On September 26, 2006, Facebook was opened to everyone at least 13 years old with a valid email address . [36] [37] [38]
In late 2007, Facebook had 100,000 business pages (pages which allowed companies to promote themselves and attract customers). These started as group pages, but a new concept called company pages was planned. [39] Pages began rolling out for businesses in May 2009. [40]
On October 24, 2007, Microsoft announced that it had purchased a 1.6% share of Facebook for $240 million, giving Facebook a total implied value of around $15 billion. [41] Microsoft's purchase included rights to place international advertisements on the social networking site. [42]
In October 2008, Facebook announced that it would set up its international headquarters in Dublin , Ireland. [43] Almost a year later, in September 2009, Facebook said that it had turned cash-flow positive for the first time. [44]
A January 2009 Compete.com study ranked Facebook the most used social networking service by worldwide monthly active users . [45] Entertainment Weekly included the site on its end-of-the-decade "best-of" list saying, "How on earth did we stalk our exes, remember our co-workers' birthdays, bug our friends, and play a rousing game of Scrabulous before Facebook?" [46]
Traffic to Facebook increased steadily after 2009. The company announced 500 million users in July 2010 [47] making it the largest online social network in the world at the time. According to the company's data, half of the site's membership use Facebook daily, for an average of 34 minutes, while 150 million users access the site by mobile. A company representative called the milestone a "quiet revolution." [48]
In November 2010, based on SecondMarket Inc. (an exchange for privately held companies' shares), Facebook's value was $41 billion. The company had slightly surpassed eBay to become the third largest American web company after Google and Amazon.com . [49]
In early 2011, Facebook announced plans to move its headquarters to the former Sun Microsystems campus in Menlo Park, California. [50] [51] In March 2011, it was reported that Facebook was removing approximately 20,000 profiles offline every day for violations such as spam, graphic content, and underage use, as part of its efforts to boost cyber security . [52]
Release of statistics by DoubleClick showed that Facebook reached one trillion page views in the month of June 2011, making it the most visited website tracked by DoubleClick. [53] According to a Nielsen Media Research study, released in December 2011, Facebook had become the second-most accessed website in the U.S. behind Google. [54]

2012–2013: IPO, lawsuits and one-billionth user
Facebook eventually filed for an initial public offering on February 1, 2012. [55] Facebook held an initial public offering on May 17, 2012, negotiating a share price of US$38. The company was valued at $104 billion, the largest valuation to date for a newly listed public company. [56] [57] [58]
Facebook began selling stock to the public and trading on the NASDAQ on May 18, 2012. [59] Based on its 2012 income of $5 billion, Facebook joined the Fortune 500 list for the first time in May 2013, ranked in position 462. [60]
Facebook filed their S1 document with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 1, 2012. The company applied for a $5 billion IPO, one of the biggest offerings in the history of technology. [61] The IPO raised $16 billion, making it the third-largest in U.S. history. [62] [63]
The shares began trading on May 18; the stock struggled to stay above the IPO price for most of the day, but set a record for the trading volume of an IPO (460 million shares). [64] The first day of trading was marred by technical glitches that prevented orders from going through; [65] [66] only the technical problems and artificial support from underwriters prevented the stock price from falling below the IPO price on the day. [67]
In March 2012, Facebook announced App Center, a store selling applications that operate via the site. The store was to be available on iPhones , Android devices, and mobile web users. [68]
On May 22, 2012, the Yahoo! Finance website reported that Facebook's lead underwriters, Morgan Stanley (MS), JP Morgan (JPM), and Goldman Sachs (GS), cut their earnings forecasts for the company in the middle of the IPO process. [69] The stock had begun its freefall by this time, closing at 34.03 on May 21 and 31.00 on May 22. A "circuit breaker" was used in an attempt to slow down the stock price's decline. [70] Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Mary Schapiro , and Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) Chairman Rick Ketchum, called for a review of the circumstances surrounding the IPO. [71]
Facebook's IPO was consequently investigated, and was compared to a pump and dump scheme. [65] [69] [71] [72] A class-action lawsuit was filed in May 2012 because of the trading glitches, which led to botched orders. [73] [74] Lawsuits were filed, alleging that an underwriter for Morgan Stanley selectively revealed adjusted earnings estimates to preferred clients. [75]
The other underwriters (MS, JPM, GS), Facebook's CEO and board, and NASDAQ also faced litigation after numerous lawsuits were filed, while SEC and FINRA both launched investigations. [76] It was believed that adjustments to earnings estimates were communicated to the underwriters by a Facebook financial officer, who used the information to cash out on their positions while leaving the general public with overpriced shares. [77] By the end of May 2012, Facebook's stock lost over a quarter of its starting value, which led The Wall Street Journal to label the IPO a "fiasco". [78]
Zuckerberg announced to the media at the start of October 2012 that Facebook had passed the monthly active users mark of one billion. [79] Facebook defines active users as a logged-in member who visits the site, or accesses it through a third-party site connected to Facebook, at least once a month. Fake accounts were not mentioned in the announcement, but the company continued to remove them after it found that 8.7% of its users were not real in August 2012. The company's data also revealed 600 million mobile users, 140 billion friend connections since the inception of Facebook, and the median age of a user as 22 years. [47]

2013–present: site developments, A4AI and 10th anniversary
On January 15, 2013, Facebook announced Facebook Graph Search , which provides users with a "precise answer", rather than a link to an answer by leveraging the data present on its site. [80] Facebook emphasized that the feature would be "privacy-aware," returning only results from content already shared with the user. [81]
The company became the subject of a lawsuit by Rembrandt Social Media in February 2013, for patents involving the "Like" button. [82] On April 3, 2013, Facebook unveiled Facebook Home , a user-interface layer for Android devices offering greater integration with the site. HTC announced the HTC First , a smartphone with Home pre-loaded. [83]
On April 15, 2013, Facebook announced an alliance across 19 states with the National Association of Attorneys General, to provide teenagers and parents with information on tools to manage social networking profiles. [84] On April 19, 2013, Facebook officially modified its logo to remove the faint blue line at the bottom of the "F" icon. The letter F moved closer to the edge of the box. [85]
Following a campaign by 100 advocacy groups, Facebook agreed to update its policy on hate speech. The campaign highlighted content promoting domestic and sexual violence against women, and used over 57,000 tweets and more than 4,900 emails that caused withdrawal of advertising from the site by 15 companies, including Nissan UK, House of Burlesque and Nationwide UK. The social media website initially responded by stating that "while it may be vulgar and offensive, distasteful content on its own does not violate our policies". [86] It decided to take action on May 29, 2013, after it "become clear that our systems to identify and remove hate speech have failed to work as effectively as we would like, particularly around issues of gender-based hate." [87]
On June 12, 2013, Facebook announced on its newsroom that it was introducing clickable hashtags to help users follow trending discussions, or search what others are talking about on a topic. [88] A July 2013 Wall Street Journal article identified the Facebook IPO as the cause of a change in the U.S.' national economic statistics, as the local government area of the company's headquarters, San Mateo County , California, became the top wage-earning county in the country after the fourth quarter of 2012. The Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that the average weekly wage in the county was US$ 3,240, 107% higher than the previous year. It noted the wages were "the equivalent of $168,000 a year, and more than 50% higher than the next-highest county, New York County (better known as Manhattan ), at $2,107 a week, or roughly $110,000 a year." [89]
Russian internet firm Mail.Ru sold its Facebook shares for US$525 million on September 5, 2013, following its initial $200 million investment in 2009. Partly owned by Russia's richest man, Alisher Usmanov , the firm owned a total of 14.2 million remaining shares prior to the sale. [90] In the same month, the Chinese government announced that it will lift the ban on Facebook in the Shanghai Free Trade Zone "to welcome foreign companies to invest and to let foreigners live and work happily in the free-trade zone." Facebook was first blocked in China in 2009. [91]
Facebook was announced as a member of The Alliance for Affordable Internet (A4AI) in October 2013, when the A4AI was launched. The A4AI is a coalition of public and private organizations that includes Google , Intel and Microsoft. Led by Sir Tim Berners-Lee , the A4AI seeks to make Internet access more affordable so that access is broadened in the developing world, where only 31% of people are online. Google will help to decrease Internet access prices so that they fall below the UN Broadband Commission's worldwide target of 5% of monthly income. [92]
A Reuters report, published on December 11, 2013, stated that Standard & Poor's announced the placement of Facebook on its S&P 500 index "after the close of trading on December 20." [93] Facebook announced Q4 2013 earnings of $523 million (20 cents per share), an increase of $64 million from the previous year, [94] as well as 945 million mobile users.
By January 2014, Facebook's market capitalization had risen to over $134 billion. [56] [95] At the end of January 2014, 1.23 billion users were active on the website every month.
The company celebrated its 10th anniversary during the week of February 3, 2014. [96] In each of the first three months of 2014, over one billion users logged into their Facebook account on a mobile device. [97]
In February 2014, Facebook announced that it would be buying mobile messaging company Whatsapp for US$19 billion in cash and stock. [98] In June 2014, Facebook announced the acquisition of Pryte, a Finnish mobile data-plan firm that aims to make it easier for mobile phone users in underdeveloped parts of the world to use wireless Internet apps. [99]
At the start of July 2014, Facebook announced the acquisition of LiveRail, a San Francisco, California-based online video advertising company. LiveRail's technology facilitates the sale of video inventory across different devices. The terms of the deal were undisclosed, but TechCrunch reported that Facebook paid between US$400 million and $500 million. [100] [101] As part of the company's second quarter results, Facebook announced in late July 2014 that mobile accounted for 62% of its advertising revenue, which is an increase of 21% from the previous year. [102]
Alongside other American technology figures like Jeff Bezos and Tim Cook , Zuckerberg hosted visiting Chinese politician Lu Wei, known as the "Internet czar" for his influence in the enforcement of China's online policy, at Facebook's headquarters on December 8, 2014. The meeting occurred after Zuckerberg participated in a Q&A session at Tsinghua University in Beijing, China, on October 23, 2014, where he attempted to converse in Mandarin—although Facebook is banned in China, Zuckerberg is highly regarded among the people and was at the university to help fuel the nation's burgeoning entrepreneur sector. [103] A book of Chinese president Xi Xinping found on Zuckerberg's office desk attracted a great deal of attention in the media, after the Facebook founder explained to Lu, "I want them [Facebook staff] to understand socialism with Chinese characteristics." [104]
Zuckerberg fielded questions during a live Q&A session at the company's headquarters in Menlo Park on December 11, 2014. The question of whether the platform would adopt a dislike button was raised again, and Zuckerberg said, "We're [Facebook] thinking about it [dislike button] … It's an interesting question," and said that he likes the idea of Facebook users being able to express a greater variety of emotions. [105] [106] In October 2015, Zuckerberg said that instead of creating a dislike button, Facebook is testing emoji reactions as an alternative to the 'like' button. [107] On February 24, 2016, Facebook launched Facebook Reactions , which allows users to respond to posts with multiple reactions in addition to "liking" it. [108] According to a study by quintly- a social media analytics company, these reactions were hardly used initially immediately after the release of the Facebook Reactions. [109] However, the second study revealed that the use of Facebook Reactions is picking up. They reported that the Facebook pages with more than 10 million fans, the new Facebook Reactions increased by a remarkable 47%. [110]
As of January 21, 2015, Facebook's algorithm is programmed to filter out false or misleading content, such as fake news stories and hoaxes, and will be supported by users who select the option to flag a story as "purposefully fake or deceitful news." According to Reuters, such content is "being spread like a wildfire" on the social media platform. Facebook maintained that "satirical" content, "intended to be humorous, or content that is clearly labeled as satire," will be taken into account and should not be intercepted. [111] The algorithm, however, has been accused of maintaining a " filter bubble ", where both material the user disagrees with [112] and posts with a low level of likes, will also not be seen. [113] In 2015 November, Zuckerberg prolonged period of paternity leave from 4 weeks to 4 months. [114]
In March 2016, Facebook acquired a SnapChat-like video filter app called Masquerade (MSQRD). [115] [116]
On April 12, 2016, Zuckerberg revealed a decade-long plan for Facebook in a keynote address. His speech outlined his vision, which was centered around three main pillars: artificial intelligence, increased connectivity around the world and virtual and augmented reality. [117] He also announced a new Facebook Messenger platform, which will have developers creating bots that are able to engage in automatic interactions with customers. [118] In June 2016 Facebook announced Deep Text, a natural language processing AI which will learn user intent and context in 20 languages. [119]
On May 31, 2016, Facebook, along with Google , Microsoft , and Twitter , jointly agreed to a European Union code of conduct obligating them to review "[the] majority of valid notifications for removal of illegal hate speech " posted on their services within 24 hours. [120]
Facebook introduced 360-degree photo to posts on June 9, 2016. [121] If one has a compatible Samsung phone, Facebook will display a dedicated "view in VR" button, then users will have to insert the phone into their Gear VR headsets to watch the photo in a more immersive style. [121]
In July 2016, a $US 1 billion lawsuit was filed against the company alleging that it permitted the Hamas group to use it to perform assaults that ended the lives of 4 people. [122] Facebook released the blueprints of Surround 360 camera on GitHub under Open-source license . [123]
In September 2016, it won an Emmy for its Visual animated short "Henry". [124]
In October 2016, Facebook announced a fee based communications tool called Workplace that aims to "connect everyone" while at work. Users can create profiles, see updates from co-workers on their news feed, stream live video and participate in secure group chats. [125]
Facebook annually has an Oculus Connect conference. [126]
In November 2016, Facebook acquired FacioMetrics, a face recognition technology company started out of Carnegie Mellon. [127]
Following the 2016 presidential election, Facebook announced that it would further combat the spread of fake news by using fact checkers from sites like FactCheck.org and the AP , making reporting hoaxes easier through crowdsourcing, and disrupting financial incentives for spammers. [128]
On January 17, 2017, Facebook COO Sheryl Sandberg planning to open Station F, a startup incubator campus in Paris, France. [129] On a six-monthly cycle, Facebook will work with ten to 15 data-driven startups in the location to help them develop their businesses. [130]
On April 18, 2017, Facebook announced the beta launch of Facebook Spaces at Facebook's annual F8 developer conference in San Francisco. [131] Facebook Spaces, a virtual reality app version of Facebook for the Facebook-owned Oculus VR goggles. In a virtual and shared space, users can access a curated selection of 360-degree photos and videos using their avatar. Users can also access their own photos and videos, and any media shared on their Facebook newsfeed. [132] The beta app is currently available in the Oculus Store. [133]

Corporate affairs

Management
Mark Zuckerberg controlled 28% [134] of Facebook equity in 2012, and controls a majority of voting stock through preferred shares.
Key management personnel consist of: Chris Cox (Chief Product Officer), Sandberg (COO), and Zuckerberg (Chairman and CEO). As of April 2011 [update] , Facebook has over 7,000 employees, and offices in 15 countries. [135] Other managers include chief financial officer David Wehner and public relations head Elliot Schrage . [136]

Revenue
Most of Facebook's revenue comes from advertising. [145] [146] Facebook generally has a lower clickthrough rate (CTR) for advertisements than most major websites. According to BusinessWeek.com, banner advertisements on Facebook have generally received one-fifth the number of clicks compared to those on the Web as a whole, [147] although specific comparisons can reveal a much larger disparity. For example, while Google users click on the first advertisement for search results an average of 8% of the time (80,000 clicks for every one million searches), [148] Facebook's users click on advertisements an average of 0.04% of the time (400 clicks for every one million pages). [149]
Sarah Smith, who was Facebook's Online Sales Operations Manager until 2012, [150] reported that successful advertising campaigns on the site can have clickthrough rates as low as 0.05% to 0.04%, and that CTR for ads tend to fall within two weeks. [151]
The cause of Facebook's low CTR has been attributed to younger users enabling ad blocking software and their adeptness at ignoring advertising messages, as well as the site's primary purpose being social communication rather than content viewing. [152] According to digital consultancy iStrategy Labs in mid-January 2014, three million fewer users aged between 13 and 17 years were present on Facebook's Social Advertising platform compared to 2011. [153] However, Time writer and reporter Christopher Matthews stated in the wake of the iStrategy Labs results:
Despite Facebook's age demographics, a study has identified five distinctive kinds of high LSM Facebook users. The study found that the popular assumption among advertisers that the wealthy aren’t engaging with social media platforms, was incorrect. For brands or companies to leverage Facebook as an advertising medium to higher LSM users, extensive target market and customer base knowledge is required to execute an effective marketing strategy . [156] [157] [158]
A portion of Facebook revenue comes from the "firehose" access, bulk access to the social media data sold to the third parties. [159] [160]
In December 2014, a report from Frank N. Magid and Associates found that the percentage of teens aged 13 to 17 who used Facebook fell to 88% in 2014, down from 94% in 2013 and 95% in 2012. [161]
Zuckerberg, alongside other Facebook executives, have questioned the data in such reports; although, a former Facebook senior employee has commented: "Mark [Zuckerberg] is very willing to recognize the strengths in other products and the flaws in Facebook." [162]
On pages for brands and products, however, some companies have reported CTR as high as 6.49% for Wall posts. [163] A study found that, for video advertisements on Facebook, over 40% of users who viewed the videos viewed the entire video, while the industry average was 25% for in-banner video ads. [164]
The company released its own set of revenue data at the end of January 2014 and claimed: Revenues of US$2.59 billion were generated for the three months ending December 31, 2013; earnings per share were 31 cents; revenues of US$7.87 billion were made for the entirety of 2013; and Facebook's annual profit for 2013 was US$1.5 billion. During the same time, independent market research firm eMarketer released data in which Facebook accounted for 5.7 per cent of all global digital ad revenues in 2013 (Google's share was 32.4 per cent). [96] Revenue for the June 2014 quarter rose to $2.68 billion, an increase of 67 per cent over the second quarter of 2013. Mobile advertising revenue accounted for around 62 per cent of advertising revenue, an increase of approximately 41 per cent over the comparable quarter of the previous year.

Number of advertisers
In February 2015, Facebook announced that it had reached two million active advertisers with most of the gain coming from small businesses. An active advertiser is an advertiser that has advertised on the Facebook platform in the last 28 days. [165] In March 2016, Facebook announced that it reached three million active advertisers with more than 70% from outside the US. [166]

Mergers and acquisitions
On November 15, 2010, Facebook announced it had acquired the domain name fb.com from the American Farm Bureau Federation for an undisclosed amount. On January 11, 2011, the Farm Bureau disclosed $8.5 million in "domain sales income", making the acquisition of FB.com one of the ten highest domain sales in history. [167]
In November 2016 Facebook acquired CrowdTangle, a social analytics company that tracks how content spreads online. CrowdTangle confirmed the acquisition in a message at their website, but company didn't disclosed financial terms of the deal. [168]

Offices
In early 2011, Facebook announced plans to move to its new headquarters, the former Sun Microsystems campus in Menlo Park. [169]
All users outside of the US and Canada have a contract with Facebook's Irish subsidiary "Facebook Ireland Limited". This allows Facebook to avoid US taxes for all users in Europe, Asia, Australia, Africa and South America. Facebook is making use of the Double Irish arrangement which allows it to pay just about 2–3% corporation tax on all international revenue. [170]
In 2010, Facebook opened its fourth office, in Hyderabad [171] [172] [173] and the first in Asia . [174]
Facebook, which in 2010 had more than 750 million active users globally including over 23 million in India, announced that its Hyderabad center would house online advertising and developer support teams and provide round-the-clock, multilingual support to the social networking site's users and advertisers globally. [175] With this, Facebook joins other giants like Google , Microsoft , Oracle , Dell , IBM and Computer Associates that have already set up shop. [176] In Hyderabad, it is registered as 'Facebook India Online Services Pvt Ltd'. [177] [178] [179]
Though Facebook did not specify its India investment or hiring figures, it said recruitment had already begun for a director of operations and other key positions at Hyderabad, [180] which would supplement its operations in California , Dublin in Ireland as well as at Austin , Texas .
A custom-built data center with substantially reduced ("38% less") power consumption compared to existing Facebook data centers opened in April 2011 in Prineville, Oregon . [181] In April 2012, Facebook opened a second data center in Forest City, North Carolina , US. [182] In June 2013, Facebook opened a third data center in Luleå , Sweden. In November 2014, Facebook opened a fourth data center in Altoona, Iowa , US. [183] In September 2016, Facebook announced a coming datacenter in Los Lunas, New Mexico in 2018 powered by renewable energy. [184] [185]
On October 1, 2012, CEO Zuckerberg visited Moscow to stimulate social media innovation in Russia and to boost Facebook's position in the Russian market. [186] Russia's communications minister tweeted that Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev urged the social media giant's founder to abandon plans to lure away Russian programmers and instead consider opening a research center in Moscow. Facebook has roughly 9 million users in Russia, while domestic analogue VK has around 34 million. [187]
The functioning of a woodwork facility on the Menlo Park campus was announced at the end of August 2013. The facility, opened in June 2013, provides equipment, safety courses and woodwork learning course, while employees are required to purchase materials at the in-house store. A Facebook spokesperson explained that the intention of the facility is to encourage employees to think in an innovative manner because of the different environment, and also serves as an attractive perk for prospective employees. [188]
On November 21, 2016 Facebook announced that it will open its new London headquarters next year and create another 500 jobs in the UK. New headquarters will be in Fitzrovia in central London at a site that is currently undergoing redevelopment. Facebook's London-based executive, Nicola Mendelsohn said "The UK remains one of the best places to be a tech company,". [189]

Open source contributions
Facebook is both a consumer of and contributor to free and open source software . [190] Facebook's contributions include: HipHop for PHP , [191] Fair scheduler in Apache Hadoop , [192] Apache Hive , Apache Cassandra , [193] and the Open Compute Project . [194]
Facebook also contributes to other opensource projects such as Oracle 's MySQL database engine. [195] [196]

Website

Technical aspects
The website's primary color is blue as Zuckerberg is red-green colorblind , a realization that occurred after a test undertaken around 2007; he explained in 2010: "blue is the richest color for me—I can see all of blue." [200] [201] Facebook is built in PHP which is compiled with HipHop for PHP , a 'source code transformer' built by Facebook engineers that turns PHP into C++ . [202] The deployment of HipHop reportedly reduced average CPU consumption on Facebook servers by 50%. [203]
Facebook is developed as one monolithic application. According to an interview in 2012 with Chuck Rossi, a build engineer at Facebook, Facebook compiles into a 1.5 GB binary blob which is then distributed to the servers using a custom BitTorrent -based release system. Rossi stated that it takes approximately 15 minutes to build and 15 minutes to release to the servers. The build and release process is zero downtime and new changes to Facebook are rolled out daily. [203]
Facebook used a combination platform based on HBase to store data across distributed machines. Using a tailing architecture, new events are stored in log files, and the logs are tailed. The system rolls these events up and writes them into storage. The User Interface then pulls the data out and displays it to users. Facebook handles requests as AJAX behavior. These requests are written to a log file using Scribe (developed by Facebook). [204]
Data is read from these log files using Ptail, an internally built tool to aggregate data from multiple Scribe stores. It tails the log files and pulls data out (thus the name). Ptail data is separated out into three streams so they can eventually be sent to their own clusters in different data centers (Plugin impression, News feed impressions, Actions (plugin + news feed)). Puma is used to manage periods of high data flow (Input/Output or IO). Data is processed in batches to lessen the number of times needed to read and write under high demand periods (A hot article will generate a lot of impressions and news feed impressions which will cause huge data skews). Batches are taken every 1.5 seconds, limited by memory used when creating a hash table . [204]
After this, data is output in PHP format (compiled with HipHop for PHP ). The backend is written in Java and Thrift is used as the messaging format so PHP programs can query Java services. Caching solutions are used to make the web pages display more quickly. The more and longer data is cached the less realtime it is. The data is then sent to MapReduce servers so it can be queried via Hive. This also serves as a backup plan as the data can be recovered from Hive. Raw logs are removed after a period of time. [204]
On March 20, 2014 Facebook announced a new open source programming language called Hack . Prior to public release, a large portion of Facebook was already running and "battle tested" using the new language. [205]
Facebook uses the Momentum platform from Message Systems to deliver the enormous volume of emails it sends to its users every day. [206]

History
On July 20, 2008, Facebook introduced "Facebook Beta", a significant redesign of its user interface on selected networks. The Mini-Feed and Wall were consolidated, profiles were separated into tabbed sections, and an effort was made to create a "cleaner" look. [207] After initially giving users a choice to switch, Facebook began migrating all users to the new version starting in September 2008. [208] On December 11, 2008, it was announced that Facebook was testing a simpler signup process. [209]

Notes

Chat

Gifts

Marketplace

Messaging

Voice calls

Video calling

Video viewing

Tor hidden service

Fundraising Feature
In March 2017, Facebook announced a feature that would allow users to raise money. Users could personally fundraise using the categories education, medical and pet health, public crisis, natural disasters, emergencies and funerals. In May 2017, Facebook added the categories community and sports and announced anyone in the U.S. eighteen and over could use the feature. [227]

User profile/personal timeline
The format of individual user pages was revamped in late 2011 and became known as either a profile or personal timeline since that change. [228] [229] Users can create profiles with photos and images, lists of personal interests, contact information, memorable life events, and other personal information, such as employment status. [230] Users can communicate with friends and other users through private or public messages, as well as a chat feature, and share content that includes website URLs, images, and video content. [231] A 2012 Pew Internet and American Life study identified that between 20 and 30 percent of Facebook users are "power users" who frequently link, poke, post and tag themselves and others. [232]
In 2007, Facebook launched Facebook Pages (also called "Fan Pages" by users) to allow "users to interact and affiliate with businesses and organizations in the same way they interact with other Facebook user profiles". On November 6, 2007, more than 100,000 Facebook pages were launched. [233]
In July 2012, Facebook added a same-sex marriage icon to its timeline feature. [234] On February 14, 2014, Facebook expanded the options for user's gender setting, adding a custom input field that allows users to choose from a wide range of gender identities. Users can also set which set of gender-specific pronouns are used in reference to them throughout the site. [235] [236] The change occurs after Nepal's first openly gay politician Sunil Babu Pant sent a letter to Zuckerberg in early 2012 to request the addition of an "Other" gender option for Facebook users; Facebook's official statement on the issue: "People can already opt out of showing their sex on their profile. We're constantly innovating on our products and features and we welcome input from everyone as we explore ways to improve the Facebook experience." [237]
On June 13, 2009, Facebook introduced a "Usernames" feature, whereby pages can be linked with simpler URLs such as https://www.facebook.com/name instead of https://www.facebook.com/profile.php?id=20531316728 . [238] Many new smartphones offer access to Facebook services through either their Web browsers or applications. An official Facebook application is available for the operating systems Android , iOS , webOS , and Firefox OS . Nokia and Research In Motion both provide Facebook applications for their own mobile devices. As of January 2015, 745 million active users access Facebook through mobile devices every day. Sherr, Ian (January 28, 2015). "Facebook mobile users hit new highs, revenue jumps" . Cnet . Retrieved March 2, 2015 .
In May 2014, Facebook introduced a feature to allow users to ask for information not disclosed by other users on their profiles. If a user does not provide key information, such as location, hometown, or relationship status, other users can use a new 'ask' button to send a message asking about that item to the user in a single click. [239]

News Feed
On September 6, 2006, News Feed was announced, which appears on every user's homepage and highlights information including profile changes, upcoming events, and birthdays of the user's friends. [240] This enabled spammers and other users to manipulate these features by creating illegitimate events or posting fake birthdays to attract attention to their profile or cause. [241] Initially, the News Feed caused dissatisfaction among Facebook users; some complained it was too cluttered and full of undesired information, others were concerned that it made it too easy for others to track individual activities (such as relationship status changes, events, and conversations with other users). [242]
In response, Zuckerberg issued an apology for the site's failure to include appropriate customizable privacy features. Since then, users have been able to control what types of information are shared automatically with friends. Users are now able to prevent user-set categories of friends from seeing updates about certain types of activities, including profile changes, Wall posts, and newly added friends. [243]
On February 23, 2010, Facebook was granted a patent [244] on certain aspects of its News Feed. The patent covers News Feeds in which links are provided so that one user can participate in the same activity of another user. [245] The patent may encourage Facebook to pursue action against websites that violate its patent, which may potentially include websites such as Twitter . [246]
One of the most popular applications on Facebook is the Photos application, where users can upload albums and photos. [247] Facebook allows users to upload an unlimited number of photos, compared with other image hosting services such as Photobucket and Flickr , which apply limits to the number of photos that a user is allowed to upload. During the first years, Facebook users were limited to 60 photos per album. As of May 2009, this limit has been increased to 200 photos per album. [248] [249] [250] [251]
Privacy settings can be set for individual albums, limiting the groups of users that can see an album. For example, the privacy of an album can be set so that only the user's friends can see the album, while the privacy of another album can be set so that all Facebook users can see it. Another feature of the Photos application is the ability to " tag ", or label, users in a photo. For instance, if a photo contains a user's friend, then the user can tag the friend in the photo. This sends a notification to the friend that she has been tagged, and provides a link to see the photo. [252]
On June 7, 2012, Facebook launched its App Center to its users. It will help the users in finding games and other applications with ease. [253] Since the launch of the App Center, Facebook has seen 150M monthly users with 2.4 times the installation of apps. [254]
The sorting and display of stories in a user's News Feed is governed by the EdgeRank algorithm. [255]
On May 13, 2015, Facebook in association with major news portals launched a program "Instant Articles" to provide rich news experience. Instant articles provides users, access to articles on Facebook news feed without leaving the site. [256] [257]
According to the technology news web site Gizmodo on May 9, 2016, Facebook curators routinely suppress or promote news that is deemed to meet a political agenda. For example, articles about Black Lives Matter would be listed even if they did not meet the trending criteria of News Feed. Likewise positive news about conservative political figures were regularly excised from Facebook pages. [258]
In January 2017, Facebook launched Facebook Stories for iOS and Android in Ireland. The feature, following the format of Snapchat and Instagram stories, allows users to upload photos and videos that appear above friends' and followers' News Feeds and disappear after 24 hours. [259]

Like button
The like button is a social networking feature, allowing users to express their appreciation of content such as status updates, comments, photos, and advertisements. It is also a social plug-in of the Facebook Platform – launched on April 21, 2010 [260] [261] – that enables participating Internet websites to display a similar like button.
The sheriff of Hampton, Virginia, US, fired employees who liked the Facebook page of an adversary, and a federal appeals court in Virginia ruled that the US Constitution protects the rights of US citizens to like any Facebook page of their choosing. US Circuit Judge William Traxler likened the practice to displaying a "political sign in one's front yard." [262] Additionally, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit upheld a National Labor Relations Board decision which found that one employee's "liking" another employee's negative comments about their employer deserved protection under the National Labor Relations Act , alerting employers to proceed with caution when disciplining employees for Facebook activity. [263]
Following a lengthy period of calls from the public to include a dislike button on the Facebook interface, Zuckerberg explained in a Q&A session on December 11, 2014 that his hesitance was due to a concern about a tone of negativity on the platform, whereby users could "shame" others, and he offered the comment option for situations where people were unwilling to use the like function. However, he said, "We're [Facebook] thinking about it [dislike button] … It's an interesting question," and said that he likes the idea of Facebook users being able to express a greater variety of emotions. [106]

Following
On September 14, 2011, Facebook added the ability for users to provide a "Subscribe" button on their page, which allows users to subscribe to public postings by the user without needing to add him or her as a friend. [264] In conjunction, Facebook also introduced a system in February 2012 to verify the identity of certain accounts. [265]
In December 2012, Facebook announced that because of user confusion surrounding its function, the Subscribe button would be re-labeled as a "Follow" button—making it more similar to other social networks with similar functions. [266]

Comparison with Myspace
The media often compares Facebook to Myspace , but one significant difference between the two Web sites is the level of customization. [267] Another difference is Facebook's requirement that users give their true identity, a demand that MySpace does not make. [268] MySpace allows users to decorate their profiles using HTML and Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), while Facebook allows only plain text . [269] Facebook has a number of features with which users may interact. They include the Wall , a space on every user's profile page that allows friends to post messages for the user to see; [270] Pokes , which allows users to send a virtual "poke" to each other (a notification then tells a user that he or she has been poked); [271] Photos , that allows users to upload albums and photos; [272] and Status , which allows users to inform their friends of their whereabouts and actions. [273] Facebook also allows users to tag various people in photographs. Depending on privacy settings, anyone who can see a user's profile can also view that user's Wall. In July 2007, Facebook began allowing users to post attachments to the Wall, whereas the Wall was previously limited to textual content only. [270] Facebook also differs from Myspace in the form of advertising used. Facebook uses advertising in the form of banner ads, referral marketing, and games. Myspace, on the other hand, uses Google and AdSense . [274] There is also a difference in the userbase of each site. MySpace, initially, was much more popular with high school students, while Facebook was more popular among college students. A study by the American firm Nielsen Claritas showed that Facebook users are more inclined to use other professional networking sites, such as LinkedIn , than Myspace users. [274]

Privacy
Facebook enables users to choose their own privacy settings and choose who can see specific parts of their profile. [276] The website is free to its users and generates revenue from advertising, such as banner ads . [277] Facebook requires a user's name and profile picture (if applicable) to be accessible by everyone. Users can control who sees other information they have shared, as well as who can find them in searches, through their privacy settings. [278]
On November 6, 2007, Facebook launched Facebook Beacon , which was a part of Facebook's advertisement system until it was discontinued in 2009. Its purpose was to allow targeted advertisements and allowing users to share their activities with their friends.
In 2010, Facebook's security team began expanding its efforts to reduce the risks to users' privacy , [279] but privacy concerns remain. [280]
Since 2010, among other social media services, the National Security Agency has been taking publicly posted profile information from users Facebook profiles to discover who they interact with. [281]
On November 29, 2011, Facebook settled Federal Trade Commission charges that it deceived consumers by failing to keep privacy promises. [282]
In August 2013 High-Tech Bridge published a study showing that links included in Facebook messaging service messages were being accessed by Facebook. [283] In January 2014 two users filed a lawsuit against Facebook alleging that their privacy had been violated by this practice. [284]

Facebook Bug Bounty Program
On July 29, 2011, Facebook announced its Bug Bounty Program in which security researchers will be paid a minimum of $500 for reporting security holes on Facebook's website. Facebook's Whitehat page for security researchers says: "If you give us a reasonable time to respond to your report before making any information public and make a good faith effort to avoid privacy violations, destruction of data, and interruption or degradation of our service during your research, we will not bring any lawsuit against you or ask law enforcement to investigate you." [285] [286]
Facebook started paying researchers who find and report security bugs by issuing them custom branded "White Hat" debit cards that can be reloaded with funds each time the researchers discover new flaws. "Researchers who find bugs and security improvements are rare, and we value them and have to find ways to reward them," Ryan McGeehan, former manager of Facebook's security response team, told CNET in an interview. "Having this exclusive black card is another way to recognize them. They can show up at a conference and show this card and say 'I did special work for Facebook.'" [287]
India, which has the second largest number of bug hunters in the world, [288] tops the Facebook Bug Bounty Program with the largest number of valid bugs. "Researchers in Russia earned the highest amount per report in 2013, receiving an average of $3,961 for 38 bugs. India contributed the largest number of valid bugs at 136, with an average reward of $1,353. The U.S. reported 92 issues and averaged $2,272 in rewards. Brazil and the UK were third and fourth by volume, with 53 bugs and 40 bugs, respectively, and average rewards of $3,792 and $2,950", Facebook quoted in a post. [289]

Reception
According to comScore , Facebook is the leading social networking site based on monthly unique visitors, having overtaken main competitor MySpace in April 2008. [290] ComScore reports that Facebook attracted over 130 million unique visitors in May 2010, an increase of 8.6 million people. [291] According to third-party web analytics providers, Alexa and SimilarWeb , Facebook is ranked second and first globally respectively, it is the highest-read social network on the Web, with over 20 billion visitors per month, as of 2015. [292] [293] [294] SimilarWeb , Quantcast , and Compete.com all rank the website 2nd in the U.S. in traffic. [293] [295] [296] The website is the most popular for uploading photos, cumulatively with 50 billion uploaded. [297] In 2010, Sophos 's "Security Threat Report 2010" polled over 500 firms, 60% of which responded that they believed Facebook was the social network that "posed the biggest threat to security," well ahead of MySpace, Twitter, and LinkedIn . [279]
Facebook is the most popular social networking site in several English-speaking countries , including Canada, [298] the United Kingdom, [299] and the United States. [300] [301] [302] However, Facebook still receives limited adoption in countries such as Japan, where domestically created social networks are still largely preferred. [303] In regional Internet markets, penetration on Facebook is highest in North America (69 percent), followed by Middle East-Africa (67 percent), Latin America (58 percent), Europe (57 percent), and Asia-Pacific (17 percent). [304] Some of the top competitors were listed in 2007 by Mashable . [305]
The website has won awards such as placement into the "Top 100 Classic Websites" by PC Magazine in 2007, [306] and winning the "People's Voice Award" from the Webby Awards in 2008. [307] In a 2006 study conducted by Student Monitor, a company specializing in research concerning the college student market, Facebook was named the "second most popular thing among undergraduates," tied with beer and only ranked lower than the iPod . [308]
In 2010, Facebook won the Crunchie "Best Overall Startup Or Product" for the third year in a row [309] and was recognized as one of the "Hottest Silicon Valley Companies" by Lead411. [310] However, in a July 2010 survey performed by the American Customer Satisfaction Index , Facebook received a score of 64 out of 100, placing it in the bottom 5% of all private-sector companies in terms of customer satisfaction, alongside industries such as the IRS e-file system, airlines, and cable companies . The reasons why Facebook scored so poorly include privacy problems, frequent changes to the website's interface, the results returned by the News Feed, and spam. [311]
In December 2008, the Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory ruled that Facebook is a valid protocol to serve court notices to defendants. It is believed to be the world's first legal judgement that defines a summons posted on Facebook as legally binding. [325] In March 2009, the New Zealand High Court associate justice David Gendall allowed for the serving of legal papers on Craig Axe by the company Axe Market Garden via Facebook. [326] [327] Employers have also used Facebook as a means to keep tabs on their employees and have even been known to fire them over posts they have made. [328]
By 2005, the use of Facebook had already become so ubiquitous that the generic verb "facebooking" had come into use to describe the process of browsing others' profiles or updating one's own. [329] In 2008, Collins English Dictionary declared "Facebook" as its new Word of the Year. [330] In December 2009, the New Oxford American Dictionary declared its word of the year to be the verb " unfriend ", defined as "To remove someone as a ' friend ' on a social networking site such as Facebook. [331]
In early 2010, Openbook was established, an avowed parody (and privacy advocacy) website [332] that enables text-based searches of those Wall posts that are available to "Everyone", i.e. to everyone on the Internet.
Writers for The Wall Street Journal found in 2010 that Facebook apps were transmitting identifying information to "dozens of advertising and Internet tracking companies". The apps used an HTTP referer which exposed the user's identity and sometimes their friends'. Facebook said, "We have taken immediate action to disable all applications that violate our terms". [333]
In May 2014, the countries with the most Facebook users were: [334]
Facebook's popularity throughout the world (especially as a tool for political movements or procrastination) has led to some countries and employers blocking access to the site.
All of the above total 309 million members or about 38.6 percent of Facebook's 1 billion worldwide members. [335] As of March 2013, Facebook reported having 1.11 billion monthly active users, globally. [336]
In regards to Facebook's mobile usage, per an analyst report in early 2013, there are 192 million Android users, 147 million iPhone users, 48 million iPad users and 56 million messenger users, and a total of 604 million mobile Facebook users. [337] In January 2016, Facebook Messenger hits 800 million users. [338]

Criticisms and controversies

Electricity usage
On April 21, 2011, Greenpeace released a report showing that of the top ten big brands in cloud computing, Facebook was most reliant on coal for electricity for its data centers. At the time, data centers consumed up to 2% of all global electricity and this amount was projected to increase. Phil Radford of Greenpeace said "we are concerned that this new explosion in electricity use could lock us into old, polluting energy sources instead of the clean energy available today." [341] On December 15, 2011, Greenpeace and Facebook announced together that Facebook would shift to use clean and renewable energy to power its own operations. Marcy Scott Lynn, of Facebook's sustainability program, said it looked forward "to a day when our primary energy sources are clean and renewable" and that the company is "working with Greenpeace and others to help bring that day closer." [342] [343]

Google
In May 2011 emails were sent to journalists and bloggers making critical allegations about Google's privacy policies ; however it was later discovered that PR giant Burson-Marsteller was paid for the emails by Facebook. [344]

NSA Prism program
Following media reports about PRISM , NSA's massive electronic surveillance program , in June 2013, several technology companies were identified as participants, including Facebook. According to leaks of said program, Facebook joined the PRISM program in 2009. [345]

Users violating minimum age requirements
A 2011 study in the online journal First Monday , examines how parents consistently enable children as young as 10 years old to sign up for accounts, directly violating Facebook's policy banning young visitors. This policy is in compliance with a United States law, the 1998 Children's Online Privacy Protection Act , which requires minors aged 13 or younger to gain explicit parental consent to access commercial websites. In other jurisdictions where a similar law sets a lower minimum age, Facebook enforces the lower age. Of the 1,007 households surveyed for the study, 76% of parents reported that their child joined Facebook at an age younger than 13, the minimum age in the site's terms of service. The study also reported that Facebook removes roughly 20,000 users each day for violating its minimum age policy. The study's authors also note, "Indeed, Facebook takes various measures both to restrict access to children and delete their accounts if they join." The findings of the study raise questions primarily about the shortcomings of United States federal law, but also implicitly continue to raise questions about whether or not Facebook does enough to publicize its terms of service with respect to minors. Only 53% of parents said they were aware that Facebook has a minimum signup age; 35% of these parents believe that the minimum age is merely a recommendation, or thought the signup age was 16 or 18, and not 13. [346]

Accounts hacked in Bangalore, India
In November 2011, several Facebook users in Bangalore , India reported that their accounts had been hacked and their profile pictures replaced with pornographic images. For more than a week, users' news feeds were spammed with pornographic, violent and sexual content, and it was reported that more than 200,000 accounts were affected. Facebook described the reports as inaccurate, and Bangalore police speculated that the stories may have been rumors spread by Facebook's competitors. [347] [348]

Unauthorized wall posting bug
On August 19, 2013, it was reported that a Facebook user from Yatta , West Bank [349] [350] Khalil Shreateh had found a bug that allowed him to post material to other users' Facebook Walls. Users are not supposed to have the ability to post material to the Facebook Walls of other users unless they are approved friends of those users that they have posted material to. To prove that he was telling the truth, Shreateh posted material to Sarah Goodin's wall, a friend of Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg. Following this, Shreateh contacted Facebook's security team with the proof that his bug was real, explaining in detail what was going on. Facebook has a bounty program in which it compensates people a US$500 fee for reporting bugs instead of using them to their advantage or selling them on the black market. However, it was reported that instead of fixing the bug and paying Shreateh the fee, Facebook originally told him that "this was not a bug" and dismissed him. Shreateh then tried a second time to inform Facebook, but they dismissed him yet again. On the third try, Shreateh used the bug to post a message to Mark Zuckerberg's Wall, stating "Sorry for breaking your privacy … but a couple of days ago, I found a serious Facebook exploit" and that Facebook's security team was not taking him seriously. Within minutes, a security engineer contacted Shreateh, questioned him on how he performed the move and ultimately acknowledged that it was a bug in the system. Facebook temporarily suspended Shreateh's account and fixed the bug after several days. Facebook refused to pay out the bounty to Shreateh, stating that by posting to Zuckerberg's account, Shreateh had violated one of their terms of service policies and therefore "could not be paid." Facebook also noted that in Shreateh's initial reports, he had failed to provide technical details for Facebook to act on the bug. [351] [352] [353]
On August 22, 2013, Yahoo News reported that Marc Maiffret , a chief technology officer of the cybersecurity firm BeyondTrust , is prompting hackers to support in raising a $10,000 reward for Khalil Shreateh. On August 20, Maiffret stated that he had already raised $9,000 in his efforts, including the $2,000 he himself contributed. He and other hackers alike have denounced Facebook for refusing Shreateh compensation. Stated Maiffret, "He is sitting there in Palestine doing this research on a five-year-old laptop that looks like it is half broken. It's something that might help him out in a big way." Facebook representatives have since responded, "We will not change our practice of refusing to pay rewards to researchers who have tested vulnerabilities against real users." Facebook representatives also claimed they'd paid out over $1 million to individuals who have discovered bugs in the past. [354]

Users quitting
A 2013 study examined the reasons users eventually quit the site. It found the most common reasons were privacy concerns (48%), general dissatisfaction with Facebook (14%), negative aspects regarding Facebook friends (13%) and the feeling of getting addicted to Facebook (6%). Facebook quitters were found to be more concerned about privacy, more addicted to the Internet and more conscientious. [280]

iPhone 'Paper' app
Following the release of the Facebook iPhone app "Paper" at the beginning of February 2014, developer company FiftyThree sent a correspondence to the social media company regarding its own app, also entitled Paper and trademarked in 2012, asking Facebook to cease using an app name that they consider their own. In response, Facebook stated that it will continue to use the Paper title but conceded that it should have informed FiftyThree at an earlier point in time. FiftyThree articulated its desired outcome in a blog post: "There's a simple fix here. We think Facebook can apply the same degree of thought they put into the app into building a brand name of their own. An app about stories shouldn't start with someone else's story. Facebook should stop using our brand name." [355] [356]

Lane v. Facebook, Inc.
In March 2010, Judge Richard Seeborg issued an order approving the class settlement in Lane v. Facebook, Inc. [357] This lawsuit charged that user's private information was being posted on Facebook without consent using Facebook's Beacon program.

Fraley v. Facebook, Inc.
Fraley v. Facebook, Inc. was a class-action case that alleged that Facebook had misappropriated users' names and likenesses in advertisements. [358] The case settled in 2013, [358] with checks to class members mailed in November 2016. [359]

User influence experiments
Academic and Facebook researchers have collaborated to test if the messages people see on Facebook can influence their behavior. For instance, in "A 61-Million-Person Experiment in Social Influence And Political Mobilization," during the 2010 elections, Facebook users were given the opportunity to "tell your friends you voted" by clicking on an "I voted" button. Users were 2% more likely to click the button if it was associated with friends who had already voted. [360]
Much more controversially, a 2014 study of "Emotional Contagion Through Social Networks" manipulated the balance of positive and negative messages seen by 689,000 Facebook users. [361] The researchers concluded that they had found "some of the first experimental evidence to support the controversial claims that emotions can spread throughout a network, [though] the effect sizes from the manipulations are small." [362]
Unlike the "I voted" study, which had presumptively beneficial ends and raised few concerns, this study was criticized for both its ethics and methods/claims. As controversy about the study grew, Adam Kramer, a lead author of both studies and member of the Facebook data team, defended the work in a Facebook update . A few days later, Sheryl Sandberg, Facebook's COO, made a statement while traveling abroad. While at an Indian Chambers of Commerce event in New Delhi she stated that "This was part of ongoing research companies do to test different products, and that was what it was. It was poorly communicated and for that communication we apologize. We never meant to upset you." [363]
Shortly thereafter, on July 3, 2014, USA Today reported that the privacy watchdog group Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC) had filed a formal complaint with the Federal Trade Commission claiming that Facebook had broken the law when it conducted the study on the emotions of its users without their knowledge or consent. In its complaint, EPIC alleged that Facebook had deceived it users by secretly conducting a psychological experiment on their emotions: "At the time of the experiment, Facebook did not state in the Data Use Policy that user data would be used for research purposes. Facebook also failed to inform users that their personal information would be shared with researchers." [364]
Beyond the ethical concerns, other scholars criticized the methods and reporting of the study's findings. John Grohol, writing for Psych Central , argued that despite its title and claims of " emotional contagion ," this study did not look at emotions at all. Instead, its authors used an application (called "Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count" or LIWC 2007) that simply counted positive and negative words in order to infer users' sentiments. He wrote that a shortcoming of the LIWC tool is that it does not understand negations. Hence, the tweet "I am not happy" would be scored as positive: "Since the LIWC 2007 ignores these subtle realities of informal human communication, so do the researchers." Grohol concluded that given these subtleties, the effect size of the findings are little more than a "statistical blip."
The consequences of the controversy are pending (be it FTC or court proceedings) but it did prompt an " Editorial Expression of Concern " from its publisher, the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , as well as an blog posting from OkCupid that " We experiment on human beings !" In September 2014, law professor James Grimmelmann argued that the actions of both companies were "illegal, immoral, and mood-altering" and filed notices with the Maryland Attorney General and Cornell Institutional Review Board. [366]
In the UK, the study was also criticised by the British Psychological Society which said, in a letter to The Guardian , "There has undoubtedly been some degree of harm caused, with many individuals affected by increased levels of negative emotion, with consequent potential economic costs, increase in possible mental health problems and burden on health services. The so-called 'positive' manipulation is also potentially harmful." [367]

Real-name policy controversy and compromise
Facebook has a real-name system policy for user profiles . The real-name policy stems from the position "that way, you always know who you're connecting with. This helps keep our community safe." [368] [369] Facebook's real-name system does not allow adopted names or pseudonyms , and in its enforcement has suspended accounts of legitimate users, until the user provides identification indicating the name. Facebook representatives have described these incidents as very rare. [370] A user claimed responsibility via the anonymous Android and iOS app Secret for reporting "fake names" which caused user profiles to be suspended, specifically targeting the stage names of drag queens . [371] On October 1, 2014, Chris Cox , Chief Product Officer at Facebook, offered an apology: "In the two weeks since the real-name policy issues surfaced, we've had the chance to hear from many of you in these communities and understand the policy more clearly as you experience it. We've also come to understand how painful this has been. We owe you a better service and a better experience using Facebook, and we're going to fix the way this policy gets handled so everyone affected here can go back to using Facebook as you were." [372]
On December 15, 2015, Facebook announced in a press release [373] that it would be providing a compromise to its real name policy after protests from groups such as the gay/lesbian community and abuse-victims. [374] The site is developing a protocol that will allow members to provide specifics as to their "special circumstance" or "unique situation" with a request to use pseudonyms, subject to verification of their true identities. At that time, this was already being tested in the U.S. Product manager Todd Gage and vice president of global operations Justin Osofsky also promised a new method for reducing the number of members who must go through ID verification while ensuring the safety of others on Facebook. The fake name reporting procedure will also be modified, forcing anyone who makes such an allegation to provide specifics that would be investigated and giving the accused individual time to dispute the allegation. [375]

"Free basics" controversy in India
In February 2016, TRAI ruled against differential data pricing for limited services from mobile phone operators effectively ending zero-rating platforms in India. Zero rating provides access to limited number of websites for no charge to the end user. Net-neutrality supporters from India ( SaveTheInternet.in ) brought out the negative implications of Facebook Free Basic program and spread awareness to the public. [376] Facebook's Free Basics program [377] was a collaboration with Reliance Communications to launch Free Basics in India. The TRAI ruling against differential pricing marked the end of Free Basics in India. [378]
Earlier, Facebook had spent $44 million USD in advertising and it implored all of its Indian users to send an email to the Telecom Regulatory Authority to support its program. [379] TRAI later asked Facebook to provide specific responses from the supporters of Free Basics. [380] [381]

Safety Check bug
On March 27, 2016, following a bombing in Lahore , Pakistan, Facebook activated its "Safety Check" feature, which allows people to let friends and loved ones know they are okay following a crisis or natural disaster, to people who were never in danger, or even close to the Pakistan explosion. Some users as far as the US, UK and Egypt received notifications asking if they were okay. [382] [383]

U.S. federal tax examination
On July 6, 2016, the U.S. Department of Justice filed a petition in the U.S. District Court in San Francisco, asking for a court order to enforce an administrative summons issued to Facebook, Inc., under Internal Revenue Code section 7602, [384] in connection with an Internal Revenue Service examination of Facebook's year 2010 U.S. Federal income tax return. [385] [386]

Support for terrorism lawsuit
In July 2016, a civil action for $1 billion in damages was filed in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York on behalf of the victims and family members of four Israeli-Americans and one US citizen killed since June 2014 by Hamas terrorists who had used Facebook. The government of the United States has designated Hamas as a Foreign Terrorist Organization and the suit alleges that Facebook provided Hamas with "material support" in violation of US Anti-Terrorism laws . [387] [388]

Stalking and torture
At least one adolescent accused of serial rape was described as using Facebook to make friends of his victims. [389]
In another separate incident, a man with special needs was kidnapped and tortured by four suspects, with the assault live streamed over Facebook. The incident has been ruled a hate crime [390] [391] [392] and has received international coverage. [393] According to CNN and The Guardian , Facebook faced criticism for not having removed the torture video quickly enough. [394] [395]

Child pornography
In March 2017 a BBC investigation found that there were groups on Facebook dedicated to sharing and discussing child pornography. Most images were not taken down on request, and when the BBC sent some of the questionable images to Facebook for comment, Facebook reported the BBC to the police. [396] [397]

Videos of killing uploaded to Facebook
On April 16, 2017, a disgruntled man from Cleveland, Ohio , United States , uploaded a video of himself shooting and killing Robert Godwin, a random passer-by. Contrary to common perception, the video was not streamed on Facebook Live, but the man, later identified as Steve Stephens, posted live streams of himself talking to friends and announcing his intent to kill more people, claiming to have already killed over a dozen. [398] Facebook removed the footage and Stephens' account shortly afterwards, and a manhunt for Stephens that spread outside Cleveland to other states culminated with Stephens taking his own life while being chased by police in Erie, Pennsylvania . [399] Facebook once again faced criticism for not removing the videos soon enough, but CEO Mark Zuckerberg offered a statement apologizing for the incident, stating that "Our hearts go out to the family and friends of Robert Godwin Sr., and we have a lot of work and we will keep doing all we can to prevent tragedies like this from happening." [400]
Later that month, a Thai man killed both himself and his baby, and this was also streamed live on Facebook. [401]

More control
In the aftermath of the incidents, it was announced on May 3, 2017 that Facebook would hire 3,000 extra people in the year to come to help preventing the live broadcast of harmful content. [402]

Impact

Media impact
In April 2011, Facebook launched a new portal for marketers and creative agencies to help them develop brand promotions on Facebook. [403] The company began its push by inviting a select group of British advertising leaders to meet Facebook's top executives at an "influencers' summit" in February 2010. Facebook has now been involved in campaigns for True Blood , American Idol , and Top Gear . [404] News and media outlets such as The Washington Post , [405] Financial Times [406] and ABC News [407] have used aggregated Facebook fan data to create various infographics and charts to accompany their articles. In 2012, the beauty pageant Miss Sri Lanka Online was run exclusively using Facebook. [408]

Social impact
Facebook has affected the social life and activity of people in various ways. Facebook allows people using computers or mobile phones to continuously stay in touch with friends, relatives and other acquaintances wherever they are in the world, as long as there is access to the Internet. It has reunited lost family members and friends. [409] [410] It allows users to trade ideas, stay informed with local or global developments, and unite people with common interests and/or beliefs through open, closed and private groups and other pages. [411] [412]
Facebook's social impact has also changed how people communicate. Rather than having to reply to others through email, Facebook allows users to broadcast or share content to others, and thereby to engage others or be engaged with others' posts. [413]
Facebook has been successful and more socially impactful than many other social media sites. David Kirkpatrick, technology journalist and author of The Facebook Effect , believes that Facebook is structured in a way that is not easily replaceable. He challenges users to consider how difficult it would be to move all the relationships and photos to an alternative. Facebook has let people participate in an atmosphere with the "over the backyard fence quality" of a small town, despite the move to larger cities. [414] As per Pew Research Center survey, 44 percent of the overall population gets news through Facebook. [415]

Emotional health impact
Recent studies have shown that Facebook causes negative effects on self-esteem by triggering feelings of envy, with vacation and holiday photos proving to be the largest resentment triggers. Other prevalent causes of envy include posts by friends about family happiness and images of physical beauty—such envious feelings leave people lonely and dissatisfied with their own lives. A joint study by two German universities discovered that one out of three people were more dissatisfied with their lives after visiting Facebook, and another study by Utah Valley University found that college students felt worse about their own lives following an increase in the amount of time spent on Facebook. [416] [417] [418] In addition, a recent study from Pace University showed that the more frequently users update their status on Facebook, the lower their self-esteem. [419]
According to professor of psychology Susan Krauss Whitbourne, although Facebook has an upside of friending people, there is also the downside of having someone unfriend or reject another person. [420] Whitbourne refers to unfriended persons on Facebook as victims of estrangement . [420] Unfriending someone is seldom a mutual decision and the person often does not know he has been unfriended. [420]
One explanation is that social-media users usually split their time between Facebook and interacting in the real world. When something entertaining happens in real life, people feel the need to share it. It might seem harmless, however at some point people begin to substitute one reality with another. As a result, people start to change their behavior and even their assumptions about life, love and friendships, based on the Facebook reality. This leads to cognitive dissonance . Such a discrepancy between perceptions and beliefs can damage people's emotional balance and lead them to experience identity confusion, relationship conflicts, changes in judgement, and even psychotic break. [421]

Political impact
In February 2008, a Facebook group called "One Million Voices Against FARC" organized an event in which hundreds of thousands of Colombians marched in protest against the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia , better known as the FARC (from the group's Spanish name). [422] In August 2010, one of North Korea 's official government websites and the official news agency of the country, Uriminzokkiri , joined Facebook. [423]
During the Arab Spring many journalists made claims that Facebook played a major role in generating the 2011 Egyptian revolution . [424] [425] On January 14, the Facebook page of "We are all khaled Said" was started by Wael Ghoniem Create Event to invite the Egyptian people to "peaceful demonstrations" on January 25. According to Mashable , [ unreliable source? ] in Tunisia and Egypt, Facebook became the primary tool for connecting all protesters and led the Egyptian government of Prime Minister Nazif to ban Facebook, Twitter and another websites on January 26 [426] then ban all mobile and Internet connections for all of Egypt at midnight January 28. After 18 days, the uprising forced President Mubarak to resign.
In Bahrain uprising which started on February 14, 2011, Facebook was utilized by the Bahraini regime as well as regime loyalists to identify, capture and prosecute citizens involved in the protests. A 20-year-old girl named Ayat Al Qurmezi was identified as a protester using Facebook, taken from her home by masked commandos and put in prison. [427]
In 2011, Facebook filed paperwork with the Federal Election Commission to form a political action committee under the name FB PAC . [428] In an email to The Hill , a spokesman for Facebook said "Facebook Political Action Committee will give our employees a way to make their voice heard in the political process by supporting candidates who share our goals of promoting the value of innovation to our economy while giving people the power to share and make the world more open and connected." [429]
During the Syrian civil war, the YPG , a libertarian army for Rojava has recruited westerners through Facebook in its fight against ISIL . [430] [431] Dozens have joined its ranks for various reasons from religious to ideological. The Facebook page's name "The Lions of Rojava" comes from a Kurdish saying which translates as "A lion is a lion, whether it's a female or a male", reflecting the organization's feminist ideology. [432]

United States
Facebook's role in the American political process was demonstrated in January 2008, shortly before the New Hampshire primary , when Facebook teamed up with ABC and Saint Anselm College to allow users to give live feedback about the "back to back" January 5 Republican and Democratic debates. [433] [434] [435] Facebook users took part in debate groups organized around specific topics, register to vote, and message questions. [436]
Over a million people installed the Facebook application "US Politics on Facebook" in order to take part, and the application measured users' responses to specific comments made by the debating candidates. [437] This debate showed the broader community what many young students had already experienced: Facebook as a popular and powerful new way to interact and voice opinions. A poll by CBS News , UWIRE and The Chronicle of Higher Education claimed to illustrate how the "Facebook effect" has affected youth voting rates, support by youth of political candidates, and general involvement by the youth population in the 2008 election. [438]
The new social media, such as Facebook and Twitter, made use first of the personal computer and the Internet, and after 2010 of the smart phones to connect hundreds of millions of people, especially those under age 35. By 2008, politicians and interest groups were experimenting with systematic use of social media to spread their message among much larger audiences than they had previously reached. [439] [440]
Facebook is having an impact on local government as well. Justin Smith , a Colorado sheriff uses Facebook to disseminate his ideas on matters relating to local, state, and national concerns. He also publicizes crimes, particularly those that his department solves. He has seven thousand followers on the social medium, considered a large number. Smith said that he rarely goes out in public "when I don't get feedback from folks. … Facebook is an interesting tool because I think it holds candidates and elected officials more accountable. Voters know where someone stands." [441]
As American political strategists turn their attention to the 2016 presidential contest, they identify Facebook as an increasingly important advertising tool. Recent technical innovations have made possible more advanced divisions and subdivisions of the electorate. Most important, Facebook can now deliver video ads to small, highly targeted subsets. Television, by contrast, shows the same commercials to all viewers, and so cannot be precisely tailored. [442]

Ban
In many countries the social networking sites and mobile apps have been blocked temporarily or permanently, including China , Iran , and North Korea .

In popular culture

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00090
Erasmus Prize
The Erasmus Prize is an annual prize awarded by the board of the Praemium Erasmianum Foundation to individuals or institutions that have made exceptional contributions to culture , society , or social science in Europe and the rest of the world. [1] It is one of Europe's most distinguished recognitions. [2] The prize is named after Desiderius Erasmus , the Dutch Renaissance humanist.

Prize and adornment
As of 2015 [update] , the prize consists of €150,000 [1] and an adornment that was designed by Bruno Ninaber van Eyben in 1995. The adornment is a ribbon folded in the style of a harmonica , with ends made of titanium plates. The ribbon bears a text in the handwriting of Erasmus taken from a letter to Jean Carondelet written on 5 January 1523. The text reads "variae sunt ingeniorum dotes multae seculorum varietates sunt. quod quisque potest in medium proferat nec alteri quisquam invideat qui pro sua virili suoque modo conatur publicis studiis utilitatis aliquid adiungere.", which translates to "Diverse are the gifts of men of genius and many are the different kinds of ages. Let each one reveal the scope of his competence and let no one be envious of another who in keeping with his own ability and style tries to make a useful contribution to the education of all." [3]

Ceremony
The award ceremony typically takes place at the Royal Palace of Amsterdam , where the prize is presented by the patron of the Foundation (King Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands as of 2015 [update] ). A wide range of academic and cultural activities are organised around the Erasmus Prize award ceremony, in cooperation with other academic and cultural organisations. These have included lectures , conferences , workshops , exhibitions , performances of dance, music and theatre, and other educational activities. An essay on the topic of the laureate and their work is also published. [4]
The prize was first awarded in 1958. As of 2015 [update] it has been awarded a total of 73 times in 53 years. [1] [5] The area in which the Erasmus prize will be awarded is decided upon in advance by the Foundation's board. An advisory committee then consults with Dutch and foreign experts before proposing a laureate; the final choice of the laureate is then made by the Foundation's board. [4]

Young researchers
The Erasmus prize is not intended to stimulate young researchers. [4] However, the Praemium Erasmianum Foundation has awarded from 1988 yearly "studyprizes" for exceptionally high quality PHD studies on the field of humanities or social sciences .

Prize winners
WebPage index: 00091
Peter Stone (professor)
Dr. Peter Stone is the David Bruton, Jr. Centennial Professor of Computer Science at the University of Texas at Austin . He is also an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellow , Guggenheim Fellow , AAAI Fellow , [1] and Fulbright Scholar .

Educational background
He received his Ph.D. in 1998 and his M.S. in 1995 from Carnegie Mellon University , both in Computer Science. He received his B.S. in Mathematics from the University of Chicago in 1993. [2]

Career
After receiving his Ph.D., Stone continued at Carnegie Mellon as a Postdoctoral Fellow for one year. From 1999 to 2002 he was a Senior Technical Staff Member in the Artificial Intelligence Principles Research Department at AT&T Labs - Research. He then joined the faculty of Computer Science Department at the University of Texas at Austin as an assistant professor. He was promoted to associate professor in 2007 and full professor in 2012. Stone was an adjunct professor at NYU in AY 2001-02, and a visiting professor at Hebrew University and Bar Ilan University in AY 2008-09.
Stone co-authored the papers that first proposed the robot soccer challenges around which Robocup was founded. [3] [4] He is a vice president of the international RoboCup Federation and was a co-chair of RoboCup-2001 at IJCAI-01 . Peter Stone was a Program Co-Chair of AAMAS 2006, was General Co-Chair of AAMAS 2011, and was a Program Co-Chair of AAAI -14. He has developed teams of robot soccer agents that have won RoboCup championships in the simulation (1998, 1999, 2003, 2005, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014), in the standard platform (2012) and in the small-wheeled robot (1997, 1998) leagues. He has also developed agents that have won auction trading agents competitions (2000, 2001, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2013).

Research
Stone describes his research interest as understanding how we can best create complete intelligent agents. His research focuses mainly on machine learning, multiagent systems, and robotics. Application domains have included robot soccer, autonomous bidding agents, autonomous vehicles, autonomic computing, and social agents. [5]

See also

Honors and awards
WebPage index: 00092
Webby Award
A Webby Award is an award for excellence on the Internet presented annually by The International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences , a judging body composed of over one thousand industry experts and technology innovators. Categories include websites ; advertising and media; online film and video; mobile sites and apps; and social. [1]
Two winners are selected in each category, one by members of The International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences, and one by the public who cast their votes during Webby People’s Voice voting. [1] Each winner presents a five-word acceptance speech, a trademark of the annual awards show. [2]
Hailed as the "Internet’s highest honor," [3] the award is one of the older Internet-oriented awards, and is associated with the phrase "The Oscars of the Internet." [4] [5] [6]

History
The Webby Awards began in 1996, sponsored by the Academy of Web Design and Cool Site of the Day . The first Webby Awards were produced by Kay Dangaard at the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel as a nod to the first site of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (Oscars). That first year, they were called "Webbie" Awards. The first "Site of the Year" winner was the pioneer webisodic serial The Spot .
Today's Webby's were founded by Tiffany Shlain when she was hired by the The Web Magazine (an IDG Publication) to establish the awards. The event was held in San Francisco from 1996 to 2004 and quickly became known for their "5 word Acceptance Speeches". After the first year the awards became more successful than the magazine and IDG closed the publication. Shlain continued to run The Webby Awards with the help of Maya Draisin until 2004. [7] [8]
The International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences , which selects the winners of The Webby Awards, was established in 1998 by co-founders Tiffany Shlain , Spencer Ante and Maya Draisin. [9] Members of the Academy include Kevin Spacey , Conan O'Brien , David Bowie , Martha Stewart , Harvey Weinstein , Arianna Huffington , Matt Groening , Biz Stone , Shane Smith , David Karp , Freddie Wong , Internet inventor Vint Cerf , Virgin Group Chairman Richard Branson , and R/GA Chairman and CEO Bob Greenberg . [1]
The Webby Awards is owned and operated by the Webby Media Group, a division of Recognition Media, which also owns and produces the Lovie Awards in Europe and Netted by the Webbys, a daily email publication launched in 2009. David-Michel Davies, CEO of Webby Media Group, current Executive Director of the Webby Awards and co-founder of Internet Week New York, was named Executive Director of the Webby Awards in 2005. [10]
In 2009, the 13th Annual Webby Awards received nearly 10,000 entries from all 50 states and over 60 countries. [11] That same year, more than 500,000 votes were cast in The Webby People's Voice Awards. [12] In 2012, the 16th Annual Webby awards received 1.5 million votes from more than 200 countries for the People's Voice awards. [13] In 2015, the 19th Annual Webby Awards received nearly 13,000 entries from all 50 U.S. states and over 60 countries worldwide. [14]

Nomination process
During the Call for Entries phase, each entry is rated by Associate Members of the International Academy of Digital Arts & Sciences. Entries that receive the highest marks during this first round of voting are included on category-specific shortlists and further evaluated by Executive Members of the Academy.
Executive Academy Members with category-specific expertise evaluate the shortlisted entries based on the appropriate Website, Advertising & Media, Online Film & Video, Mobile Sites & Apps, and Social category criteria, and cast ballots to determine Webby Honorees, Nominees and Webby Winners. Deloitte provides vote tabulation consulting for the Webby Awards. [15]
In addition to the award given in each category by the International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences, another winner is selected in each category as determined by the general public during People’s Voice voting. Winners of both the Academy-selected and People’s Voice-selected awards are invited to the Webbys. [16]

Awards granted
The Webby Awards are presented in over a hundred categories among all four types of entries. A website can be entered in multiple categories and receive multiple awards.
In each category, two awards are handed out: a Webby Award selected by The International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences, and a People's Voice Award selected by the general public. [17]
Past winners include Amazon.com , eBay , Travel + Leisure, SimplyHired.com, Kayak.com , Yahoo! , iTunes , Google , FedEx , BBC News , CNN , MSNBC , The New York Times , Annie Lennox , NPR , Salon Magazine , Facebook , Meetup , Wikipedia , Deleted - The Game , Flickr , ESPN , Comedy Central , PBS , The Onion News Network, The Office Webisodes, SwiftKey , My Damn Channel , NASA , George Takei , Airbnb , The Onion , Kickstarter , Mashable , Zach Galifianakis , Justin Bieber , Rhett and Link and Humans of New York .
Each year, the International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences also honors individuals with Webby Special Achievement Awards. Past Webby Special Achievement winners include Al Gore , Prince , David Bowie , Meg Whitman , Tim & Eric , Sir Tim Berners-Lee , Lorne Michaels , Craig Newmark , Thomas Friedman , Stephen Colbert , Michel Gondry , the Beastie Boys , Kevin Spacey , Banksy , Lawrence Lessig and Jerry Seinfeld . [17]

Ceremony
Since 2005, The Webby Awards has been presented in New York City. [18] Comedian Rob Corddry hosted the ceremony from 2005 to 2007. Seth Meyers of Saturday Night Live hosted in 2008 and 2009, B.J. Novak of NBC 's The Office in 2010, and Lisa Kudrow in 2011. [19]
Comedian, actor, and writer Patton Oswalt hosted from 2012 to 2014. [20] Comedian Hannibal Buress will host the 19th Annual Webby Awards. [21]
The Webbys are famous for limiting recipients to five-word speeches, which are often humorous, although some exceed the limit. In 2005 when accepting his Lifetime Achievement Award, former Vice President Al Gore 's speech was "Please don't recount this vote." He was introduced by Vint Cerf who used the same format to state, "We all invented the Internet." [22] In 2008, Stephen Colbert shouted “Me. Me. Me. Me. Me” [23] when accepting his award for Webby Person of the Year. Accepting the award for Best Political Blog in 2008, Arianna Huffington ’s speech was “President Obama ... Sounds good, right?" [23]
Other popular speeches include "Can anyone fix my computer?" [24] (the Beastie Boys ); "Everything you think is true" [25] ( Prince ); "Thank God Conan got promoted" [26] ( Jimmy Fallon ), "Free, open... Keep one Web" [26] ( Sir Tim Berners Lee ), “Holy - Fucking - Shit, Buzz Aldrin " [27] ( Jake Hurwitz ), and " Holocaust . Did it happen? Yes." ( Sarah Silverman ).
In 2013, the creator of the Graphics Interchange Format (GIF) , accepted his Webby and delivered his now famous five-word speech, "It’s pronounced 'Jif' not 'Gif'." [28]

Criticism
The Webbys have been criticized for their pay-to-enter and pay-to-attend policy (winners and nominees also have to pay to attend the award ceremony), and thus for not taking most websites into consideration before distributing their awards. [29] [30] [31] Gawker , its Valleywag column, and others, have called the awards a scam, with Valleywag saying, "...somewhere along the way, the organizers figured out that this goofy charade could be milked for profit." [32]
In response, Webby Awards executive director David-Michel Davies told the Wall Street Journal that entry fees “provide the best and most sustainable model for ensuring that our judging process remains consistent and rigorous and is not dependent on things like sponsorships that can fluctuate from year to year.” [31]

See also
WebPage index: 00093
Princess of Asturias Awards
The Princess of Asturias Awards [1] (Spanish: Premios Princesa de Asturias , Asturian : Premios Princesa d'Asturies ), formerly the Prince of Asturias Awards from 1981–2014 (Spanish: Premios Príncipe de Asturias ) are a series of annual prizes awarded in Spain by the Princess of Asturias Foundation (previously the Prince of Asturias Foundation) to individuals, entities or organizations from around the world who make notable achievements in the sciences, humanities, and public affairs.
The prize was established on 24 September 1980 by the then twelve-year-old Felipe, Prince of Asturias , heir to the throne of Spain , "to consolidate links between the Principality and the Prince of Asturias, and to contribute to, encourage and promote scientific, cultural and humanistic values that form part of mankind's universal heritage." [2] The awards are presented at the Campoamor Theatre in Oviedo , the capital of the Principality of Asturias . A sculpture, expressly created for the prize by Spanish sculptor Joan Miró , is presented yearly to the recipients of the prize.
Following the accession of Felipe VI as King of Spain on 19 June 2014, it was announced that, beginning in 2015, the foundation and the awards are to be renamed the Princess of Asturias Awards to reflect the new heir presumptive to the Spanish throne, Leonor, Princess of Asturias . [3] King Felipe will continue to preside over the awards ceremony until the Princess of Asturias reaches majority age on 31 October 2023. In 2015, Wikipedia won the prize in the International Cooperation category. [4]

Categories

Arts (Artes)

Communications and Humanities (Comunicación y Humanidades)

International Cooperation (Cooperación Internacional)

Literature (Letras)

Social Sciences (Ciencias Sociales)

Sports (Deportes)

Technical and Scientific Research (Investigación Científica y Técnica)

Concord (Concordia)

Exemplary Town of Asturias (Pueblo Ejemplar de Asturias)
Every year, a town or community organization in the Principality of Asturias is chosen to receive this award, a royal visit, and a prize of €25,000. [5]

See also
WebPage index: 00094
The Office (U.S. TV series)
The Office is an American television comedy series that aired on NBC from March 24, 2005 to May 16, 2013. [1] It is an adaptation of the BBC series of the same name . The Office was adapted for American audiences by Greg Daniels , a veteran writer for Saturday Night Live , King of the Hill , and The Simpsons . It is co-produced by Daniels' Deedle-Dee Productions , and Reveille Productions (later Shine America ), in association with Universal Television . The original executive producers were Greg Daniels, Howard Klein , Ben Silverman , Ricky Gervais , and Stephen Merchant , with numerous others being promoted in later seasons.
The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton, Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company. To simulate the look of an actual documentary , it is filmed in a single-camera setup , without a studio audience or a laugh track . The show debuted on NBC as a mid-season replacement and ran for nine seasons and 201 episodes . The Office initially featured Steve Carell , Rainn Wilson , John Krasinski , Jenna Fischer and B. J. Novak as the main cast; the show experienced numerous changes to its ensemble cast during its run.
The first season of The Office was met with mixed reviews, but the following four seasons received widespread acclaim from television critics. These seasons were included on several critics' year-end top TV series lists, winning several awards including four Primetime Emmy Awards , including Outstanding Comedy Series in 2006. While later seasons were criticized for a decline in quality, earlier writers oversaw the final season and ended the show's run with a positive reception.

Production

Crew
Greg Daniels served as the senior series showrunner for the first four seasons of the series and developed the British series for American television. He then left the position when he co-created the comedy series Parks and Recreation with fellow Office writer Michael Schur and divided his time between the two series. [2] Paul Lieberstein and Jennifer Celotta were named the series showrunners for the fifth season. [3] Celotta left the series after the sixth season and Lieberstein stayed on as showrunner for the following two seasons. He left the showrunner spot after the eighth season for the potential Dwight Schrute spin-off, The Farm , which was eventually passed up by NBC. [4] [5] Daniels returned to the showrunner position for the ninth and final season. [6] Other executive producers include cast members B. J. Novak and Mindy Kaling . [7] [8] Kaling, Novak, Daniels, Lieberstein and Schur made up the original team of writers. [9] Kaling, Novak and Lieberstein also serve multiple roles on the series, as they play regular characters on the show, as well as write, direct and produce episodes. [10] Credited with twenty-four episodes, Kaling is the most prolific writer on the staff. [10] Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant , who created the original British series, are credited as executive producers, and wrote the pilot and the third-season episode, " The Convict ". [11] Merchant later directed the episode " Customer Survey " while Gervais appeared in the episodes " The Seminar " and " Search Committee ". [12] [13]
Randall Einhorn is the most frequent director of the series, with 15 credited episodes. [10] The series has also had several guest directors, including Lost co-creator J. J. Abrams , Buffy the Vampire Slayer creator Joss Whedon , [14] [15] both of whom are fans of the series, [16] [17] and filmmakers Jon Favreau , Harold Ramis , Jason Reitman , and Marc Webb . [10] Episodes have been directed by several of the actors on the show including Steve Carell , John Krasinski , Rainn Wilson , Ed Helms , and Brian Baumgartner . [10]

Development and writing
Before the series aired its second episode, the writers spent time researching in offices. [18] This process was used for Daniels' other series King of the Hill and Parks and Recreation . [18] The pilot is a direct adaptation of the first episode of the British version. [19] Daniels had decided to go this route because "completely starting from scratch would be a very risky thing to do" due to the show being an adaptation. [19] He had briefly considered using the idea for " The Dundies " as the pilot episode. [20] After the writers knew who the cast was, they were allowed to write for the actors, which allowed the show to be more original for the following episode, " Diversity Day ". [19] Following the mixed reaction towards the first season, the writers attempted to make the series more "optimistic" and to make Michael Scott more likable. [21] They also established the supporting characters of the series more, giving them actual personalities. They also made the lights in the office brighter, which allowed the series to differentiate itself from the British version. [21]
A common problem with the scripts, according to Novak, is that they tend to run too long for the regular 22-minute time slot, leading to several cuts. [22] For example, the script for the episode " Search Committee " was initially 75 pages—10 pages too long. [22] A complete script is written for each episode; however, actors are given opportunities to improvise during the shooting process. Fischer said, "Our shows are 100 percent scripted. They put everything down on paper. But we get to play around a little bit, too. Steve and Rainn are brilliant improvisers." [23] This leads to a large number of deleted scenes with almost every episode of The Office , all of which are considered part of the show's canon and storyline by Daniels. [24] Deleted scenes have sometimes been restored in repeats to make episodes longer or draw back people who have seen the episode before to see the bonus footage. In an experiment, a deleted scene from " The Return " was made available over NBC.com and iTunes , explaining the absence of a character over the next several episodes. [24] Daniels hoped that word of mouth among fans would spread the information, but eventually considered the experiment a failure. [24]

Casting
According to Jenna Fischer , the series used an unusual casting process which did not involve a script. The producers would ask the actors several questions and they would respond as the characters they were auditioning for. [25] NBC programmer Kevin Reilly originally suggested Paul Giamatti to producer Ben Silverman for the role of Michael Scott, but the actor declined. Martin Short , Hank Azaria , and Bob Odenkirk were reported to be interested in the part. [26] In January 2004, Variety reported that Steve Carell , of the popular Comedy Central program The Daily Show with Jon Stewart , was in talks to play the role. At the time, he was already committed to another NBC mid-season replacement comedy, Come to Papa , [27] but the series was quickly canceled, allowing his full commitment to The Office . Carell later stated that he had only seen about half of the original pilot episode of the British series before he auditioned. He did not continue watching for fear that he would start copying Gervais' characterizations. [28] Other people who were considered or auditioned for the role included Ben Falcone , Alan Tudyk , Jim Zulevic , and Paul F. Tompkins . Rainn Wilson was cast as power-hungry sycophant Dwight Schrute , and he watched every episode of the series before he auditioned. [29] Wilson had originally auditioned for Michael, a performance that he described as a "terrible Ricky Gervais impersonation"; however, the casting directors liked his audition as Dwight much more and hired him. Seth Rogen , Matt Besser , Patton Oswalt , and Judah Friedlander also auditioned for the role. [29]
John Krasinski and Jenna Fischer were virtually unknown before being cast in their respective roles as Jim and Pam, the central love interests. Krasinski had attended school with B. J. Novak, and the two were friends. [30] [31] Fischer prepared for her audition by looking as boring as possible, creating the original Pam hairstyle. [32] In an interview on NPR 's Fresh Air , Fischer recalled the last stages of the audition process for Pam and Jim, with the producers partnering the different potential Pams and Jims (four of each) together to gauge their chemistry. When Fischer finished her scene with Krasinski, he told her that she was his favorite Pam, to which she reciprocated that he was her favorite Jim. [25] Adam Scott and John Cho both auditioned for the role of Jim, and Kathryn Hahn also auditioned for the role of Pam. [33]
The supporting cast includes actors known for their improv work: Angela Kinsey , Kate Flannery , Oscar Nunez , Leslie David Baker , Brian Baumgartner , Melora Hardin , and David Denman . [34] Kinsey had originally auditioned for Pam. The producers thought she was "too feisty" for the character, but they called her back for the part of Angela Martin , which she won. [35] Flannery first auditioned for the part of Jan Levinson-Gould, before landing the role of Meredith Palmer. [36] Baumgartner originally auditioned for Stanley, but was eventually cast as Kevin. [37] Ken Kwapis , the director of the pilot episode, liked the way Phyllis Smith , a casting associate, read with other actors auditioning so much that he cast her as Phyllis . [38] At the beginning of the third season, Ed Helms and Rashida Jones joined the cast as members of Dunder Mifflin Stamford. While Jones would later leave the cast for a role on Parks and Recreation , in February 2007, NBC announced that Helms was being promoted to a series regular. [39]
Four of the show's writers have also performed in front of the camera. B. J. Novak was cast as reluctant temp Ryan Howard after Daniels saw his stand-up act . Paul Lieberstein was cast as human resources director Toby Flenderson on Novak's suggestion after his cold readings of scripts. [34] Greg Daniels was originally unsure where to use Mindy Kaling on-screen in the series until the opportunity came in the script for the second episode, " Diversity Day ", where Michael needed to be slapped by a minority. "Since [that slap], I've been on the show" (as Kelly Kapoor ), says Kaling. [38] Michael Schur has also made occasional appearances as Dwight's cousin Mose , and consulting producer Larry Wilmore has played diversity trainer Mr. Brown . Plans were made for Mackenzie Crook , Martin Freeman , and Lucy Davis , from the British version of The Office , to appear in the third season, [40] but those plans were scrapped due to scheduling conflicts. [41] [42]

Filming
The Office was filmed with a single-camera setup in a cinéma vérité allowing the look of an actual documentary, with no studio audience or laugh track, allowing its "deadpan" and "absurd" humor to fully come across. [43] The primary vehicle for the show is that a camera crew has decided to film Dunder Mifflin and its employees, seemingly around the clock. [43] The presence of the camera is acknowledged by the characters, especially Michael Scott, who enthusiastically participates in the filming. [44] The characters, especially Jim and Pam, also look towards the camera when Michael creates an awkward situation. [25] The main action of the show is supplemented with talking-head interviews or "confessionals" in which characters speak one on one with the camera crew about the day's events. [25]
In order to get the feel of an actual documentary, the producers hired cinematographer Randall Einhorn, who is known for directing episodes of Survivor , which allowed the show to have the feel of "rough and jumpy" like an actual documentary. [44] According to producer Michael Schur, the producers to the series would follow the documentary format strictly. [45] The producers would have long discussions over whether a scene could work under the documentary format. [45] For example, in the fourth-season episode " Did I Stutter? ," a scene featured Michael going through a long process to go to the bathroom and not pass by Stanley. The producers debated whether that was possible and Einhorn walked through the whole scene in order to see if a camera man could get to all the places in time to shoot the whole scene. [45] Despite the strict nature in the early years of the series, later seasons seem to have loosened the rules on the format, with the camera crew often going into places that actual documentary crews would not, which also changed the writing and comedy-style of the series. [46] This inconsistency has received criticism from critics and fans. [46] [47]

Music
The theme song for The Office was written by Jay Ferguson and performed by The Scrantones. [48] It is played over the title sequence, which features scenes of Scranton, various tasks around the office and often the main cast members. Some episodes of the series use a shortened version of the theme song. Starting with the fourth season, the theme song is played over the closing credits , which previously rolled in silence. The exteriors of buildings in the title sequence are actual buildings in Scranton, Pennsylvania , and were shot by cast member John Krasinski. [49] The mockumentary format of the show contains no laugh track , and most of the music is diegetic , with songs either sung or played by the characters or heard on radios, computers, or other devices. [50] However, songs have been played during montages or the closing credits, such as " Tiny Dancer " by Elton John (" The Dundies ") and " Islands in the Stream " by Kenny Rogers and Dolly Parton (" E-mail Surveillance "). [20] Featured music tends to be well known, and often songs reflect the character, such as Michael's attempt to seem hip by using " Mambo No. 5 " and later " My Humps " as his cell phone ringtone. [50] Daniels has said that it does not count as film score as long as it already appeared in the episode. [20]

Characters
The Office employs an ensemble cast. Many characters portrayed by The Office cast are based on the British version of the show. While these characters normally have the same attitude and perceptions as their British counterparts, the roles have been redesigned to better fit the American show. The show is known for its generally large cast size, with many of its actors and actresses known particularly for their improvisational work. Steve Carell stars as Michael Scott , Regional Manager of the Dunder Mifflin Scranton Branch. Loosely based on David Brent , Gervais' character in the British version, Scott is a well-intentioned man whose attempts at humor, while seemingly innocent to himself, often offends and annoys his peers and employees, and in some situations lead to reprimanding from his superiors. Rainn Wilson portrays Dwight Schrute , who, based upon Gareth Keenan , is a salesman and the Assistant to the Regional Manager, a fictional title created by Michael. [51] John Krasinski portrays Jim Halpert , a salesman and, in later seasons, co-manager who is often known for his wittiness and his hijinks on Schrute (often accompanied by Pam Beesly ). Halpert is based upon Tim Canterbury , and is known to have feelings for Pam, the receptionist. [52] Pam, played by Jenna Fischer , is based on Dawn Tinsley . She is shy, but in many cases a cohort with Jim in his pranks on Dwight. [53] B. J. Novak portrays Ryan Howard , who for the first two seasons is a temporary worker , but is promoted to sales representative in the third season . He later ascends to the position of Vice President, North East Region and Director of New Media until his treachery was exposed for corporate fraud and he was fired. After this, he gets a job in a bowling alley and then briefly works for the Michael Scott Paper Company. After all this, and a stint in rehab, he eventually ends up again as the temporary worker at the Scranton branch. [54]
The accounting department features Angela Martin , an admitted uptight and hypocritical woman who wishes to keep things orderly and make sure situations remain as serious as possible; Kevin Malone , a lovable, but dim-witted man who revels in juvenile humor and frequently indulges himself with gambling and M&Ms; and Oscar Martinez is intelligent but often patronizing and whose homosexuality and Hispanic heritage made him a favorite target for Michael's unintentional off-color comments. Rounding out the office are the stern salesman Stanley Hudson , who barely stood for Michael's constant references to his Black-American heritage (he also doesn't like to take part in time wasting meetings and sometimes sleeps in them or works on crossword puzzles); eccentric quality assurance representative Creed Bratton ; the kind and caring saleswoman Phyllis Lapin-Vance , who marries Bob Vance from Vance Refrigeration across the hall from the office; Andy Bernard is a salesman introduced in season three after the closing of the Stamford, Connecticut branch of Dunder Mifflin and the merging of the two; the bubbly and talkative customer service representative Kelly Kapoor ; the promiscuous alcoholic supply relations representative Meredith Palmer ; human resources representative Toby Flenderson , who is admittedly hated by, and often the target of abuse by Michael Scott ; warehouse foreman Darryl Philbin ; Warehouse dock worker and Pam's ex-fiancé Roy Anderson , who was fired in the third season; and Michael's former love interest and former Vice President for Regional Sales for Dunder Mifflin Jan Levinson (Jan Levinson-Gould until her divorce in season 2).
Toward the end of season five, bubbly and naive new receptionist Erin Hannon is introduced as Pam's replacement. A story arc at the end of season four has Holly Flax transferred to the office as Toby's replacement. She acts as a love interest for Michael, as they share very similar personalities. Jo Bennett is the CEO of Sabre and Gabe Lewis , introduced in the middle of season six, is a Sabre employee who is assigned to the Dunder Mifflin Scranton branch as the Regional Director of Sales. In season nine Clark Green and Pete Miller joined as two new customer service representatives to attempt to catch up on the ignored customer services complaints that Kelly had dismissed while she worked at Dunder Mifflin.
Initially the actors who portray the other office workers were credited as guest stars before they were named series regulars during the second season. [55] The show's large ensemble has been mainly praised by critics and led to the series winning two Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series . [56] Carell was reportedly paid $175,000 per episode starting with the third season. [57] Krasinski and Fischer were paid around $20,000 for the beginning of the series. [57] Starting with the fourth season, the two started getting paid around $100,000 per episode. [57]

Season synopses
A typical episode for a half-hour time slot runs 20-and-a-half minutes. [58] The final episode of season two introduces the first of what would be several super-sized episodes that are approximately 28-minute running time for a 40-minute time slot. [59] Season three introduces the first of occasional hour-long episodes (approximately 42-minute running time; suitable for being shown as two separate normal episodes). [60]

Season 1
The first season consists of six episodes.
The series begins by mostly introducing the office's workers via a tour given by branch manager Michael Scott for both the camera crew and a first-day temp (Ryan Howard). [61] The audience learns salesman Jim Halpert has a crush on receptionist Pam Beesly (who helps him play pranks on co-worker Dwight Schrute), even though she is engaged to Roy (who works in the building's lower-level warehouse). News spreads throughout the office that Dunder Mifflin's corporate headquarters is planning to downsize an entire branch, leading to general anxiety, but Michael chooses to deny or downplay the realities of the situation in order to maintain employee morale.

Season 2
The second season is the series' first twenty-two-episode season, and has its first 40-minute "super-sized" episode.
Many workers seen in the background of the first season are developed into secondary characters, and romantic relationships begin to develop between some of the characters. Michael spends the night with his boss Jan, in the wake of the latter's divorce, but does not sleep with her. [62] Dwight and Angela become romantically involved, [63] but keep the relationship a secret from everyone else. Kelly develops a crush on Ryan, and they start dating. When Roy sets a date for his wedding to Pam, [64] Jim grows depressed and considers transferring to the Stamford, Connecticut branch, but tells Pam in the season finale that he loves her, even though Pam still insists she will marry Roy. The two kiss, but Jim transfers to the Stamford branch soon after. [65] The general threat of downsizing continues throughout the season as well.

Season 3
The third season consists of 25 half-hours of material, divided into 17 half-hour episodes, four 40-minute "super-sized" episodes, and two one-hour episodes.
Jim briefly transfers to Stamford branch after Pam confirms her commitment to Roy. Corporate is later forced to merge the Stamford branch and staff into the Scranton branch. [66] Included in the transfer to Scranton are Karen Filippelli , with whom Jim has developed a relationship, and the anger-prone Andy Bernard . Pam is newly single after calling off her marriage and relationship to Roy prior to the merger, and Jim's unresolved feelings for her and new relationship with Karen lead to shifting tensions amongst the three. Meanwhile, Michael and Jan's relationship escalates which causes them both to behave erratically on the job while Dwight and Angela continue their secret relationship. In the season's finale , Jim, Karen, and Michael interview for a corporate position that turns out to be Jan's, who is fired that day for poor performance. Jim wins and rejects the offer off-screen, [67] opting instead to return to Scranton without Karen and asks Pam out on a date, which she joyfully accepts. In the final scene, we learn Ryan has been awarded Jan's job due to his business school credentials. [68]

Season 4
NBC ordered a full fourth season of 30 half-hour episodes, but ended with only 19 due to a halt in production caused by the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike . [69] [70] The season consists of 9 half-hour episodes, and 5 hour-long episodes to comprise the 19 total episodes of material created.
Karen has left the Scranton branch after her breakup with Jim, and becomes regional manager at the Utica branch. [71] Pam and Jim date happily. [72] An unemployed Jan moves in with Michael, until the dissolution of their relationship midway through the season. After Dwight's crude (though well-intentioned) method of euthanasia of Angela's ailing cat without her permission, [73] she leaves him for Andy, leading Dwight into depression. Ryan, in his new corporate life in New York City, attempts to modernize Dunder Mifflin with a new website for online sales; he also learns that his boss, David Wallace , favors Jim, and thus Ryan attempts to sabotage Jim's career. Ryan is soon arrested and fired for committing fraud related to the website's sales numbers. Toby, embarrassed after accidentally revealing affection for Pam, announces he is moving to Costa Rica , and is replaced by Holly Flax , who quickly shows fondness towards Michael. Pam decides to follow her artistic interests and attend a three-month graphic design course at the Pratt Institute in New York City. In the season finale Andy proposes to Angela, who reluctantly agrees. Phyllis then catches Dwight and Angela having sex in the office. [74]

Season 5
The fifth season consists of 28 half-hours of material, divided into 24 half-hour episodes and two hour-long episodes, one of which aired after Super Bowl XLIII . [75]
Jim and Pam become engaged, and she ultimately returns from New York to Scranton, where Jim has bought his parents' house for the two of them. Having avoided jail and only been sentenced to community service, Ryan dyes his hair and starts working for a bowling alley. Michael initiates a romance with Holly until she is transferred to the Nashua, New Hampshire branch and the relationship ends. When Andy is made aware of Dwight and Angela's continued affair, both men leave her. [76] Newly hired Vice President Charles Miner implements a rigid managerial style over the branch that causes Michael to resign in protest. [77] Michael opens the Michael Scott Paper Company , enticing Pam and Ryan to join as salespeople, and though his business model is ultimately unsustainable, Dunder Mifflin's profits are immediately threatened. [78] In a buyout of the Michael Scott Paper Company, the three are rehired with Pam promoted to sales and Ryan returning as a temp. During the chaos, new receptionist Erin is hired to fill the vacancy originally left by Pam. The season's finale ends with a cliffhanger ending hinting that Pam might be pregnant. [79]

Season 6
The sixth season consists of 26 half-hours of material, divided into 22 half-hour episodes and two hour-long episodes.
Jim and Pam marry and have a baby named Cecelia Marie Halpert. [80] Meanwhile, Andy and Erin develop mutual interest in one another, but find their inherent awkwardness inhibits his attempts to ask her out on a date. Rumors of bankruptcy begin to surround Dunder Mifflin, and by Christmas, Wallace announces to the branch that Dunder Mifflin has accepted a buyout from Sabre Corporation, a printer company. While Wallace and other executives are let go, the Scranton office survives due to its relative success within the company. In the season finale , Dwight buys the office park. Michael agrees to make an announcement to the press regarding a case of faulty printers. When Jo Bennet, Sabre CEO, asks how she can repay him, Michael responds that she could bring Holly back to the Scranton branch. [81]

Season 7
The seventh season consists of 26 half-hours of material, divided into 21 half-hour episodes, one "super-sized" episode, and two hour-long episodes. [82]
This is the final season for Steve Carell , who plays the lead character Michael Scott , as Carell wanted to move on after his contract expired during this season. [83] Beginning with this season, Zach Woods , who portrays Gabe Lewis , was promoted to a series regular. [84] Erin and Gabe have begun a relationship, much to Andy's chagrin, and he attempts to win her affection back. Michael's former girlfriend, Holly returns to Scranton to fill in for Toby who is doing jury duty for the "Scranton Strangler" trial. Michael and Holly eventually restart their relationship. After the two get engaged, he then reveals he will be leaving Scranton to go to Colorado with Holly in order to support her elderly parents. Pam and Jim are still adjusting to parenthood as Angela starts dating the Senator. After Michael's replacement ( Will Ferrell ) is seriously injured, Jo creates a search committee to interview candidates and choose a new manager for the office.

Season 8
The eighth season consists of 24 episodes.
James Spader reprises his role as Robert California , the new CEO of Dunder Mifflin/Sabre. [85] Andy is then promoted to Regional Manager and works hard to make a good impression on Robert, and asks Dwight to be his number two. [86] Pam and Jim are expecting their second child, Phillip, at the start of the season, to coincide with Fischer's real life pregnancy. [87] Angela is pregnant with her first son, also named Philip, with State Senator Robert Lipton (although it is implied that Dwight Schrute is actually the child's biological father). Darryl starts falling for new warehouse foreman Val. [88] Dwight is tasked with traveling to Tallahassee, Florida in order to assist Sabre Special Projects Manager Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) in launching a chain of retail stores, along with Jim, Ryan, Stanley, Erin, and new office temp Cathy Simms . Cathy is also revealed to have ulterior motives for the trip, as she intends to seduce Jim, but fails. [89] Robert later kills the retail store project, and Erin decides to stay in Florida as an elderly woman's live-in helper. Andy goes to Florida and wins back Erin, but this allows Nellie to claim the manager position as her own. Robert tells Andy that he has been demoted back to a salesman, but he refuses to accept the news, which causes him to be fired. Andy becomes motivated to begin a Dunder Mifflin comeback and joins with former CFO, David Wallace, to buy Dunder Mifflin back from Sabre, putting Sabre completely out of business and giving Andy the manager position once again.

Season 9
The final season consists of 25 episodes.
Andy, recently returning from Outward Bound manager's training, reverts to his arrogant earlier season personality, abandoning both Erin and the office to travel around the Caribbean with his brother. In his absence, Erin strikes up a romance with new customer service rep Pete, who along with Clark, another new character, replaces Kelly, who left for Ohio with her new husband (Ryan also moves to Ohio for "unrelated reasons"). Meanwhile, Jim receives an exciting opportunity from an old college friend, who offers him a job at Athlead, a sports marketing company based in Philadelphia. Darryl also jumps on board, but the distance and dedication to Athlead hurts Jim's relationship with Pam. Angela also must deal with her husband's infidelity with Oscar. She also deals with her lingering attraction to Dwight, who inherits his family's beet farm. Dwight receives more good news when David Wallace handpicks him to be the new manager after Andy quits to pursue an acting career, which quickly ends when he embarrasses himself at an a cappella singing competition that turns into a viral web sensation. Dwight later makes Jim his Assistant to the Regional Manager and the two officially end their grudge. After Jim reconciles with Pam, choosing to stay in Scranton over Philadelphia, Dwight professes his love for Angela, and finally marries her. In the series finale, taking place one year after the release of the documentary, the employees reunite for Dwight and Angela's wedding, for which Michael returns (with help from Jim who was the person Dwight first asked to be his best man) to serve as the best man. Kelly and Ryan run away together, Nellie now lives in Poland and "adopts" Ryan's abandoned baby, Erin meets her birth parents, Andy gets a job at Cornell, Stanley retires to Florida, Kevin and Toby are both fired with the former buying a bar and the latter moving to New York City to become an author, Oscar runs for State Senate, Jim and Pam, at her persuasion, move to Austin to open a new branch of Athleap (previously Athlead) with Darryl (Dwight "fires" them to give them both severance packages), and Creed is arrested for his many crimes.

Product placement
The Office has had product placement deals with Staples [90] and the Olympic balers , [91] as well as mentioning in dialogue or displaying clear logos for products such as Sandals Resorts , HP , Apple , and Gateway computers, and Activision 's Call of Duty video game series. In " The Merger ", Kevin Malone uses a Staples-branded shredding machine to shred a Staples-branded CD-R and many other non-paper items, including a salad. [90] As with HP, Cisco Systems , a supplier of networking and telephone equipment, pays for product placement, which can be seen on close-up shots of the Cisco IP Telephones. Some products have additional branding labels attached; this can be clearly seen with the HP photo printer on Toby's desk in season 6, and is less noticeable with the Cisco phones. [92] In " The Secret " Michael takes Jim to Hooters [93] to discuss Jim's feelings for Pam.
Many products featured are not part of product placement agreements, but rather inserted by writers as products the characters would use to create realism under the guise of a documentary. Chili's restaurants were used for filming in " The Dundies " and " The Client ", as the writers believed they were realistic choices for a company party and business lunch. [94] [95] [96] Though not an explicit product placement, the producers of the show had to allow Chili's to have final approval of the script before filming, causing a scene of "The Dundies" to be hastily rewritten when the chain objected to the original version. [95] Apple Inc. received over four minutes of publicity for the iPod when it was used as a much-desired gift in " Christmas Party ", though the company did not pay for the placement. [97] The travel website TripAdvisor.com was featured during Season 4 when after a visit to Dwight's "agritourism" bed and breakfast, Schrute Farms, Jim and Pam post an online review about their stay. The show reportedly approached the travel review website about using their name on the show and TripAdvisor set up a review page for the fictional B&B which itself received hundreds of reviews. [98] The appearance of Second Life in the episode " Local Ad " was rated eighth in the top ten most effective product placements of 2007. [99]

Reception

Critical reviews and commentary
Before the show aired, Ricky Gervais acknowledged that there were feelings of hesitation from certain viewers. [100] The first season of The Office was met with a mixed response from critics with some of them comparing it to the short-lived NBC series Coupling which was also based on a British version . [101] [102] The New York Daily News called it "so diluted there's little left but muddy water," and USA Today called it a "passable imitation of a miles-better BBC original." [103] A Guardian Unlimited review panned its lack of originality, stating, "(Steve Carell) just seems to be trying too hard ... Maybe in later episodes when it deviates from Gervais and Merchant's script, he'll come into his own. But right now he's a pale imitation." [104] Tom Shales of the Washington Post said it was "not the mishmash that [Americanized version of Coupling ] turned out to be, but again the quality of the original show causes the remake to look dim, like when the copying machine is just about to give out." [102]
The second season was better received. James Poniewozik of Time remarked, "Producer Greg Daniels created not a copy but an interpretation that sends up distinctly American work conventions ... with a tone that's more satiric and less mordant. ... The new boss is different from the old boss, and that's fine by me." [106] He named it the second best TV show of 2006 after Battlestar Galactica . [106] Entertainment Weekly writer Mark Harris echoed these sentiments a week later, stating, "Thanks to the fearless Steve Carell, an ever-stronger supporting cast, and scripts that spew American corporate absurdist vernacular with perfect pitch, this undervalued remake does the near impossible—it honors Ricky Gervais' original and works on its own terms." [107] The A.V. Club reviewer Nathan Rabin expressed its views on the show's progression: "After a rocky start, The Office improved immeasurably, instantly becoming one of TV's funniest, sharpest shows. The casting of Steve Carell in the Gervais role proved to be a masterstroke. The American Office is that rarest of anomalies: a remake of a classic show that both does right by its source and carves out its own strong identity." [108]
The series has been included on several top TV series lists. The show placed #61 on Entertainment Weekly 's "New TV Classics" list. [109] Time' s James Poniewozik named it the second best TV series of 2006, [106] and the sixth best returning series of 2007, out of ten TV series. [110] He also included it on his "The 100 Best TV Shows of All-TIME" list. [111] The show was also named the best show of 2006 by BuddyTV . [112] while Paste named it the sixth best sitcom of 2010. [113] In 2013, the Writers Guild of America placed it at #66 on their list of 101 Best Written TV Series . [114]
The show has some superficial similarities to the comic strip Dilbert , which also features employees coping with an inept superior. John Spector, CEO of The Conference Board, says that both show the impact a leader can have, for good or bad. Dilbert creator Scott Adams also touts the similarities: "The lesson from The Office and from Dilbert is that people are often dysfunctional, and no amount of training can fix it." [115] A labor -affiliated group praised the episode " Boys and Girls " for what it considered an unusually frank depiction of union busting on American television. [116] Metacritic , a review aggregation website, only graded the first, third, sixth, and final seasons. However, it denoted that all four of them received "generally favorable reviews" from critics, awarding a 61, 85, 78, and 64 score—out of 100—to each of them, respectively. [117] [118] [119] [120] It later named it the thirteenth most mentioned series on "Best of Decade" top-ten lists. [121]
The last few seasons were criticized for a dip in quality. The sixth season received criticisms for a lack of stakes for the characters. [123] [124] [125] Other critics and fans have also criticized the dragging out of the Jim and Pam romance. [126] The Office co-creator Ricky Gervais wrote in his blog, referring to " Search Committee ," particularly Warren Buffett 's guest appearance, "If you're going to jump a shark, jump a big one", and compared the episode to the Chris Martin episode of Gervais's other series, Extras (although he later said on his website, "I fucking didn't [diss The Office ], that's for sure"). [127] Some critics said the series should have ended after the departure of Steve Carell. [128] [129] Rainn Wilson felt that the eighth season possessed some mistakes "creatively", such as the chemistry between Spader and Helms, which he called "a bit dark" and argued that the show should have gone for a "brighter and more energized" relationship. [130] Despite this, there are later-series episodes that have received critical acclaim, including " Stress Relief ", " Niagara ", " Garage Sale ", " Goodbye, Michael ", " Dwight Christmas ", " A.A.R.M. ", and " Finale ". [131] [132] [133] [134] [135] [136] [137]

Awards
The series received 42 Primetime Emmy Awards nominations, with five wins. [138] It won for Outstanding Comedy Series in season two, Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series ( Greg Daniels for " Gay Witch Hunt "), Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series ( Jeffrey Blitz for " Stress Relief ") and Outstanding Single-Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series ( David Rogers and Claire Scanlon for " Finale "). Many cast and crew members have expressed anger that Carell did not receive an Emmy award for his performance in the series. [139] [140] Despite this, Carell won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Television Comedy or Musical in 2006. The series was also named the best TV series by the American Film Institute in 2006 and 2008, [141] [142] won two Screen Actors Guild Awards for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series in 2006 and 2007 [56] and won a Peabody Award in 2006. [143]

Ratings
Premiering on Thursday, March 24, 2005, after an episode of The Apprentice on NBC, The Office brought in 11.2 million viewers in the U.S., winning its time slot. [103] When NBC moved the series to its intended Tuesday night slot, it lost nearly half its audience with only 5.9 million viewers. [144] The program averaged 5.4 million viewers, ranking it #102 for the 2004–05 U.S. television season. [145] " Hot Girl ", the first season's finale , rated a 2.2 with a 10 audience measurement share . Episodes were also rerun on CNBC . [146]
As the second season started, the success of Carell's hit summer movie The 40-Year-Old Virgin and online sales of episodes at iTunes helped the show. [147] The increase in viewership led NBC to move the series to the " Must See TV " Thursday night in January 2006, where ratings continued to grow. By the 2005–06 season, it placed #67 (tied with 20/20 ). It averaged 8 million viewers with a 4.0/10 rating/share among viewers ages 18–49, and was up 80% in viewers from the year before and up 60% in viewers ages 18–49. [148] The series ranked as NBC's highest rated scripted series during its run. [149] The highest rated episode of the series was " Stress Relief ", which was watched by 22.9 million viewers. This episode was aired right after Super Bowl XLIII . [150] While later seasons dropped in the ratings, the show was still one of NBC's highest rated shows, and in October 2011 it was reported that it cost $178,840 per-30 second commercial, the most for any NBC scripted series. [151]

Nielsen ratings

Cultural impact
The city of Scranton, long known mainly for its industrial past as a coal mining and rail center, [172] has eagerly embraced, and ultimately has been redefined by the show. "We're really hip now," says the mayor's assistant. [49] The Dunder Mifflin logo is on a lamppost banner in front of Scranton City Hall , as well as the pedestrian bridge to The Mall at Steamtown . The Pennsylvania Paper & Supply Company, whose tower is shown in the opening credits, plans to add it to the tower as well. [173] Newspapers in other Northeastern cities have published travel guides to Scranton locations for tourists interested in visiting places mentioned in the show. [172] [173] [174] Scranton has become identified with the show outside the United States as well. In a 2008 St. Patrick's Day speech in its suburb of Dickson City , former Taoiseach (Irish prime minister) Bertie Ahern identified the city as the home of Dunder Mifflin. [175]
The inaugural The Office convention was held downtown in October 2007. Notable landmarks, some of which have been settings for the show, that served as venues include the University of Scranton , the Radisson Lackawanna Station Hotel and the Mall at Steamtown . Cast appearances were made by B.J. Novak, Ed Helms, Oscar Nunez, Angela Kinsey, Brian Baumgartner, Leslie David Baker, Mindy Kaling, Craig Robinson, Melora Hardin, Phyllis Smith, Creed Bratton, Kate Flannery, Bobby Ray Shafer, and Andy Buckley. Writer appearances, besides Novak and Kaling, were made by Greg Daniels, Michael Schur, Jennifer Celotta, Lee Eisenberg, Gene Stupnitsky, Justin Spitzer, Anthony Ferrell, Ryan Koh, Lester Lewis, and Jason Kessler. Not present were writer-actor Paul Lieberstein (who was originally going to make an appearance), Steve Carell, John Krasinski, Rainn Wilson, and Jenna Fischer. [176]
On an episode of The Daily Show , Republican presidential candidate John McCain , reportedly a devoted fan of the show, jokingly told Jon Stewart he might take Dwight Schrute as his running mate. [177] Rainn Wilson later accepted on Dwight Schrute's behalf while on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno . After the airing of " Garage Sale ", Colorado governor John Hickenlooper issued a press release appointing Michael Scott to the position of Director of Paper Distribution in the Department of Natural Resources. [178]
The show is often paid tribute by the band Relient K . Band member Matt Thiessen is a fan of The Office , and, during concerts , will often perform a self-described "love song" about the series, titled "The Ballad of Dunder Mifflin", followed by him and the band playing the show's opening theme. [179]

International broadcasts
Aside from NBC , The Office has gone into off-network syndication in the United States. It has reruns on local stations and TBS . In the United Kingdom , the show was named in listings magazines (but not onscreen) as The Office: An American Workplace when it was originally aired on ITV2 . [180]

Other media

Online releases
Episodes from The Office were among the first shows available for download from the iTunes Store beginning in December 2005. In 2006, ten internet-exclusive webisodes featuring some of the characters on The Office aired on NBC.com. "Producer's Cuts" (containing approximately ten additional minutes of material) of the episodes " Branch Closing " and " The Return " were also made available on NBC.com. The Office also became available for download from Amazon.com's Unbox video downloads in 2006. Sales of new The Office episodes on iTunes ceased in 2007 due to a dispute between NBC and Apple ostensibly over pricing. [181] As of September 9, 2008 The Office was put back on the iTunes Store, and can be bought in HD and Regular format. Netflix also offers the show for online viewing by subscribers, in addition to traditional DVD rental. The Office is also available on Microsofts Zune Marketplace.
Of the 12.4 million total viewings of " Fun Run ", the fourth season's premiere, 2.7 million, or 22%, were on a computer via online streaming. " The Office ," said The New York Times , "is on the leading edge of a sharp shift in entertainment viewing that was thought to be years away: watching television episodes on a computer screen is now a common activity for millions of consumers." It was particularly popular with online viewers, an NBC researcher said, because as an episode-driven sitcom without special effects it was easy to watch on smaller monitors such as those found on laptops and iPods . [182] Between the online viewings and those who use digital video recorders , 25–50% of the show's viewers watch it after its scheduled airtime . [183]
The show's Internet success became an issue in the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike . Daniels and many of the cast members who double as writers posted a video to YouTube shortly after the strike began, pointing out how little, if any, they received in residuals from online and DVD viewing. "You're watching this on the Internet, a thing that pays us zero dollars," Schur said. "We're supposed to get 11 cents for every two trillion downloads." The writers were particularly upset that they weren't compensated for the Daytime Emmy Award -winning summer webisodes "The Accountants", which NBC considered promotional material despite the embedded commercials . [184]

Promotional
The show's success has resulted in expansion outside of television. Characters have appeared in promotional materials for NBC, and a licensed video game— The Office —was released in 2007. [185] [186] In 2008 two games were introduced via Pressman Toy Corp: The Office Trivia Board Game and The Office DVD Board Game. [187] In 2009, The Office Clue was released, and The Office Monopoly was released in 2010. Other merchandise, from T-shirts and a bobblehead doll of Dwight Schrute [188] to more office-specific items such as Dunder Mifflin copy paper [189] and parodies of the Successories motivational poster series featuring the cast [190] are available. Dunder Mifflin has two websites, [191] and the cast members maintain blogs both as themselves and in character.

Cast blogs
Several members of the cast maintained blogs. These include Jenna Fischer, Angela Kinsey, and Brian Baumgartner, who posted regularly during the season. [192] Rainn Wilson wrote in character on "Schrute Space" on NBC.com, which is updated periodically. However, he stopped writing the blog himself. [193] It is unknown whether Creed Bratton authors "Creed Thoughts", the blog attributed to his character . [194]

Home video releases

Proposed spin-offs
A spin-off to the series was proposed in 2008, [201] with a pilot episode expected to debut as the Super Bowl lead-out program in 2009. [202] However, The Office ' s creative team instead decided to develop Parks and Recreation as a separate series. [203]
Another spin-off starring Rainn Wilson as Dwight Schrute running a bed-and-breakfast and beet farm, titled The Farm, was proposed in early 2012. [4] [204] In October 2012, however, NBC decided not to go forward with the series. [205] The backdoor pilot episode instead aired as part of the ninth and final season of The Office on March 14, 2013. [204] [206]
WebPage index: 00095
Perry Cox
Dr. Percival Ulysses "Perry" Cox , M.D. , [1] is a fictional character played by John C. McGinley on the American television comedy-drama Scrubs . Dr. Cox appeared in every episode except " My Last Words ," " My Comedy Show ," and " My Full Moon ," all in Season 8 .
McGinley, Zach Braff , and Donald Faison were the only cast members who returned as regulars for Season 9 .

Character profile
Dr. Cox is sarcastic and bitter and has a quick, cruel wit, normally expressed through frequent and sometimes incredibly long rants. At the beginning of the series, he is the chief attending physician at Sacred Heart Hospital; he is later promoted to residency director and, by the eighth season, to chief of medicine. In the ninth and final season, he becomes a professor when Sacred Heart is turned into a medical school. He is the superior and unwilling mentor of the series' protagonist, John "J.D." Dorian ( Zach Braff ). He has a "married but not married" relationship with his ex-wife, Jordan Sullivan ( Christa Miller ), with whom he has a son, Jack, and a daughter, Jennifer Dylan.
Cox is athletic, often found playing basketball in the hospital's parking lot with younger employees. In " My Friend the Doctor ", he shows off by slam-dunking a basketball, but injures his back when he lands, a reminder that he is middle-aged. Out of vanity, he tries to hide his injury. He is also extremely egocentric ; when named by a magazine as the best doctor in the city, he lines up every staff member beneath him, and his ex-wife, to consecutively praise him.
Cox grew up in an Irish Catholic family and has a younger sister, Paige ( Cheryl Hines ). Their family was extremely dysfunctional; their father was an abusive alcoholic who "drunkenly knocked [them] from room to room", while their mother did nothing to stop the abuse. Cox has a strained relationship with his sister, who reminds him of the childhood he has tried to forget. [2]
Ironically, while he goes out of his way to distance himself from others, Cox often gets mixed up in the hardships of both his patients and those around him. This personal involvement often manifests in destructive ways, with Cox either internalizing his feelings or externalizing them by targeting those around him. Despite this, he has intervened in some situations, with no expectation of personal gain and often to his own detriment, to help others. A notable example is when he risks incurring the wrath of his pregnant ex-wife, Jordan, by calling her in to help Nurse Carla Espinosa ( Judy Reyes ) deal with her postpartum depression . [3]
According to McGinley in the Season 1 DVD bonus features, Dr. Cox's habit of often touching his nose is a homage to Paul Newman 's character in The Sting , although Cox also uses it as a sign of irritation on occasion, rather than just a sign signifying "it's going to be OK", as it was used in the film. Dr. Cox has also been compared to Gregory House . This is further explored in " My House ", during which Cox acquires a temporary limp. At the end of the episode, through a series of circumstances, Dr. Cox walks into the room where the other characters are sitting and in a very House-esque way, gives them the answers to everything they have been trying to figure out through the whole episode.
Cox accepts the position of chief of medicine after his longtime nemesis, Dr. Bob Kelso , retires. [4] The position, however, does not come easily. He temporarily holds the position until the board finds a replacement, Dr. Taylor Maddox ( Courteney Cox ). After concluding that Dr. Maddox is, in fact, worse than Kelso, Dr. Cox teams up with the Janitor and Dr. Kelso to oust her. [5] After Dr. Maddox is fired, the position is vacant until Dr. Kelso, behind Cox's back, recommends him for the job. Dr. Cox is initially hesitant to take the job out of fear of losing the connection he has with his patients. Although it takes a few days, Kelso convinces him to accept the position. [6]
In the Season 2 DVD commentary of "His Story" , series creator Bill Lawrence stated that one of Dr. Cox's quirks is that he knows if someone is standing behind him and who it is, without turning around to check. This quirk is defied in " My Finale " when J.D. stands behind Cox as he tells one of the new interns how he really feels; throughout the speech, he gives no sign that he knows that J.D. is behind him.
He is also a very good golfer, regularly besting Kelso. [7]
Cox harbors an intense hatred for Hugh Jackman , mentioning him frequently in his rants about things he hates throughout the series. According to a 2006 interview with McGinley, Cox's reason for hating Jackman may be that Bill Lawrence envies the actor's talent. [8]
Cox is occasionally seen wearing a Detroit Red Wings jersey. McGinley is a Red Wings fan and a close friend of former Detroit defenseman Chris Chelios , whose name can be seen on the back of Cox's jersey. He has also been seen wearing a T-shirt for Cheli's Chili Bar, a small chain of restaurants owned by Chelios.
Cox is a graduate of Hale University and Johns Hopkins School of Medicine , the former being a fictional adaptation of Yale University . Interestingly, however, a janitor on the show is stated to have attended Yale. [9]
Dr. Cox is often seen drinking scotch and has acknowledged (humorously) that he has a drinking problem. Cox drinks so much that J.D. fears that Cox will die of liver disease. [10] After making a mistake about a transplant patient that results in three deaths, a guilt-ridden Cox goes to work drunk and falls into a deep depression. [11] J.D. eventually helps him forgive himself, however. [12] His son Jack's first full sentence is "Daddy drinks a lot". [12]

Relationships with other characters

In Sacred Heart
Dr. Cox constantly berates the residents, giving John "J.D." Dorian female nicknames (e.g. "Tiffany", "Jennifer", "Carol", "Betsy", "Lindsey") and regularly calling him "Newbie". He also calls Elliot Reid ( Sarah Chalke ) " Barbie ", Turk ( Donald Faison ) " Gandhi " and Bob Kelso ( Ken Jenkins ) "Bob-O", "Bobcat", and "Beelzebob". The one person he openly admits to tolerating is head nurse Carla Espinosa ( Judy Reyes ). Throughout Season 1, he and Turk compete for her affections, with Cox eventually bowing out when he sees that Turk and Carla are in love. In one episode, it is seen that Cox helped Turk with how to deal with women when they are mad, Turk eventually taking Perry's advice. Turk soon learns that Carla and Cox went on a date before Turk came to the hospital. [13] Despite his contempt for Turk in early seasons, Cox develops a restrained level of respect for him, and even occasionally gets along with and relates to him. Being reluctant at first, he even appoints Turk as the Chief Surgeon of Sacred Heart. Cox makes this decision after being told by Kelso that his own promotions by Kelso where against the latter's personal disdain for Cox, yet Cox' excellent medical knowledge made him the best candidate nonetheless - a feature that Turk shares with Cox.
He berates Elliot almost as much as J.D., frequently making fun of her insecurity, hairstyle and WASP background. However, he has also been known to stand up for her: he punches Kelso in the face when he yells at her in front of the staff. [14]
Cox despises Kelso, Sacred Heart's chief of medicine. They disagree constantly about the best way to provide care, with Cox advocating for patients and Kelso adhering to the hospital's bottom line . On occasion, however, they have acknowledged the necessity of the other's position, and Kelso has admitted that they need each other. [12] When Kelso retires and Cox succeeds him as chief of medicine, Cox confides in him about the pressures of the job, and the two form a "secret friendship". [15]
While Dr. Cox has had limited interactions with veteran nurse Laverne Roberts ( Aloma Wright ), his cynicism drives him to mock her strong religious beliefs on occasion. This culminates in Cox confronting her about a seemingly "miraculous" accident, unwilling to accept it as divine intervention . Visibly upset, Laverne replies that after 24 years as a nurse, she has to believe in a "bigger plan", otherwise she'd lose all hope. Taken aback, Cox uncharacteristically apologizes and sincerely replies that he wishes he could also believe that. [16] When she dies in the following episode, he joins the rest of the staff in bidding her farewell and drinking in her honor. [17]
He berates J.D. from their first meeting [18] and emphatically denies being his mentor, despite J.D.'s repeated attempts to win his favor. Nonetheless, Cox has shown concern for J.D.'s welfare, such as telling him not to blame himself for a patient's death [11] and (reluctantly) comforting him when his father dies. [19] He also tells J.D. that he trusts him as a doctor and a person and has taken an interest in him from the start because he seems "to actually give a crap". [20] Cox also recommends him as a promising, skilled, and hard-working doctor to a review board. [21] In " My Finale ", Cox finally admits that he considers J.D. a talented doctor, a good person, and a friend, although he has to be tricked to do it. He refuses to say this directly to J.D. or to hug him. A flash-forward scene at the end of the episode suggests that Cox will reluctantly be a part of J.D.'s life well into the future. [22]
In the ninth season, Sacred Heart has become a medical school, and Cox is hired as a professor. He immediately begins berating the series' new protagonist, Lucy Johnson ( Kerry Bishe ), and takes an interest in one of his students, Drew Suffin ( Michael Mosley ). He calls the latter "Number 1" and makes him his protégé, much to J.D.'s chagrin. [23] However, he still provides advice and support to J.D. (albeit in his usual sarcastic fashion) by telling him that he has to learn to let his students make their own mistakes. [24]

Family life
Cox's family is from Pittsburgh . He has a sister, Paige ( Cheryl Hines ), who is a born-again Christian . [2] Cox is presented as an ardent skeptic [2] who says that he does not "technically believe" in God. [25] His political views are varied; he has expressed disdain for members of both political parties, as well as "registered Independents". He opposes the Iraq War and is disgusted when Elliot reveals that she is a Republican . [26] He also uses "Republican" as an insult for Paige. [2]
Cox's father was an abusive alcoholic , and his mother would "watch silently while he drunkenly knocked [Dr. Cox and Paige] from room to room." At the end of one episode, he admits to his sister that seeing her reminds him of the childhood he has tried so hard to forget. [2]
Cox was apparently legally divorced from Jordan Sullivan ( Christa Miller Lawrence ), but the two have lived together in an exclusive relationship since Jordan discovered she was pregnant . [27] As revealed in flashbacks, the marriage appears to have started out strongly, but went downhill and eventually ended when Jordan slept with Dr. Cox's then-protégé Peter Fisher ( Jay Mohr ). [28] Later in the series, it is revealed that Ted did not submit the divorce papers properly, so Cox and Jordan have been married during the entire run of the show. They immediately resume the role of husband and wife since they have already reconciled, but they quickly become dissatisfied with being an ordinary married couple, so they agree to go back to acting as though they were divorced, even going so far as to actually legally divorce with Ted (again) ending their marriage. In later seasons, Cox quietly resumes wearing his wedding ring, and Jordan soon acquiesces to the marriage title after the birth of their second child, and it is implied that they have remarried.
He has two children with Jordan: a son named Jack and, after an unsuccessful vasectomy , a daughter named Jennifer Dylan (J.D.). Jack is played by Andrew Miller and his twin brother (although in a cameo appearance in " My Missed Perception ", he is played by Bill Lawrence and Christa Miller's son, William). When Jordan first becomes pregnant with Jack, she tells Cox that she was impregnated by a Greek bellboy , wanting Cox to stay because he wants to rather than out of obligation to his child. [27] At first, Cox feels nothing for the then-nameless boy, but begins to feel a connection after the child responds to the name Jack, which Cox had been trying to impress upon him for some time. J.D.'s college friend Spencer ( Ryan Reynolds ) accidentally tells Cox that he is actually Jack's biological father, [14] and he takes on the role of father with much more sincerity. Cox has a very unorthodox way of raising Jack, often treating him like his "drinking buddy". Nonetheless, Cox loves his son and tries fervently to be a better father than his own was. He often talks to Jack in lieu of a therapist . He also dotes on his daughter; among other things, he goes far out of his way to have someone else give her a shot so that she will not associate him with pain. [29]
Cox is best friends with Jordan's brother, Ben ( Brendan Fraser ), and is hit hard when he is diagnosed with leukemia ; he is initially too afraid to treat him because he fears he will lose him. He rallies, however, and helps Ben go into remission . [30] [31] Ben dies in the episode " My Screw Up ", but Cox convinces himself that he is still alive. When he finally admits that Ben is dead, he is devastated, and uncharacteristically allows people to comfort him at the funeral. [32]
WebPage index: 00096
Dilbert
Dilbert is an American comic strip written and illustrated by Scott Adams , first published on April 16, 1989. [1] The strip is known for its satirical office humor about a white-collar , micromanaged office featuring engineer Dilbert as the title character . The strip has spawned several books, an animated television series , a video game , and hundreds of Dilbert-themed merchandise items. Dilbert Future and The Joy of Work are among the most read books in the series. Adams received the National Cartoonists Society Reuben Award in 1997 and the Newspaper Comic Strip Award in the same year for his work on the strip. Dilbert appears online and in 2,000 newspapers worldwide in 65 countries and 25 languages. [2]

Themes
The comic strip originally revolved around Dilbert and his "pet" dog Dogbert in their home. Many plots revolved around Dilbert's engineer nature or his bizarre inventions. Also prominent were plots based on Dogbert's megalomaniacal ambitions. Later, the location of most of the action moved to Dilbert's workplace and the strip started to satirize technology, workplace, and company issues. The comic strip's popular success is attributable to its workplace setting and themes, which are familiar to a large and appreciative audience; [3] Adams has said that switching the setting from Dilbert's home to his office was "when the strip really started to take off". [4] The workplace location is Silicon Valley . [5]
Dilbert portrays corporate culture as a Kafkaesque world of bureaucracy for its own sake and office politics that stand in the way of productivity, where employees' skills and efforts are not rewarded, and busy work is praised. Much of the humor emerges as the audience sees the characters making obviously ridiculous decisions that are natural reactions to mismanagement .

Characters

Dilbert
The main character in the strip, Dilbert is a stereotypical technically-minded single male. Until October 2014, he was usually depicted wearing a white dress shirt, black trousers and a red-and-black striped tie that inexplicably curves upward; after October 13, 2014, his standard apparel changed to a red polo shirt with a name badge on a lanyard around his neck. [6] Dilbert is a skilled engineer but has a poor social and romantic life.

Pointy-Haired Boss
The unnamed, oblivious manager of the engineering division of Dilbert's company. Scott Adams states that he never named him so that people can imagine him to be their boss. In earlier strips he was depicted as a stereotypical late-middle-aged balding middle manager with jowls; it was not until later that he developed his signature "pointy hair" and the jowls disappeared. He is hopelessly incompetent at management, and often tries to compensate for his lack of skills with countless group therapy sessions and business strategies which usually never bear fruit. He does not understand technical issues but always tries to disguise this, usually by using buzzwords he also does not understand. The Boss treats his employees alternately with enthusiasm or neglect; he often uses them to his own ends regardless of the consequences to them. Adams himself wrote that "He's not sadistic, just uncaring". His level of intelligence varies from near-vegetative to perceptive and clever, depending on the strip's comic needs. His utter lack of consistent business ethics, however, is perfectly consistent. His brother is a demon named "Phil, the Prince of Insufficient Light", and according to Adams, the pointy hair is intended to remind one of devil's horns.

Wally
One of the oldest engineers, Wally was originally a worker trying to get fired to get a severance package. He hates work and avoids it whenever he can. He often carries a cup of coffee, calmly sipping from it even in the midst of chaos or office-shaking revelations. Wally is extremely cynical. He is even more socially inept than Dilbert (though far less self-aware of the fact), and references to his lack of personal hygiene are not uncommon. Like the Pointy-Haired Boss, Wally is utterly lacking in ethics and will take advantage of any situation to maximize his personal gain while doing the least possible amount of honest work. Squat and balding, Wally is almost invariably portrayed wearing a short sleeved dress shirt and tie. Adams has stated that Wally was based on a Pacific Bell coworker of his who was interested in a generous employee buy-out program—for the company's worst employees. This had the effect of causing this man—whom Adams describes as "one of the more brilliant people I've met"—to work hard at being incompetent, rude, and generally poor at his job to qualify for the buy-out program. Adams has said that this inspired the basic laziness and amorality of Wally's character. Despite these personality traits Wally is accepted as part of Dilbert, Ted, Alice, and Asok's clique. Although his relationship with Alice is often antagonistic and Dilbert occasionally denies being his friend, their actions show at least a certain acceptance of him.

Alice
One of the more competent engineers. She is often frustrated at her work, because she does not get proper recognition, which she believes is because she is female, though in reality it is likely because she has a quick, often violent temper, sometimes putting her "Fist of Death" to use, even with the Pointy-Haired Boss. Alice is based on a woman that Scott Adams worked with named Anita, who is described as sharing Alice's "pink suit, fluffy hair, technical proficiency, coffee obsession, and take-no-crap attitude."

Dogbert
Dilbert's anthropomorphic pet dog is the smartest dog on Earth. Dogbert is a megalomaniac intellectual dog, planning to one day conquer the world. He once succeeded, but became bored with the ensuing peace, and quit. Often seen in high-ranking consultant or technical support jobs, he constantly abuses his power and fools the management of Dilbert's company, though considering the intelligence of the company's management in general and Dilbert's boss in particular, this is not very hard to do. He also enjoys pulling scams on unsuspecting and usually dull customers to steal their money. However, despite Dogbert's cynical exterior, he has been known to pull his master out of some tight jams. Dogbert's nature as a pet was more emphasized during the earlier years of the strip; as the strip progressed, references to his acting like a dog became less common, although he still wags his tail when he perpetrates his scams. When an older Dilbert arrives while time-traveling from the future, he refers to Dogbert as "majesty", indicating that Dogbert will one day indeed rule the world...again, and make worshipping him retroactive so he could boss around time travelers.

Catbert
Catbert is a fictional cat, and the "evil director of human resources " in the Dilbert comic strip. He was supposed to be a one-time character but resonated with readers so well that Adams brought him back as the HR director.

Asok
A young intern, he works very hard but does not always get proper recognition. Asok is intensely intelligent but naive about corporate life; the shattering of his optimistic illusions becomes frequent comic fodder. He is Indian, and has graduated from the Indian Institutes of Technology (IIT). The other workers, especially the boss, often unwittingly trample on his cultural beliefs. On the occasions when Asok mentions this, he is normally ignored. His test scores (a perfect 1600 on the old SAT) and his IQ of 240 show that he is the smartest member of the engineering team. Nonetheless he is often called upon by the Boss to do odd jobs, and in meetings his ideas are usually left hanging. He is also seen regularly at the lunch table with Wally and Dilbert, experiencing jarring realizations of the nature of corporate life. There are a few jokes about his psychic powers, which he learned at the IIT. Yet despite his intelligence, ethics and mystical powers, Asok sometimes takes advice from Wally in the arts of laziness, and from Dilbert in surviving the office. As of February 7, 2014, Asok is officially gay, which never impacts any storylines but merely commemorates a decision by the Indian Supreme Court to uphold an anti-gay law. [7]

Ted
An engineer who is often seen hanging out with Wally. He is referenced by name more often in older comics, but he is still seen occasionally now. He is a friend of Dilbert and Wally, but is not seen interacting with Alice or Asok as much. He has been accepted into Dilbert's clique. He has been fired and killed numerous times (for example, being pushed down a flight of stairs and becoming possessed), so it is likely that he is rehired and brought back to life in a similar way to the other main characters who die and come back. In addition to this, he is often promoted and given benefits over the other employees. Ted has a wife and kids who are referenced multiple times and seen on at least one occasion. Adams refers to him as Ted the Generic Guy because whenever he needs to fire or kill someone he uses Ted, but slowly over time Ted has become his own character.

Legacy
The popularity of the comic strip within the corporate sector has led to the Dilbert character being used in many business magazines and publications, including several appearances on the cover of Fortune Magazine . Many newspapers run the comic in their business section rather than in the regular comics section (similar to the way that Doonesbury is often featured in the editorial section, due to its pointed commentary). [ citation needed ]

Criticism and parody
Media analyst Norman Solomon and cartoonist Tom Tomorrow claim [8] that Adams's caricatures of corporate culture seem to project empathy for white-collar workers, but the satire ultimately plays into the hands of upper corporate management itself. Solomon describes the characters of Dilbert as dysfunctional time-wasters, none of whom occupies a position higher than middle management, and whose inefficiencies detract from corporate values such as 'productivity' and 'growth'. Dilbert and his office-mates often find themselves baffled or victimized by the whims of managerial behavior, but they never seem to question it openly. Solomon cites the Xerox corporation's use of Dilbert strips and characters in internally distributed 'inspirational' pamphlets:
Adams responded in the February 2, 1998 [9] strip and in his book The Joy of Work , simply by restating Solomon's argument, apparently suggesting that it was absurd and required no rebuttal.
In 1997, Tom Vanderbilt wrote in a similar vein in The Baffler magazine:
In 1998, Bill Griffith , creator of Zippy the Pinhead , chided Dilbert for crude drawings and simplistic humor. He wrote, "Long since psychically kidnapped by the gaudy, mindlessly hyperactive world of TV, (readers) no longer demand or expect comic strips to be compelling, challenging, or even interesting. Enter ' Cathy '. And 'Dilbert.' Sure, comics are still funny. It’s just that the humor has almost no 'nutritional' value. In the tiny space allotted to them, daily strips have all too successfully adapted to their new environment. In this Darwinian set-up, what thrives are simply drawn panels , minimal dialogue, and a lot of head-and-shoulder shots. Anything more complicated is deemed 'too hard to read.' A full, rich drawing style is a drawback. Simplicity, even crudity, rules." [10] Adams lashed back with a comic strip called Pippy the Ziphead , "cramming as much artwork in as possible so no one will notice there's only one joke...[and] it's on the reader." [11] Dilbert notes that the strip is "nothing but a clown with a small head who says random things", and Dogbert responds that he is "maintaining his artistic integrity by creating a comic that no one will enjoy." [12] In September of the same year, Griffith mocked Adams by mimicking his Pippy the Ziphead creation with a strip showing stiff, Dilbert -like creations in an office setting and one of the characters saying, "I sense a joke was delivered". [13]
In the late 1990s, an amateur cartoonist named Karl Hörnell began submitting a comic strip to Savage Dragon creator Erik Larsen which parodied both Dilbert [14] and the Image Comics series The Savage Dragon . This soon became a regular feature in the Savage Dragon comic book, titled The Savage Dragonbert and Hitler's Brainbert ("Hitler's Brainbert" being a loose parody of both Dogbert and the Savage Dragon villain identified as Adolf Hitler 's disembodied, superpowered brain). The strip began as a specific parody of the comic book itself, set loosely within the office structure of Dilbert , with Hörnell doing an emulation of Adams's cartooning style. [14]

Language
Adams has invented words which have become popular among fans in describing their own office environments, such as " Induhvidual ". This term is based on the American English slang expression " duh !" The conscious misspelling of individual as induhvidual is a pejorative term for people who are not in Dogbert's New Ruling Class (DNRC). Its coining is explained in Dilbert Newsletter #6. The strip has also popularized the usage of the terms "cow-orker" and PHB . [ citation needed ]

Management
In 1997, Scott Adams masqueraded as a management consultant to Logitech executives (as Ray Mebert), with the cooperation of the company's vice-chairman. He acted in much the way that he portrays management consultants in the comic strip, with an arrogant manner and bizarre suggestions, such as comparing mission statements to broccoli soup. He convinced the executives to change their existing mission statement for their New Ventures Group from "provide Logitech with profitable growth and related new business areas" to "scout profitable growth opportunities in relationships, both internally and externally, in emerging, mission-inclusive markets, and explore new paradigms and then filter and communicate and evangelize the findings". [15] [16] [17]
To demonstrate what can be achieved with the most mundane objects if planned correctly and imaginatively, Adams has worked with companies to develop "dream" products for Dilbert and company. In 2001, he collaborated with design company IDEO to come up with the "perfect cubicle", a fitting creation since many of the Dilbert strips make fun of the standard cubicle desk and the environment which it creates. The result was both whimsical and practical. [18] [19]
This project was followed in 2004 with designs for Dilbert's Ultimate House (abbreviated as DUH). An energy-efficient building was the result, designed to prevent many of the little problems that seem to creep into a normal building. For instance, to save time spent buying and decorating a Christmas tree every year, the house has a large (yet unapparent) closet adjacent to the living room where the tree can be stored from year to year.

Webcomics
In 1995, Dilbert was the first syndicated comic strip to be published for free on the Internet . Putting his e-mail address in each Dilbert strip, Adams created a "direct channel to [his] customers," allowing him to modify the strip based on their feedback. [20] Joe Zabel stated that Dilbert had a large influence on many of the webcomics that followed it, establishing the " nerdcore " genre as it found its audience. [21]
In April 2008, Scott Adams announced that United Media would be instituting an interactive feature on Dilbert.com, allowing fans to write speech bubbles and, in the near future, interact with Adams about the content of the strips. Adams has spoken positively about the change, saying, "This makes cartooning a competitive sport." [22] [ needs update ]

Awards
In addition to the National Cartoonists Society Reuben Awards won by Adams, the Dilbert strip has received a variety of other awards. Adams was named best international comic strip artist of 1995 in the Adamson Awards given by the Swedish Academy of Comic Art.
Dilbert was named the best syndicated strip of 1997 in the Harvey Awards and won the Max & Moritz Prize as best international comic strip for 1998.

Media

Comic strip compilations

Chronological

Special

Business books

Other books

Merchandise

Animated series
Dilbert was adapted into a UPN animated television series starring Daniel Stern as Dilbert , Chris Elliott as Dogbert , and Kathy Griffin as Alice. The series ran for two seasons from January 25, 1999 to July 25, 2000. The first season centered around the creation of a new product called the "Gruntmaster 6000". It was critically acclaimed and won a Golden Globe award, leading to its renewal for a second season. The second season did away with the serial format and was composed entirely of standalone episodes, many of which shifted focus away from the workplace and involved absurdist plots such as Wally being mistaken for a religious leader (" The Shroud of Wally ") and Dilbert being accused of mass murder (" The Trial "). Critical and fan reception was resoundingly negative to the change in format and storytelling, and the series was not renewed for a third season. The second season two-episode finale included Dilbert getting pregnant with the child of a cow, a hillbilly , Robot DNA, "several dozen engineers", an elderly billionaire, and an alien , eventually ending up in a custody battle with Stone Cold Steve Austin as the Judge.

New animation
On April 7, 2008, dilbert.com presented its first Dilbert animation. The new Dilbert animations are animated versions of original comic strips produced by RingTales and animated by Powerhouse Animation Studios . The animation videos run for around 30 seconds each and are added every weekday. On December 10, 2009 the RingTales produced animations were made available as a calendar application for mobile devices. [23]

"Drunken lemurs" case
In October 2007, the Catfish Bend Casino in Burlington, Iowa notified its staff that the casino was closing and they were going to be laid off . David Steward, an employee of seven years, then posted on an office bulletin board the Dilbert strip [24] of October 26, 2007 that compared management decisions to those of "drunken lemurs". The casino called this "very offensive"; they identified him from a surveillance tape, fired him, and tried to prevent him from receiving unemployment insurance benefits. However, an administrative law judge ruled in December 2007 that he would receive benefits, as his action was not intentional misbehavior. Scott Adams said that it might be the first confirmed case of an employee being fired for posting a Dilbert cartoon. [25] On February 20, 2008, the first of a series of Dilbert strips showed Wally being caught posting a comic strip which "compares managers to drunken lemurs". [26] Adams later said that fans should stick to posting Garfield strips, as no one gets fired for that.

Guest artists
On February 29, 2016, Adams posted on his blog [27] that he would be taking a six-week vacation. During that time, strips would be written by him but drawn by guest artists who work for Universal Uclick . [28] Jake Tapper drew the strip on the week on May 23. [29]

See also
WebPage index: 00097
Chelsea Manning
Chelsea Elizabeth Manning [3] (born Bradley Edward Manning , December 17, 1987) is a United States Army soldier who was convicted by court-martial in July 2013, of violations of the Espionage Act and other offenses, after disclosing to WikiLeaks nearly three-quarters of a million classified, or unclassified but sensitive, military and diplomatic documents. [4] Manning was sentenced in August 2013 [5] and pursuant to a commutation by President Obama , was released on May 17, 2017. [6]
Manning is a trans woman who, in a statement the day after sentencing, said she had a female gender identity since childhood, wanted to be known as Chelsea, and desired to begin hormone replacement therapy . [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] From early life and throughout much of her Army career, Manning was known as Bradley. She was diagnosed with gender dysphoria in 2013. [12]
Assigned in 2009 to an Army unit in Iraq as an intelligence analyst , Manning had access to classified databases. In early 2010, she leaked classified information to WikiLeaks and confided this to Adrian Lamo , an online acquaintance. Lamo informed Army Counterintelligence and Manning was arrested in May that same year. The material included videos of the July 12, 2007 Baghdad airstrike , and the 2009 Granai airstrike in Afghanistan; 251,287 U.S. diplomatic cables ; [13] and 482,832 Army reports that came to be known as the " Iraq War Logs " [14] and " Afghan War Diary ". [15] Much of the material was published by WikiLeaks or its media partners between April and November 2010. [16] [17] [18] [19] [20]
Manning was ultimately charged with 22 offenses, including aiding the enemy , which was the most serious charge and could have resulted in a death sentence . [21] [22] [23] [24] She was held at the Marine Corps Brig, Quantico in Virginia, from July 2010 to April 2011, under Prevention of Injury status—which entailed de facto solitary confinement and other restrictions that caused domestic and international concern—before being transferred to Fort Leavenworth , Kansas, where she could interact with other detainees. [25] [26] [27] She pleaded guilty in February 2013 to 10 of the charges. [28] The trial on the remaining charges began on June 3, 2013, and on July 30, she was convicted of 17 of the original charges and amended versions of four others, but was acquitted of aiding the enemy. [1] [29] [30] [31] She was sentenced to serve a 35-year sentence at the maximum-security U.S. Disciplinary Barracks at Fort Leavenworth. [32] On January 17, 2017, President Barack Obama commuted Manning's sentence to nearly seven years of confinement dating from the date of arrest (May 27, 2010) by military authorities. [33]
Reaction to Manning's disclosures, arrest, and sentence was mixed. Denver Nicks , one of Manning's biographers, writes that the leaked material, particularly the diplomatic cables, was widely seen as a catalyst for the Arab Spring that began in December 2010 [34] and that Manning was viewed as both a 21st-century Tiananmen Square Tank Man and an embittered traitor . [35]

Background

Early life
Born Bradley Edward Manning in 1987, in Oklahoma City , Oklahoma, [36] she was the second child of Susan Fox, originally from Wales, and Brian Manning, an American. Brian had joined the United States Navy in 1974, at the age of 19, and served for five years as an intelligence analyst . Brian met Susan in a local Woolworths store while stationed in Wales at RAF Brawdy . [37] Manning's older sister, Casey Manning, was born in 1976. The couple returned to the United States in 1979, settling first in California. After their move near Crescent, Oklahoma , they bought a two-story house with an above-ground swimming pool and 5 acres (2 hectares) of land, where they kept pigs and chickens. [38] [39]
Manning's sister Casey told the court-martial that both their parents were alcoholics , and that their mother had drunk continually while pregnant with Chelsea. Captain David Moulton, a Navy psychiatrist, told the court that Manning's facial features showed signs of fetal alcohol syndrome . [40] Casey became Manning's principal caregiver, waking at night to make a bottle for the baby. The court heard that Manning was fed only milk and baby food until the age of two. As an adult she reached 5 ft 2 in (1.57 m) and weighed around 105 pounds (48 kg). [41] [42]
Manning's father took a job as an information technology (IT) manager for a rental car agency, which required travel. The family lived several miles out of town, and Manning's mother was unable to drive. She spent her days drinking, while Manning was left largely to fend for herself, playing with Legos or on the computer. Brian would stock up on food before his trips, and leave pre-signed checks that Casey mailed to pay the bills. A neighbor said that whenever Manning's elementary school went on field trips, she would give her own son extra food or money so he could make sure Manning had something to eat. Friends and neighbors considered the Mannings a troubled family. [43] [44] [45] [46] [47]

Parents' divorce, move to Wales
As a child, Manning was opinionated about the intersection of religion and politics. [48] For example, she remained silent during the part of the Pledge of Allegiance that refers to God. [49] [50]
In a 2011 interview Manning's father said, "People need to understand that he's a young man that had a happy life growing up." He also said that Manning excelled at the saxophone, science, and computers, and created a website at the age of 10. Manning learned how to use PowerPoint , won the grand prize three years in a row at the local science fair, and in sixth grade, took top prize at a statewide quiz bowl . [44] [45] [51]
A childhood friend of Manning's, speaking about a conversation they had when Manning was 13, said: "he told me he was gay." The friend also said that Manning's home life was not good and that her father was very controlling. Around this time, Manning's parents divorced. She and her mother Susan moved out of the house to a rented apartment in Crescent, Oklahoma. [52] [53] [54] [55] [56] Susan's instability continued, and in 1998 she attempted suicide; Manning's sister drove their mother to the hospital, with the 11-year-old Manning sitting in the back of the car trying to make sure their mother was still breathing. [57]
Manning's father remarried in 2000, the same year as his divorce. His new wife, also named Susan, had a son from a previous relationship. Manning apparently reacted badly when the son changed his surname to Manning, too; she started taking running jumps at the walls, telling her mother: "I'm nobody now." [44]
In November 2001, Manning and her mother left the United States and moved to Haverfordwest , Wales, where her mother had family. Manning attended the town's Tasker Milward secondary school. A school friend there told Ed Caesar for The Sunday Times that Manning's personality was "unique, extremely unique. Very quirky, very opinionated, very political, very clever, very articulate." [58] [59] Manning's interest in computers continued, and in 2003, she and a friend, James Kirkpatrick, set up an online message board , angeldyne.com, [60] that offered games and music downloads. [61] [62]
Manning became the target of bullying at the school because she was the only American and was viewed as effeminate . Manning had come out to two friends in Oklahoma as gay, but was not open about it at school in Wales. [63] [64] The students would imitate her accent, [63] and apparently abandoned her once during a camping trip; her aunt told The Washington Post that Manning awoke to an empty camp site one morning, after everyone else had packed up their tents and left without her. [44] [51]

Return to the United States
Fearing that her mother was becoming too ill to cope, in 2005 (at age 17) Manning returned to the United States. [65] [66] [67] She moved in with her father in Oklahoma City , where he was living with his second wife and her child. Manning got a job as a developer with a software company, Zoto, and was apparently happy for a time, but was let go after four months. Her boss told The Washington Post that on a few occasions Manning had "just locked up" and would simply sit and stare, and in the end communication became too difficult. The boss told the newspaper that "nobody's been taking care of this kid for a really long time." [68] [69]
By then, Manning was living as an openly gay man. Her relationship with her father was apparently good, but there were problems between Manning and her stepmother. In March 2006, Manning reportedly threatened her stepmother with a knife during an argument about Manning's failure to get another job; the stepmother called the police, and Manning was asked to leave the house. Manning drove to Tulsa in a pickup truck her father had given her, at first slept in it, then moved in with a friend from school. The two got jobs at Incredible Pizza in April. Manning moved on to Chicago before running out of money and again having nowhere to stay. Her mother arranged for Brian's sister, Debra, a lawyer in Potomac, Maryland , to take Manning in. Nicks wrote that the 15 months Manning spent with her aunt were among the most stable of her life. She had a boyfriend, took several low-paid jobs, and spent a semester studying history and English at Montgomery College , but left after failing an exam. [70] [71] [72] [73]

Military service

Enlistment in the Army
Manning's father spent weeks in late 2007 asking her to consider joining the Army. Hoping to gain a college education through the G.I. Bill , and perhaps to study for a PhD in physics, she enlisted in September that year. [74] [75] [76] She told her Army supervisor later that she had also hoped joining such a masculine environment would resolve her gender identity disorder . [77]
Manning began basic training at Fort Leonard Wood , Missouri, on October 2, 2007. She wrote that she soon realized she was neither physically nor mentally prepared for it. [78] Six weeks after enlisting, she was sent to the discharge unit. She was allegedly being bullied, and in the opinion of another soldier, was having a breakdown. The soldier told The Guardian : "The kid was barely five foot ... He was a runt, so pick on him. He's crazy, pick on him. He's a faggot, pick on him. The guy took it from every side. He couldn't please anyone." Nicks writes that Manning, who was used to being bullied, fought back—if the drill sergeants screamed at her, she would scream at them —to the point where they started calling her "General Manning". [79] [80] [81] [82]
The decision to discharge her was revoked, and she started basic training again in January 2008. After graduating in April, she moved to Fort Huachuca , Arizona, in order to attend Advanced Individual Training (AIT) for Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) 35F, intelligence analyst, receiving a TS/SCI security clearance ( Top Secret / Sensitive Compartmented Information ). According to Nicks, this security clearance, combined with the digitization of classified information and the government's policy of sharing it widely, gave Manning access to an unprecedented amount of material. Nicks writes that Manning was reprimanded while at Fort Huachuca for posting three video messages to friends on YouTube , in which she described the inside of the " Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility " (SCIF) where she worked. [83] [84] [85] [86] [87] Upon completion of her initial MOS course, Manning received the Army Service Ribbon and the National Defense Service Medal . [88]

Move to Fort Drum, deployment to Iraq
In August 2008, Manning was sent to Fort Drum in Jefferson County, New York , where she joined the 2nd Brigade Combat Team, 10th Mountain Division , and trained for deployment to Iraq. [89] In late 2008 while stationed there, she met Tyler Watkins, who was studying neuroscience and psychology at Brandeis University , near Boston. Watkins was her first serious relationship, and she posted happily on Facebook about it, regularly traveling 300 miles (480 km) to Boston on visits. [90]
Watkins introduced her to a network of friends and the university's hacker community . She also visited Boston University's " hackerspace " workshop, known as "Builds", and met its founder, David House, the MIT researcher who was later allowed to visit her in jail. In November 2008, she gave an anonymous interview to a high-school reporter during a rally in Syracuse in support of gay marriage:
Nicks writes that Manning would travel back to Washington, D.C., for visits. An ex-boyfriend helped her find her way around the city's gay community, introducing her to lobbyists, activists, and White House aides. Back at Fort Drum, she continued to display emotional problems and, by August 2009, had been referred to an Army mental-health counselor. [92] A friend told Nicks that Manning could be emotionally fraught, describing an evening they had watched two movies together— The Last King of Scotland and Dancer in the Dark —after which Manning cried for hours. By September 2009 her relationship with Watkins was in trouble; they reconciled for a short time, but it was effectively over. [93]
After four weeks at the Joint Readiness Training Center (JRTC) in Fort Polk , Louisiana, Manning was deployed to Forward Operating Base Hammer, near Baghdad, arriving in October 2009. From her workstation there, she had access to SIPRNet (the Secret Internet Protocol Router Network) and JWICS (the Joint Worldwide Intelligence Communications System). Two of her superiors had discussed not taking her to Iraq; it was felt she was a risk to herself and possibly others, according to a statement later issued by the Army—but the shortage of intelligence analysts dictated their decision to take her. [94] In November 2009, she was promoted from Private First Class to Specialist . [95]

Contact with gender counselor
In November 2009 Manning wrote to a gender counselor in the United States, said she felt female, and discussed having surgery. The counselor told Steve Fishman of New York magazine in 2011 that it was clear Manning was in crisis, partly because of her gender concerns, but also because she was opposed to the kind of war in which she found herself involved. [96]
She was by all accounts unhappy and isolated. Because of the military's " Don't ask, don't tell " policy (known as DADT and in effect until September 20, 2011), Manning was unable to live as an openly gay man without risk of being discharged. But she apparently made no secret of her orientation: her friends said she kept a fairy wand on her desk. When she told her roommate she was attracted to men, he responded by suggesting they not speak to each other. [97] Manning's working conditions included 14- to 15-hour night shifts in a tightly packed, dimly lit room. [98]
On December 20, 2009, during a counseling session with two colleagues to discuss her poor time-keeping, Manning was told she would lose her one day off a week for persistent lateness. She responded by overturning a table, damaging a computer that was sitting on it. A sergeant moved Manning away from the weapons rack, and other soldiers pinned her arms behind her back and dragged her out of the room. Several witnesses to the incident believed her access to sensitive material ought to have been withdrawn at that point. [99] The following month, January 2010, she began posting on Facebook that she felt hopeless and alone. [100]

State of mind over release of material
Manning told Amnesty International :

Release of material to WikiLeaks
Manning said her first contact with WikiLeaks took place in January 2010, when she began to interact with them on IRC and Jabber . She had first noticed them toward the end of November 2009, when they posted 570,000 pager messages from the September 11 attacks . [102] [103]
On January 5, 2010, Manning downloaded the 400,000 documents that became known as the Iraq War logs. [104] On January 8, she downloaded 91,000 documents from the Afghanistan database, known later as part of the Afghan War logs. She saved the material on CD-RW and smuggled it through security by labeling the CD-RW media " Lady Gaga ". [105] She then copied it onto her personal computer. [106] The next day, she wrote a message in a readme.txt file (see right) , which she told the court was initially intended for The Washington Post . [107]
Manning copied the files from her laptop to an SD card for her camera, so that she could take it with her to the United States while on R&R leave. [106] Army investigators later found the SD card in Manning's basement room in her aunt's home, in Potomac, Maryland . [108] On January 23, Manning flew to the United States via Germany, for two weeks of leave. It was during this visit that she first went out dressed as a woman , wearing a wig and makeup. [109] [110] [111] After her arrest, her former partner, Tyler Watkins, told Wired that Manning had said during the visit that she had found some sensitive information and was considering leaking it. [112]
Manning contacted The Washington Post and The New York Times to ask if they were interested in the material; the Post reporter did not sound interested, and the Times did not return the call. Manning decided instead to pass it to WikiLeaks, and on February 3 sent them the Iraq and Afghan War logs via Tor . She returned to Iraq on February 11, with no acknowledgement from WikiLeaks that they had received the files. [113]
On or around February 18, she passed WikiLeaks a diplomatic cable, dated January 13, 2010, from the U.S. Embassy in Reykjavík , Iceland . [114] They published it within hours, which suggested to Manning that they had received the other material, too. [115] She found the Baghdad helicopter attack ("Collateral murder") video in a Judge Advocate 's directory and passed it to WikiLeaks on or around February 21. [116] [117] In late March, she sent them a video of the May 2009 Granai airstrike in Afghanistan; this was the video later removed and apparently destroyed by Daniel Domscheit-Berg when he left the organization. [118] [119] [120] [121] Between March 28 and April 9, she downloaded the 250,000 diplomatic cables and on April 10, uploaded them to a WikiLeaks dropbox. [122]
Manning told the court that, during her interaction with WikiLeaks on IRC and Jabber, she developed a friendship with someone there, believed to be Julian Assange (although neither knew the other's name), which she said made her feel she could be herself. [123] Army investigators found 14 to 15 pages of encrypted chats, in unallocated space on her MacBook's hard drive , between Manning and someone believed to be Assange. [108] She wrote in a statement that the more she had tried to fit in at work, the more alienated she became from everyone around her. The relationship with WikiLeaks had given her a brief respite from the isolation and anxiety. [123]

Email to supervisor, recommended discharge
On April 24, 2010, Manning sent an email to her supervisor, Master Sergeant Paul Adkins—with the subject line "My Problem"—saying she was suffering from gender identity disorder . She attached a photograph of herself dressed as a woman and with the filename breanna.jpg . [124] She wrote:
Adkins discussed the situation with Manning's therapists, but did not pass the email to anybody above him in his chain of command ; he told Manning's court-martial that he was concerned the photograph would be disseminated among other staff. [125] Captain Steven Lim, Manning's company commander, said he first saw the email after Manning's arrest, when information about hormone replacement therapy was found in Manning's room on base; at that point Lim learned that Manning had been calling herself Breanna. [126]
Manning told former " grey hat " hacker Adrian Lamo that she had set up Twitter and YouTube accounts as Breanna to give her female identity a digital presence, writing to Lamo: "I wouldn't mind going to prison for the rest of my life [for leaking information], or being executed so much, if it wasn't for the possibility of having pictures of me... plastered all over the world press... as [a] boy... [...] the CPU is not made for this motherboard..." [127] On April 30 she posted on Facebook that she was utterly lost, and over the next few days wrote that she was "not a piece of equipment", and was "beyond frustrated" and "livid" after being "lectured by ex-boyfriend despite months of relationship ambiguity ..." [128]
On May 7, according to Army witnesses, Manning was found curled in a fetal position in a storage cupboard; she had a knife at her feet and had cut the words "I want" into a vinyl chair. A few hours later she had an altercation with a female intelligence analyst, Specialist Jihrleah Showman, during which she punched Showman in the face. The brigade psychiatrist recommended a discharge, referring to an "occupational problem and adjustment disorder". Manning's supervisor removed the bolt from her weapon, making it unable to fire, and she was sent to work in the supply office, although at this point her security clearance remained in place. As punishment for the altercation with Showman, she was demoted from Specialist (E-4) to Private First Class (E-3) three days before her arrest on May 27. [129]
Ellen Nakashima writes that, on May 9, Manning contacted Jonathan Odell, a gay American novelist in Minneapolis, via Facebook, leaving a message that she wanted to speak to him in confidence; she said she had been involved in some "very high-profile events, albeit as a nameless individual thus far". [72] On May 19, according to Army investigators, she emailed Eric Schmiedl, a mathematician she had met in Boston, and told him she had been the source of the Baghdad airstrike video. Two days later, she began the series of chats with Adrian Lamo that led to her arrest. [130]

Publication of leaked material

WikiLeaks
WikiLeaks was set up in late 2006 as a disclosure portal, initially using the Wikipedia model, where volunteers would write up restricted or legally threatened material submitted by whistleblowers. It was Julian Assange —an Australian Internet activist and journalist, and the de facto editor-in-chief of WikiLeaks—who had the idea of creating what Ben Laurie called an "open-source, democratic intelligence agency". The open-editing aspect was soon abandoned, but the site remained open for anonymous submissions. [131]
According to Daniel Domscheit-Berg , a former WikiLeaks spokesperson, part of the WikiLeaks security concept was that they did not know who their sources were. The New York Times wrote in December 2010 that the U.S. government was trying to discover whether Assange had been a passive recipient of material from Manning, or had encouraged or helped her to extract the files; if the latter, Assange could be charged with conspiracy. Manning told Lamo in May 2010 that she had developed a working relationship with Assange, communicating directly with him using an encrypted Internet conferencing service, but knew little about him. WikiLeaks did not identify Manning as their source. [132] [133] [134] Army investigators found pages of chats on Manning's computer between Manning and someone believed to be Julian Assange. [108] Nicks writes that, despite this, no decisive evidence was found of Assange's offering Manning any direction. [135]

Reykjavik13
On February 18, 2010, WikiLeaks posted the first of the material from Manning, the diplomatic cable from the U.S. Embassy in Reykjavík , a document now known as Reykjavik13. [114] [136] [137] On March 15, WikiLeaks posted a 32-page report written in 2008 by the U.S. Department of Defense about WikiLeaks itself, and on March 29 it posted U.S. State Department profiles of politicians in Iceland. [138] [139] [140]

Baghdad airstrike
WikiLeaks named the Baghdad airstrike video "Collateral Murder", and Assange released it on April 5, 2010, during a press conference at the National Press Club in Washington, D.C. [144] The video showed two American helicopters firing on a group of 10 men in the Amin District of Baghdad. Two were Reuters employees there to photograph an American Humvee under attack by the Mahdi Army. Pilots mistook their cameras for weapons. The helicopters also fired on a van, targeted earlier by one helicopter, that had stopped to help wounded members of the first group. Two children in the van were wounded, and their father was killed. Pilots also engaged a building where retreating insurgents were holed up. The Washington Post wrote that it was this video, viewed by millions, that put WikiLeaks on the map. According to Nicks, Manning emailed a superior officer after the video aired and tried to persuade her that it was the same version as the one stored on SIPRNet . Nicks writes that it seemed as though Manning wanted to be caught. [144] [145]

Afghan War logs, Iraq War logs
On July 25, 2010, WikiLeaks and three media partners— The New York Times , The Guardian , and Der Spiegel —began publishing the 91,731 documents that, in their entirety, became known as the Afghan War logs. (Around 77,000 of these had been published as of May 2012.) This was followed on October 22, 2010, by 391,832 classified military reports covering the period January 2004 to December 2009, which became known as the Iraq War logs. Nicks writes that the publication of the former was a watershed moment, the "beginning of the information age exploding upon itself". [146] [147]

Diplomatic cables
Manning was also responsible for the " Cablegate " leak of 251,287 State Department cables, written by 271 American embassies and consulates in 180 countries, dated December 1966 to February 2010. The cables were passed by Assange to his three media partners, plus El País and others, and published in stages from November 28, 2010, with the names of sources removed. WikiLeaks said it was the largest set of confidential documents ever to be released into the public domain. [13] [148] [149] WikiLeaks published the remaining cables, unredacted, on September 1, 2011, after David Leigh and Luke Harding of The Guardian inadvertently published the passphrase for a file that was still online; [150] [151] [152] Nicks writes that, consequently, one Ethiopian journalist had to leave his country, and the U.S. government said it had to relocate several sources. [153]

Guantanamo Bay files
Manning was also the source of the Guantanamo Bay files leak , obtained by WikiLeaks in 2010 and published by The New York Times on April 24, 2011. [154] [155]

Granai airstrike
Manning said she gave WikiLeaks a video, in late March 2010, of the Granai airstrike in Afghanistan . The airstrike occurred on May 4, 2009, in the village of Granai, Afghanistan, killing 86 to 147 Afghan civilians. The video was never published; Julian Assange said in March 2013 that Daniel Domscheit-Berg had taken it with him when he left WikiLeaks and had apparently destroyed it. [118]

Manning and Adrian Lamo

First contact
On May 20, 2010, Manning contacted Adrian Lamo , a former " grey hat " hacker convicted in 2004 of having accessed The New York Times computer network two years earlier without permission. Lamo had been profiled that day by Kevin Poulsen in Wired magazine; the story said Lamo had been involuntarily hospitalized and diagnosed with Asperger syndrome . [157] Poulsen, by then a reporter, was himself a former hacker who had used Lamo as a source several times since 2000. [156] Indeed it was Poulsen who, in 2002, had told The New York Times that Lamo had gained unauthorized access to its network; Poulsen then wrote the story up for SecurityFocus . Lamo would hack into a system, tell the organization, then offer to fix their security, often using Poulsen as a go-between. [158]
Lamo said Manning sent him several encrypted emails on May 20. He said he was unable to decrypt them but replied anyway and invited the emailer to chat on AOL IM. Lamo said he later turned the emails over to the FBI without having read them. [159]

Chats
In a series of chats between May 21 and 25, Manning—using the handle "bradass87"—told Lamo that she had leaked classified material. She introduced herself as an Army intelligence analyst, and within 17 minutes, without waiting for a reply, alluded to the leaks. [127]
Lamo replied several hours later. He said: "I'm a journalist and a minister. You can pick either, and treat this as a confession or an interview (never to be published) & enjoy a modicum of legal protection." They talked about restricted material in general, then Manning made her first explicit reference to the leaks: "This is what I do for friends." She linked to a section of the May 21, 2010, version of Wikipedia's article on WikiLeaks, which described the WikiLeaks release in March that year of a Department of Defense report on WikiLeaks itself. She added "the one below that is mine too"; the section below in the same article referred to the leak of the Baghdad airstrike ("Collateral Murder") video. [160] Manning said she felt isolated and fragile, and was reaching out to someone she hoped might understand. [127]
Manning said she had started to help WikiLeaks around Thanksgiving in November 2009—which fell on November 26 that year—after WikiLeaks had released the 9/11 pager messages; the messages were released on November 25. She told Lamo she had recognized that the messages came from an NSA database, and that seeing them had made her feel comfortable about stepping forward. Lamo asked what kind of material Manning was dealing with; Manning replied: "uhm ... crazy, almost criminal political backdealings ... the non-PR-versions of world events and crises ..." Although she said she dealt with Assange directly, Manning also said Assange had adopted a deliberate policy of knowing very little about her, telling Manning: "lie to me." [127]
Lamo again assured her that she was speaking in confidence. Manning wrote: "but im not a source for you ... im talking to you as someone who needs moral and emotional fucking support," and Lamo replied: "i told you, none of this is for print." [127]
Manning said the incident that had affected her the most was when 15 detainees had been arrested by the Iraqi Federal Police for printing anti-Iraqi literature. She was asked by the Army to find out who the "bad guys" were, and discovered that the detainees had followed what Manning said was a corruption trail within the Iraqi cabinet. She reported this to her commanding officer, but said "he didn't want to hear any of it"; she said the officer told her to help the Iraqi police find more detainees. Manning said it made her realize, "i was actively involved in something that i was completely against ..." [127]
She explained that "i cant separate myself from others ... i feel connected to everybody ... like they were distant family," and cited Carl Sagan , Richard Feynman and Elie Wiesel . She said she hoped the material would lead to "hopefully worldwide discussion, debates, and reforms. if not ... than [sic] we're doomed as a species." She said she had downloaded the material onto music CD-RWs, erased the music and replaced it with a compressed split file. Part of the reason no one noticed, she said, was that staff were working 14 hours a day, seven days a week, and "people stopped caring after 3 weeks." [127]

Lamo approaches authorities, chat logs published
Shortly after the first chat with Manning, Lamo discussed the information with Chet Uber of the volunteer group ProjectVIGILANT, which researches cybercrime , and with Timothy Webster, a friend who had worked in Army counterintelligence. [161] Both advised Lamo to go to the authorities. His friend reported the conversation to United States Army Counterintelligence , and Lamo was contacted by counterintelligence agents shortly thereafter. [162] He told them he believed Manning was endangering lives. [163] He was largely ostracized by the hacker community afterwards. Nicks argues, on the other hand, that it was thanks to Lamo that the government had months to ameliorate any harm caused by the release of the diplomatic cables. [164]
Lamo met with FBI and Army investigators on May 25 in California, and showed them the chat logs. On or around that date he also passed the story to Kevin Poulsen of Wired , and on May 27 gave him the chat logs and Manning's name under embargo . He met with the FBI again that day, at which point they told him Manning had been arrested in Iraq the day before. Poulsen and Kim Zetter broke the news of the arrest in Wired on June 6. [165] Wired published around 25 percent of the chat logs on June 6 and 10, and the full logs in July 2011. [166]

Legal proceedings

Arrest and charges
Manning was arrested by the U.S. Army Criminal Investigation Division (CID), [167] on May 27, 2010, and transferred four days later to Camp Arifjan in Kuwait. [168] She was charged with several offenses in July, replaced by 22 charges in March 2011, including violations of Articles 92 and 134 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), and of the Espionage Act . The most serious charge was "aiding the enemy", a capital offense, although prosecutors said they would not seek the death penalty. [169] Another charge, which Manning's defense called a "made up offense" [170] but of which she was found guilty, read that Manning "wantonly [caused] to be published on the internet intelligence belonging to the US government, having knowledge that intelligence published on the internet is accessible to the enemy". [171]

Detention
While in Kuwait, Manning was placed on suicide watch after her behavior caused concern. [172] She was moved from Kuwait to the Marine Corps Base Quantico , Virginia, on July 29, 2010, and classified as a maximum custody detainee with Prevention of Injury (POI) status. POI status is one stop short of suicide watch, entailing checks by guards every five minutes. Her lawyer, David Coombs , a former military attorney, said Manning was not allowed to sleep between 5 am (7 am on weekends) and 8 pm, and was made to stand or sit up if she tried to. She was required to remain visible at all times, including at night, which entailed no access to sheets, no pillow except one built into her mattress, and a blanket designed not to be shredded. [173] Manning complained that she regarded it as pretrial punishment. [174]
Her cell was 6 × 12 ft (1.8 x 3.6 m) with no window, containing a bed, toilet and sink. The jail had 30 cells built in a U shape, and although detainees could talk to one another, they were unable to see each other. Her lawyer said the guards behaved professionally, and had not tried to harass or embarrass Manning. She was allowed to walk for up to one hour a day, meals were taken in the cell, and she was shackled during visits. There was access to television when it was placed in the corridor, and she was allowed to keep one magazine and one book. [173] Because she was in pretrial detention, she received full pay. [175]
On January 18, 2011, after Manning had an altercation with the guards, the commander of Quantico classified her as a suicide risk. [176] Manning said the guards had begun issuing conflicting commands, such as "turn left, don't turn left," and upbraiding her for responding to commands with "yes" instead of " aye ". Shortly afterwards, she was placed on suicide watch, had her clothing and eyeglasses removed, and was required to remain in her cell 24 hours a day. The suicide watch was lifted on January 21 after a complaint from her lawyer, and the brig commander who ordered it was replaced. [177] On March 2, she was told that her request for removal of POI status—which entailed among other things sleeping wearing only boxer shorts—had been denied. Her lawyer said Manning joked to the guards that, if she wanted to harm herself, she could do so with her underwear or her flip-flops. The comment resulted in Manning being ordered to strip naked in her cell that night and sleep without clothing. On the following morning only, Manning stood naked for inspection. Following her lawyer's protest and media attention, Manning was issued a sleeping garment on or before March 11. [178]
The detention conditions prompted national and international concern. Juan E. Mendez , United Nations Special Rapporteur on torture, told The Guardian that the U.S. government's treatment of Manning was "cruel, inhuman and degrading". [179] In January 2011 Amnesty International asked the British government to intervene because of Manning's status as a British citizen by descent, although Manning's lawyer said Manning did not regard herself as a British citizen. [180] The controversy claimed a casualty in March that year when State Department spokesman Philip J. Crowley criticized Manning's treatment and resigned two days later. [181] In early April, 295 academics (most of them American legal scholars) signed a letter arguing that the treatment was a violation of the U.S. Constitution. [182] On April 20 the Pentagon transferred Manning to the Midwest Joint Regional Correctional Facility , a new medium-security facility at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, where she was placed in an 80-square-foot cell with a window and a normal mattress, able to mix with other pretrial detainees and keep personal objects in her cell. [183]

Evidence presented at Article 32 hearing
In April 2011, a panel of experts, having completed a medical and mental evaluation of Manning, ruled that she was fit to stand trial. [184] An Article 32 hearing , presided over by Lieutenant Colonel Paul Almanza, was convened on December 16, 2011, at Fort Meade , Maryland; the hearing resulted in Almanza's recommending that Manning be referred to a general court-martial. She was arraigned on February 23, 2012, and declined to enter a plea. [185]
During the Article 32 hearing, the prosecution, led by Captain Ashden Fein, presented 300,000 pages of documents in evidence, including chat logs and classified material. [186] The court heard from two Army investigators, Special Agent David Shaver, head of the digital forensics and research branch of the Army's Computer Crime Investigative Unit (CCIU); and Mark Johnson, a digital forensics contractor from ManTech International , who works for the CCIU. They testified that they had found 100,000 State Department cables on a workplace computer Manning had used between November 2009 and May 2010; 400,000 military reports from Iraq and 91,000 from Afghanistan on an SD card found in her basement room in her aunt's home in Potomac, Maryland; and 10,000 cables on her personal MacBook Pro and storage devices that they said had not been passed to WikiLeaks because a file was corrupted. They also recovered 14 to 15 pages of encrypted chats, in unallocated space on Manning's MacBook hard drive, between Manning and someone believed to be Julian Assange. Two of the chat handles, which used the Berlin Chaos Computer Club 's domain (ccc.de), were associated with the names Julian Assange and Nathaniel Frank. [108]
Johnson said he found SSH logs on the MacBook that showed an SFTP connection , from an IP address that resolved to Manning's aunt's home, to a Swedish IP address with links to WikiLeaks. [108] Also found was a text file named "Readme", attached to the logs and apparently written by Manning to Assange, which called the Iraq and Afghan War logs "possibly one of the most significant documents of our time, removing the fog of war and revealing the true nature of 21st century asymmetric warfare". [104] The investigators testified they had also recovered an exchange from May 2010 between Manning and Eric Schmiedl, a Boston mathematician, in which Manning said she was the source of the Baghdad helicopter attack ("Collateral Murder") video. Johnson said there had been two attempts to delete material from the MacBook. The operating system had been re-installed in January 2010, and on or around January 31, 2010, an attempt had been made to erase the hard drive by doing a " zero-fill ", which involves overwriting material with zeroes. The material was recovered after the overwrite attempts from unallocated space. [108]
Manning's lawyers argued that the government had overstated the harm the release of the documents had caused, and had overcharged Manning to force her to give evidence against Assange. The defense also raised questions about whether Manning's confusion over her gender identity affected her behavior and decision making. [187]

Guilty plea, trial, sentence
The judge, Army Colonel Denise Lind, ruled in January 2013 that any sentence would be reduced by 112 days because of the treatment Manning received at Quantico. [188] On February 28, Manning pleaded guilty to 10 of the 22 charges. [28] Reading for over an hour from a 35-page statement, she said she had leaked the cables "to show the true cost of war". Prosecutors pursued a court-martial on the remaining charges. [189]
The trial began on June 3, 2013. Manning was convicted on July 30, on 17 of the 22 charges in their entirety, including five counts of espionage and theft, and an amended version of four other charges; she was acquitted of aiding the enemy. The sentencing phase began the next day. [1]
Captain Michael Worsley, a military psychologist who had treated Manning before her arrest, testified that Manning had been left isolated in the Army, trying to deal with gender-identity issues in a "hyper-masculine environment". [190] David Moulton, a Navy forensic psychiatrist who saw Manning after the arrest, said Manning had narcissistic traits, and showed signs of both fetal alcohol syndrome and Asperger syndrome . He said that, in leaking the material, Manning had been "acting out [a] grandiose ideation". [191]
A defense psychiatrist, testifying to Manning's motives, suggested a different agenda:
On August 14, Manning apologized to the court: "I am sorry that my actions hurt people. I'm sorry that they hurt the United States. I am sorry for the unintended consequences of my actions. When I made these decisions I believed I was going to help people, not hurt people. ... At the time of my decisions I was dealing with a lot of issues." [190]
Manning's offenses carried a maximum sentence of 90 years. [193] The government asked for 60 years as a deterrent to others, while Manning's lawyer asked for no more than 25 years. She was sentenced on August 21 to 35 years in prison, reduction in rank to private (private E-1 or PVT) , forfeiture of all pay and allowances, and a dishonorable discharge . [2] She was given credit for 1,293 days of pretrial confinement, including 112 days for her treatment at Quantico, and would have been eligible for parole after serving one-third of the sentence. [2] She was confined at the United States Disciplinary Barracks (USDB) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. [32]
The sentence was criticized as "unjust and unfair" [194] by The Guardian , and as "excessive" [195] by The New York Times .
On April 14, 2014, Manning's request for clemency was denied; the case went to the United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals for further review. [196]

Requests for release
On September 3, 2013, Manning's lawyer applied for a presidential pardon for his client. Coombs filed a Petition for Pardon/Commutation of Sentence to President Obama through the pardon attorney at the Department of Justice and Secretary of the Army John M. McHugh . [197] In the petition, which was filed with the legal name "Bradley Manning" and used male-gender pronouns, Coombs contended that Manning's disclosures did not cause any "real damage", and that the documents in question did not merit protection as they were not sensitive. The request for a pardon included a supporting letter from Amnesty International which said that Manning's leaks had exposed violations of human rights. Coombs's letter touched on Manning's role as a whistleblower , asking that Manning be granted a full pardon or that her sentence be reduced to time served. [198]
In April 2015, Amnesty International posted online a letter from Manning in which she wrote, "I am now preparing for my court-martial appeal before the first appeals court. The appeal team, with my attorneys Nancy Hollander and Vince Ward, are hoping to file our brief before the court in the next six months. We have already had success in getting the court to respect my gender identity by using feminine pronouns in the court filings (she, her, etc.)." [199]
In November 2016, Manning made a formal petition to President Obama to reduce her 35-year sentence to the six years of time she had already served. [200] On December 10, 2016, a White House petition to commute her sentence reached the minimum 100,000 signatures required for an official response. [201] Lawyers familiar with clemency applications stated in December 2016 that the pardon was unlikely to happen; the request did not fit into the usual criteria. [202]

Commutation
In January 2017, a Justice Department source said that Manning was on President Obama's short list for a possible commutation. [203] On January 17, 2017, President Obama commuted all but four months of Manning's remaining sentence. [33] [204] In a press conference held on January 18, Obama stated that Manning's original 35-year prison sentence was "very disproportionate relative to what other leakers have received" and that "it makes sense to commute—and not pardon—her sentence." [204] [205]
On January 26, 2017, in her first column for The Guardian since the commutation, Manning lamented that President Obama's political opponents consistently refused to compromise, resulting in "very few permanent accomplishments" during his time in office. [206] In response, President Donald Trump condemned Manning as an "ungrateful traitor" and said that she should "never have been released." [207]

Release
Manning was released from Fort Leavenworth's detention center at approximately 2 a.m. Central Time on May 17, 2017. [208] [209] Following her release, Manning spoke with ABC News. [208] Although Manning was sentenced to be dishonorably discharged upon release during her court-martial, she has been returned to active unpaid " excess leave " status while her appeals are pending, a status which entitles her to military medical care. [210]

Reaction to disclosures
The publication of the leaked material, particularly the diplomatic cables, attracted in-depth coverage worldwide, with several governments blocking websites that contained embarrassing details. Alan Rusbridger , editor of The Guardian , said: "I can't think of a time when there was ever a story generated by a news organisation where the White House, the Kremlin, Chávez, India, China, everyone in the world was talking about these things. ... I've never known a story that created such mayhem that wasn't an event like a war or a terrorist attack." [211]
United States Navy Admiral Michael Mullen , then Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , said the leaks had placed the lives of American soldiers and Afghan informants in danger. [212] Journalist Glenn Greenwald argued that Manning was the most important whistleblower since Daniel Ellsberg leaked the Pentagon Papers in 1971. [213] In an impromptu questioning session after a fundraiser, captured on a cell phone video, President Barack Obama said that Manning "broke the law", which was later criticized as " unlawful command influence " on Manning's upcoming trial. [214] [215]
Manning and WikiLeaks were credited as catalysts for the Arab Spring that began in December 2010, when waves of protesters rose up against rulers across the Middle East and North Africa, after the leaked cables exposed government corruption. [216] [217] [218] [219] [220] [221] [222] [223] In Tunisia, where the uprisings began on December 17, 2010, one of the leaked cables—published around 10 days earlier—showed that the President's daughter and her husband had their ice cream flown in from Saint-Tropez. [224] [225] [226]
A Washington Post editorial asked why an apparently unstable Army private had been able to access and transfer sensitive material in the first place. [227] According to a biographer, Manning's sexuality came into play by illustrating for the far right that gay people were unfit for military service, while the American mainstream thought of Manning as a gay soldier driven mad by bullying. [228]

Non-military tributes
In 2011, Manning was awarded a "Whistleblowerpreis" by the German Section of the International Association of Lawyers against Nuclear Arms and the Federation of German Scientists . [229] In 2012, she was awarded "People's Choice Award" awarded by Global Exchange . [230] In 2013, she was awarded the Sean MacBride Peace Prize by the International Peace Bureau . [231] In 2014, she was awarded the Sam Adams Award by Sam Adams Associates for Integrity in Intelligence. [232]
Icelandic and Swedish Pirate Party MPs nominated Manning and fellow whistleblower Edward Snowden for the 2014 Nobel Peace Prize . In a statement to the Nomination Committee, the Pirate Party members said Manning and Snowden "have inspired change and encouraged public debate and policy changes that contributed to a more stable and peaceful world". [233] In 2013, Roots Action launched a petition nominating Manning for the prize that received more than 100,000 supporting signatures. [234]
In May 2015, Anything to say? , an art installation made of mobile bronze statues of Manning, Edward Snowden, and Julian Assange, was placed at Berlin's Alexanderplatz for a weekend, as a "monument for courage". [235] Germany's Green Party sponsored the sculpture created by Italian sculptor David Dormino. [236] Afterwards, the installation was moved and exhibited in different European cities. [237]

Gender transition

2010
In an article written by Manning, she says her first public appearance as female was in February 2010 while on leave from her military duties; Manning was exhilarated to blend in as a woman. [239]

2013
On August 22, 2013, the day after sentencing, Manning's attorney issued a press release to the Today show announcing that his client was a female, and asked that she be referred to by her new name of Chelsea and feminine pronouns. Manning's statement included the following:
The news media split in its reaction to Manning's request; some organizations used the new name and pronouns, and others continued to use the former ones. [241] [242] Advocacy groups such as GLAAD , the National Lesbian and Gay Journalists Association , and the Human Rights Campaign (HRC) encouraged media outlets to refer to Manning by her self-identified name and pronoun. [243] [244] [245]

2014
In April 2014, the Kansas District Court considered a petition from Manning for a legal name change. The petition was granted that month. [246] An Army spokesman stated that while the Army would update personnel records to acknowledge the name change, the military would continue to regard Manning as a male. [3] Manning sought hormone therapy and the right to live as a woman while confined, consistent with her gender dysphoria , which had been confirmed by two Army medical specialists. Such treatment is provided in civilian federal prisons when it is found to be medically necessary, but it is not available in military prisons. The Pentagon policy at the time considered transgender individuals ineligible to serve. [247] [248]
In July, the Federal Bureau of Prisons rejected a request by the Army to transfer Manning from the USDB to a civilian facility for treatment of her gender dysphoria. Instead, the Army kept Manning in military custody and begin rudimentary gender treatment, which could include allowing her to wear female undergarments and possibly receive hormone treatments. No decision was announced regarding whether or not Manning will be transferred from the all-male USDB to a female facility. [249]
On August 12, 2014, the ACLU and Manning's civilian attorney David Coombs said Manning was not receiving treatment for her gender identity condition as previously approved by Secretary of Defense Hagel . They notified the USDB, Hagel and other Defense Department officials that a lawsuit would be filed if they did not confirm by September 4 that treatment would be provided. [250] On August 22, Army spokeswoman Lt. Col. Alayne Conway told NBC News, "The Department of Defense has approved a request by Army leadership to provide required medical treatment for an inmate diagnosed with gender dysphoria." Although Conway would not discuss "the medical needs of an individual", she did say, "In general terms, the initial stages of treatment for individuals with gender dysphoria include psychotherapy and elements of the 'real life experience' therapy. Treatment for the condition is highly individualized and generally is sequential and graduated." The Army declined to say when treatment might begin. [251]
In September, Manning filed a lawsuit in federal district court in Washington, D.C., against Secretary of Defense Hagel, claiming she had "been denied access to medically necessary treatment" for gender disorder. She sued to be allowed to grow her hair longer and use cosmetics, and to receive hormone treatments "to express her female gender". [252]

2015
On February 12, 2015, USA Today reported that the commandant of the USDB wrote in a February 5 memo, "After carefully considering the recommendation that (hormone treatment) is medically appropriate and necessary, and weighing all associated safety and security risks presented, I approve adding (hormone treatment) to Inmate Manning's treatment plan." According to USA Today , Manning remained a soldier, and the decision to administer hormone therapy was a first for the Army. [253] Manning was not allowed to grow her hair longer. Her ACLU attorney said that the delay in approving her hormone treatment "came with a significant cost to Chelsea and her mental health". [254]
On March 5, in response to Manning's request for an order compelling the military to use pronouns that conform to her chosen gender identity, the U.S. Army Court of Criminal Appeals ruled, "Reference to appellant in all future formal papers filed before this court and all future orders and decisions issued by this court shall either be neutral, e.g., Private First Class Manning or appellant, or employ a feminine pronoun." [255]
On March 14, the digital library host Cryptome posted an unsigned public copy of a court document, filed March 10, wherein the parties to Manning's September 2014 lawsuit against Secretary of Defense Hagel agreed to stay proceedings for seven months, after which time they would address how the litigation should proceed in light of Manning's status at that time. The document revealed that the Army was then providing Manning with weekly psychotherapy, including psychotherapy specific to gender dysphoria; cross-sex hormone therapy; female undergarments; the ability to wear prescribed cosmetics in her daily life at the USDB; and speech therapy. [256]
In April 2015, Amnesty International posted online a letter from Manning in which she disclosed,

2016
On September 13, 2016, the ACLU announced that the army will be granting Manning's request for gender transition surgery , a first for a transgender inmate. [257]
In December 2016, Manning's attorneys reported that her military doctor, Dr. Ellen Galloway, refused Manning's request to change the gender on her military records to female. [258]

Prison life
In March 2015, Bloomberg News reported that Manning could be visited by only those she had named before her imprisonment, and not by journalists. She could not be photographed or give interviews on camera. Manning was not allowed to browse the web, but could consult print news and have access to new gender theory texts. [259]
In April 2015, Amnesty International posted online a letter from Manning in which she described her daily life. "My days here are busy and very routine," she wrote. "I am taking college correspondence courses for a bachelor's degree. I also work out a lot to stay fit, and read newspapers, magazines and books to keep up-to-date on current events around the world and learn new things." [199]
Also that month, Cosmopolitan published the first interview with Manning in prison, conducted by mail. Cosmo reported that Manning was optimistic about recent progress but said that not being allowed to grow her hair long was "painful and awkward … I am torn up. I get through each day okay, but at night, when I'm alone in my room, I finally burn out and crash." Manning said it was "very much a relief" to announce that she is a woman and did not fear the public response. "Honestly, I'm not terribly worried about what people out there might think of me. I just try to be myself." According to Cosmo , Manning had her own cell with "two tall vertical windows that face the sun", and could see "trees and hills and blue sky and all the things beyond the buildings and razor wire". Manning denied being harassed by other inmates and claimed some had become confidantes. [260]

Writing
In February 2015, Katharine Viner , editor-in-chief of Guardian US , announced that Manning had joined The Guardian as a contributing opinion writer on war, gender, and freedom of information. [261] Viner added that Manning would not be paid in this capacity. [262] In 2014, The Guardian had published two op-eds by Manning: "How to make Isis fall on its own sword" (September 16) [263] and, "I am a transgender woman and the government is denying my civil rights" (December 8). [264] Manning's debut under the new arrangement, "The CIA's torturers and the leaders who approved their actions must face the law," appeared on March 9, 2015. [265]
In April 2015, Manning began communicating via Twitter , under the handle @xychelsea , by using a voice phone to dictate to intermediaries, who then tweet on her behalf. [266]

Suicide attempts
On July 5, 2016, Manning was taken to a hospital after what media sources characterized as a suicide attempt . [267] The following week, Manning confirmed through an attorney statement that she had attempted to end her own life. [268] [269] On July 28, 2016, the ACLU announced that Manning was under investigation and facing several possible charges related to her suicide attempt. [270] She was not allowed to have legal representation at the disciplinary hearing for these charges. [271] At the hearing, held on September 22, she was sentenced to 14 days in solitary confinement, with seven of those days suspended indefinitely. [272] Manning emerged from solitary confinement on October 12, after serving seven days; she said that she was not given the opportunity to appeal the ruling before being placed in solitary. [273]
In an article following her recovery, entitled "Moving On", Chelsea reflected on her change in identity, wishing people to see her no longer as "Chelsea Manning, formerly Bradley Manning, a US Army Soldier... convicted..." but as a person. She used a selfie from 2008 to accompany the article. [274]
In November 2016, Manning disclosed that she made a second suicide attempt on October 4, 2016, on the first night of her solitary confinement. [275]

Hunger strike
On September 9, 2016, Manning began a hunger strike to protest what she described as her being bullied by prison authorities and the U.S. government. [276] On September 13, the ACLU announced that Manning had ended the five-day hunger strike after the Army agreed to provide gender transition surgery. [257]

See also

Material associated with Manning

Citations
WebPage index: 00098
Wikinews
Wikinews is a free-content news source wiki and a project of the Wikimedia Foundation . The site works through collaborative journalism . Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales has distinguished Wikinews from Wikipedia by saying "on Wikinews, each story is to be written as a news story as opposed to an encyclopedia article." [2] The neutral point of view policy espoused in Wikinews distinguishes it from other citizen journalism efforts such as Indymedia and OhmyNews . [3] In contrast to most projects of the Wikimedia Foundation, Wikinews allows original work under the form of original reporting and interviews. [4]

Early years
The first [5] recorded proposal of a Wikimedia news site was a two-line anonymous post on January 5, 2003, on Wikipedia community's Meta-Wiki . [6] Daniel Alston, who edited Wikipedia as Fonzy, [7] claimed to have been the one who posted it. [5] [8] The proposal was then further developed by German freelance journalist, software developer and author Erik Möller . [5] Early opposition from long-time Wikipedia contributors, many of them pointing out the existence of Wikipedia's own news summaries, gave way to detailed discussions and proposals about how it could be implemented as a new project of the Wikimedia Foundation .
In November 2004, a demonstration wiki was established to show how such a collaborative news site might work. A month later, in December 2004, the site was moved out of the "demo" stage and into the beta stage. A German language edition was launched at the same time. Soon editions in Italian , Dutch , French , Spanish , Swedish , Bulgarian , Polish , Portuguese , Romanian , Ukrainian , Serbian , Japanese , Russian , Hebrew , Arabic , Thai , Norwegian , Chinese , Turkish , Korean , Hungarian , Greek , Esperanto , Czech , Albanian , and Tamil (in that chronological order) were set up.
On March 13, 2005, the English edition of Wikinews reached 1,000 news articles. A few months later in September 2005, the project moved to the Creative Commons Attribution 2.5 license. [9] It reached 5,000 articles on April 29, 2006, and 10,000 on September 5, 2007.

Interviews
Wikinews reporters have conducted interviews with several notable people, including an interview in December 2007 with Israeli President Shimon Peres by Wikinews reporter David Shankbone . Shankbone had been invited to conduct the interview by the America-Israel Friendship League and the Israeli foreign ministry. [10] [11]
Other notable interviews have included writers, actors and politicians, such as Augusten Burroughs , [12] several 2008 U.S. Republican Party nomination hopefuls as well as various U.S. independent and third party presidential candidates, Tony Benn , Eric Bogosian , Nick Smith , John Key , and World Wide Web co-inventor Robert Cailliau . [10]

Criticism
Wikinews— like Wikipedia —has been criticized for its perceived inability to be neutral or include only verified and true information. Robert McHenry , former editor-in-chief of the Encyclopædia Britannica , criticized the credibility of the project:
McHenry was skeptical about Wikinews' ability to provide a neutral point of view and its claim to be evenhanded: "The naïveté is stunning." [13]
In a 2007 interview Sue Gardner , at that time a special adviser to the board of the Wikimedia Foundation and former head of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation 's Internet division, CBC.ca, dismissed McHenry's comment, stating:
Wikinews has also had issues with maintaining a separate identity from Wikipedia, which also covers major news events in real-time. Columnist Jonathan Dee of The New York Times pointed out in 2007 that "So indistinct has the line between past and present become that Wikipedia has inadvertently all but strangled one of its sister projects, the three-year-old Wikinews... [Wikinews] has sunk into a kind of torpor; lately it generates just 8 to 10 articles a day... On bigger stories there's just no point in competing with the ruthless purview of the encyclopedia." [15] Andrew Lih and Zachary M. Seward commented on the continuing issue in a 2010 piece in the Nieman Journalism Lab , "Why Wikipedia beats Wikinews as a collaborative journalism project." Lih wrote "it's not clear that the wiki process really gears itself towards deadlines and group narrative writing" and that "if you're trying to write something approaching a feature piece, it's much harder to get more than two or three people to stay consistent with the style." [16] Lih considers Wikipedia's stricter "formula" for article composition an advantage in a large wiki with many editors. [16]

Additional projects
Wikinews members have at times expanded the site beyond text articles. Examples include Audio Wikinews , Wikinews Video 2.0 (test phase) and Wikinews Print edition , and Wikimedia Radio .
Wikinews has worked for undergraduate journalism practice effort with University of Wollongong , with research published on neutrality of the project output, distinguishing it from other journalism practice opportunities. [17] [18]
WebPage index: 00099
Web 2.0
Web 2.0 (pronounced web two point oh) describes World Wide Web websites that emphasize user-generated content , usability (ease of use, even by non-experts), and interoperability (this means that a website can work well with other products, systems and devices) for end users . The term was popularized by Tim O'Reilly and Dale Dougherty at the O'Reilly Media Web 2.0 Conference in late 2004, though it was coined by Darcy DiNucci in 1999. [1] [2] [3] [4] Web 2.0 does not refer to an update to any technical specification, but to changes in the way Web pages are designed and used.
A Web 2.0 website may allow users to interact and collaborate with each other in a social media dialogue as creators of user-generated content in a virtual community , in contrast to the first generation of Web 1.0 -era websites where people were limited to the passive viewing of content . Examples of Web 2.0 include social networking sites and social media sites (e.g., Facebook ), blogs , wikis , folksonomies ("tagging" keywords on websites and links), video sharing sites (e.g., YouTube ), hosted services , Web applications ("apps"), collaborative consumption platforms, and mashup applications .
Whether Web 2.0 is substantively different from prior Web technologies has been challenged by World Wide Web inventor Tim Berners-Lee , who describes the term as jargon . [5] His original vision of the Web was "a collaborative medium, a place where we [could] all meet and read and write". [6] [7] On the other hand, the term Semantic Web (sometimes referred to as Web 3.0) [8] was coined by Berners-Lee to refer to a web of content where the meaning can be processed by machines. [9]

History

"Web 1.0"
Web 1.0 is a retronym referring to the first stage of the World Wide Web 's evolution. According to Cormode, G. and Krishnamurthy, B. (2008): "content creators were few in Web 1.0 with the vast majority of users simply acting as consumers of content." [10] Personal web pages were common, consisting mainly of static pages hosted on ISP -run web servers , or on free web hosting services such as GeoCities . [11] [12] With the advent of Web 2.0, it was more common for the average web user to have social networking profiles on sites such as Myspace and Facebook, as well as personal blogs on one of the new low-cost web hosting services or a dedicated blog host like Blogger or LiveJournal . The content for both were generated dynamically from stored content, allowing for readers to comment directly on pages in a way that was not previously common. [ citation needed ]
Some Web 2.0 capabilities were present in the days of Web 1.0 but they were implemented differently. For example, a Web 1.0 site may have had a guestbook page to publish visitor comments, instead of a comment section at the end of each page. Server performance and bandwidth considerations had to be taken into account, and a long comments thread on each page could potentially slow down the site. Terry Flew , in his 3rd edition of New Media described the differences between Web 1.0 and Web 2.0:
Flew believed it to be the above factors that form the basic change in trends that resulted in the onset of the Web 2.0 "craze". [13]

Characteristics
Some design elements of a Web 1.0 site include: [14]

Web 2.0
The term "Web 2.0" was first used in January 1999 by Darcy DiNucci, an information architecture consultant. In her article, "Fragmented Future", DiNucci writes: [4]
Writing when Palm Inc. was introducing its first Web-capable personal digital assistant , supporting Web access with WAP , DiNucci saw the Web "fragmenting" into a future that extended beyond the browser/PC combination it was identified with. She focused on how the basic information structure and hyperlinking mechanism introduced by HTTP would be used by a variety of devices and platforms. As such, her use of the "2.0" designation refers to a next version of the Web that does not directly relate to the term's current use. [ citation needed ]
The term Web 2.0 did not resurface until 2002. [17] [18] [19] These authors focus on the concepts currently associated with the term where, as Scott Dietzen puts it, "the Web becomes a universal, standards-based integration platform". [19] In 2004, the term began its rise in popularity when O'Reilly Media and MediaLive hosted the first Web 2.0 conference. In their opening remarks, John Battelle and Tim O'Reilly outlined their definition of the "Web as Platform", where software applications are built upon the Web as opposed to upon the desktop. The unique aspect of this migration, they argued, is that "customers are building your business for you". [20] They argued that the activities of users generating content (in the form of ideas, text, videos, or pictures) could be "harnessed" to create value. O'Reilly and Battelle contrasted Web 2.0 with what they called "Web 1.0". They associated this term with the business models of Netscape and the Encyclopædia Britannica Online . For example,
In short, Netscape focused on creating software, releasing updates and bug fixes, and distributing it to the end users. O'Reilly contrasted this with Google , a company that did not at the time focus on producing end-user software, but instead on providing a service based on data such as the links Web page authors make between sites. Google exploits this user-generated content to offer Web search based on reputation through its " PageRank " algorithm. Unlike software, which undergoes scheduled releases, such services are constantly updated, a process called "the perpetual beta ". A similar difference can be seen between the Encyclopædia Britannica Online and Wikipedia : while the Britannica relies upon experts to write articles and releases them periodically in publications, Wikipedia relies on trust in (sometimes anonymous) community members to constantly write and edit content. Wikipedia editors are not required to have educational credentials, such as degrees, in the subjects in which they are editing. Wikipedia is not based on subject-matter expertise, but rather on an adaptation of the open source software adage "given enough eyeballs, all bugs are shallow" . This maxim is stating that if enough users are able to look at a software product's code (or a website), then these users will be able to fix any " bugs " or other problems. Wikipedia's volunteer editor community produces, edits and updates articles constantly. O'Reilly's Web 2.0 conferences have been held every year since 2004, attracting entrepreneurs , representatives from large companies, tech experts and technology reporters.
The popularity of Web 2.0 was acknowledged by 2006 TIME magazine Person of The Year ( You ). [22] That is, TIME selected the masses of users who were participating in content creation on social networks , blogs, wikis, and media sharing sites. In the cover story, Lev Grossman explains:

Characteristics
Instead of merely reading a Web 2.0 site, a user is invited to contribute to the site's content by commenting on published articles or creating a user account or profile on the site, which may enable increased participation. By increasing emphasis on these already-extant capabilities, they encourage the user to rely more on their browser for user interface , application software ("apps") and file storage facilities. This has been called "network as platform" computing. [2] Major features of Web 2.0 include social networking websites, self-publishing platforms (e.g., WordPress ' easy-to-use blog and website creation tools), "tagging" (which enables users to label websites, videos or photos in some fashion), "like" buttons (which enable a user to indicate that they are pleased by online content), and social bookmarking . Users can provide the data that is on a Web 2.0 site and exercise some control over that data. [2] [23] These sites may have an "architecture of participation" that encourages users to add value to the application as they use it. [1] [2] Users can add value in many ways, such as by commenting on a news story on a news website, by uploading a relevant photo on a travel website, or by adding a link to a video or TED talk which is pertinent to the subject being discussed on a website. Some scholars argue that cloud computing is an example of Web 2.0 because cloud computing is simply an implication of computing on the Internet. [24]
Web 2.0 offers almost all users the same freedom to contribute. [25] While this opens the possibility for serious debate and collaboration, it also increases the incidence of "spamming" , "trolling" , and can even create a venue for racist hate speech , cyberbullying and defamation . The impossibility of excluding group members who do not contribute to the provision of goods (i.e., to the creation of a user-generated website) from sharing the benefits (of using the website) gives rise to the possibility that serious members will prefer to withhold their contribution of effort and "free ride" on the contributions of others. [26] This requires what is sometimes called radical trust by the management of the Web site. According to Best, [27] the characteristics of Web 2.0 are: rich user experience, user participation, dynamic content , metadata , Web standards , and scalability . Further characteristics, such as openness, freedom [28] and collective intelligence [29] by way of user participation, can also be viewed as essential attributes of Web 2.0. Some websites require users to contribute user-generated content to have access to the website, to discourage "free riding".
The key features of Web 2.0 [30] include:

Comparison with Web 1.0
In 2005, Tim O'Reilly and Dale Dougherty held a brainstorming session to elucidate characteristics and components of the Web 1.0 to Web 2.0 transition and what changed: [31]

Technologies
The client-side ( Web browser ) technologies used in Web 2.0 development include Ajax and JavaScript frameworks . Ajax programming uses JavaScript and the Document Object Model to update selected regions of the page area without undergoing a full page reload. To allow users to continue to interact with the page, communications such as data requests going to the server are separated from data coming back to the page ( asynchronously ). Otherwise, the user would have to routinely wait for the data to come back before they can do anything else on that page, just as a user has to wait for a page to complete the reload. This also increases overall performance of the site, as the sending of requests can complete quicker independent of blocking and queueing required to send data back to the client. The data fetched by an Ajax request is typically formatted in XML or JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) format, two widely used structured data formats. Since both of these formats are natively understood by JavaScript, a programmer can easily use them to transmit structured data in their Web application. When this data is received via Ajax, the JavaScript program then uses the Document Object Model (DOM) to dynamically update the Web page based on the new data, allowing for a rapid and interactive user experience. In short, using these techniques, Web designers can make their pages function like desktop applications. For example, Google Docs uses this technique to create a Web-based word processor.
As a widely available plugin independent of W3C standards (the World Wide Web Consortium is the governing body of Web standards and protocols), Adobe Flash is capable of doing many things that were not possible pre- HTML5 . Of Flash's many capabilities, the most commonly used is its ability to integrate streaming multimedia into HTML pages. With the introduction of HTML5 in 2010 and growing concerns with Flash's security, the role of Flash is decreasing. In addition to Flash and Ajax, JavaScript/Ajax frameworks have recently become a very popular means of creating Web 2.0 sites. At their core, these frameworks use the same technology as JavaScript, Ajax, and the DOM. However, frameworks smooth over inconsistencies between Web browsers and extend the functionality available to developers. Many of them also come with customizable, prefabricated ' widgets ' that accomplish such common tasks as picking a date from a calendar, displaying a data chart, or making a tabbed panel. On the server-side , Web 2.0 uses many of the same technologies as Web 1.0. Languages such as Perl , PHP , Python , Ruby , as well as Enterprise Java (J2EE) and Microsoft.NET Framework , are used by developers to output data dynamically using information from files and databases. This allows websites and web services to share machine readable formats such as XML ( Atom , RSS , etc.) and JSON . When data is available in one of these formats, another website can use it to integrate a portion of that site's functionality .

Concepts
Web 2.0 can be described in three parts:
As such, Web 2.0 draws together the capabilities of client - and server -side software, content syndication and the use of network protocols . Standards-oriented Web browsers may use plug-ins and software extensions to handle the content and the user interactions. Web 2.0 sites provide users with information storage , creation, and dissemination capabilities that were not possible in the environment now known as "Web 1.0".
Web 2.0 sites include the following features and techniques, referred to as the acronym SLATES by Andrew McAfee: [32]
While SLATES forms the basic framework of Enterprise 2.0, it does not contradict all of the higher level Web 2.0 design patterns and business models. It includes discussions of self-service IT, the long tail of enterprise IT demand, and many other consequences of the Web 2.0 era in enterprise uses. [33]

Usage
A third important part of Web 2.0 is the social web . The social Web consists of a number of online tools and platforms where people share their perspectives, opinions, thoughts and experiences. Web 2.0 applications tend to interact much more with the end user. As such, the end user is not only a user of the application but also a participant by:
The popularity of the term Web 2.0, along with the increasing use of blogs, wikis, and social networking technologies, has led many in academia and business to append a flurry of 2.0's to existing concepts and fields of study, [34] including Library 2.0 , Social Work 2.0, [35] Enterprise 2.0 , PR 2.0, [36] Classroom 2.0, [37] Publishing 2.0, [38] Medicine 2.0, [39] Telco 2.0, Travel 2.0 , Government 2.0 , [40] and even Porn 2.0 . [41] Many of these 2.0s refer to Web 2.0 technologies as the source of the new version in their respective disciplines and areas. For example, in the Talis white paper "Library 2.0: The Challenge of Disruptive Innovation", Paul Miller argues
Here, Miller links Web 2.0 technologies and the culture of participation that they engender to the field of library science, supporting his claim that there is now a "Library 2.0". Many of the other proponents of new 2.0s mentioned here use similar methods. The meaning of Web 2.0 is role dependent. For example, some use Web 2.0 to establish and maintain relationships through social networks, while some marketing managers might use this promising technology to "end-run traditionally unresponsive I.T. department[s]." [43] There is a debate over the use of Web 2.0 technologies in mainstream education. Issues under consideration include the understanding of students' different learning modes; the conflicts between ideas entrenched in informal on-line communities and educational establishments' views on the production and authentication of 'formal' knowledge; and questions about privacy, plagiarism, shared authorship and the ownership of knowledge and information produced and/or published on line. [44]

Marketing
Web 2.0 is used by companies, non-profit organizations and governments for interactive marketing . A growing number of marketers are using Web 2.0 tools to collaborate with consumers on product development, customer service enhancement, product or service improvement and promotion. Companies can use Web 2.0 tools to improve collaboration with both its business partners and consumers. Among other things, company employees have created wikis—Web sites that allow users to add, delete, and edit content — to list answers to frequently asked questions about each product, and consumers have added significant contributions. Another marketing Web 2.0 lure is to make sure consumers can use the online community to network among themselves on topics of their own choosing. [45] Mainstream media usage of Web 2.0 is increasing. Saturating media hubs—like The New York Times , PC Magazine and Business Week — with links to popular new Web sites and services, is critical to achieving the threshold for mass adoption of those services. [46] User web content can be used to gauge consumer satisfaction. In a recent article for Bank Technology News , Shane Kite describes how Citigroup's Global Transaction Services unit monitors social media outlets to address customer issues and improve products. [47] According to Google Timeline, the term Web 2.0 was discussed and indexed most frequently in 2005, 2007 and 2008. Its average use is continuously declining by 2–4% per quarter since April 2008. [ citation needed ]

Destination Marketing
In tourism industries, social media is an effective channel to attract travellers and promote the tourism product and services by engaging with customers. The brand of tourist destinations can be built through the marketing campaigns on social media by engaging with customers. For example, the “Snow at First Sight” campaign launched by the State of Colorado aimed at a brand awareness of Colorado as a winter destination. The campaign used social media platforms, for examples, Facebook and Twitter, to promote this competition, and requested the participates to share experiences, pictures and videos on social medias. As a result, Colorado enhanced the image of winter destination and a campaign worth was about $2.9 million [48] .
The tourism organisation can earn a brand royalty from interactive marketing campaigns on social media with engaging passive communication tactics. For example, “Moms” advisors of the Walt Disney World are responsibilities for offer suggestions and reply answers about the family trips at the Walt Disney World. Due to its characteristic of experts in Disney, the “Moms” was chosen to represent the campaign [49] . The social networking such as Facebook can be used as a platform for providing a detailed information about the marketing campaign, as well as real-time online communication with customers. Korean Airline Tour created and maintained a relationship with customers by using Facebook for individual communication purposes [50] .
Travel 2.0 refers a model of Web 2.0 on tourism industries which provided virtual travel communities. Travel 2.0 model allow user to create their own contents and exchange their words through globally interactive features on websites [51] [52] . The users also can contribute their experiences, images and suggestions regarding their trips on online travel communities. For example, TripAdvisor is an online travel community which is enable user to rate and share autonomously their reviews and feedbacks on hotels and tourist destinations. Non pre-associate users can interact socially and discuss through discussion forums on Tripadvior [53] . Social media, especially Travel 2.0 website, plays a crucial role in decision-making behaviours of travellers. The user-generated contents on social media tools have a significant impact on travellers’ choices and organisation preferences. The travel 2.0 emerged a radical change in receiving information methods of travellers from business-to-customer marketing into peer-to-peer reviews. The user-generated contents become a vital tool for helping a number of travellers manage their international travels for the first time visiting [54] . The travellers tend to trust and rely on peer-to-peer reviews and virtual communications on social media rather than the information provided by travel supplier [53] [49] . In addition, An autonomous review feature on social media would help traveller reduce risks and uncertainties before purchasing stages [51] [54] . Social media is also a channel for customer complaints and negative feedbacks which can damage images of organisations and destinations [54] . For example, a major of UK travellers read customer reviews before booking hotels and the bookings of hotels receiving negative feedbacks would be refrained by half of customers [54] . Therefore, the organisations should develop strategic plans to handle and manage the negative feedbacks on social media. Although the user-generated content and rating system on social media are out of business controls, the businesses can monitor those conversations and participate in communities to enhance a customer loyalty and maintain customer relationships [49] .

Education
Web 2.0 could allow for more collaborative education. For example, blogs give students a public space to interact with one another and the content of the class. [55] Some studies suggest that Web 2.0 can increase the public's understanding of science, which could improve governments' policy decisions. A 2012 study by researchers at the University of Wisconsin-Madison notes that "...the internet could be a crucial tool in increasing the general public’s level of science literacy. This increase could then lead to better communication between researchers and the public, more substantive discussion, and more informed policy decision." [56]

Web-based applications and desktops
Ajax has prompted the development of Web sites that mimic desktop applications, such as word processing , the spreadsheet , and slide-show presentation . WYSIWYG wiki and blogging sites replicate many features of PC authoring applications. Several browser-based services have emerged, including EyeOS [57] and YouOS .(No longer active.) [58] Although named operating systems , many of these services are application platforms. They mimic the user experience of desktop operating-systems, offering features and applications similar to a PC environment, and are able to run within any modern browser. However, these so-called "operating systems" do not directly control the hardware on the client's computer. Numerous web-based application services appeared during the dot-com bubble of 1997–2001 and then vanished, having failed to gain a critical mass of customers.

Distribution of media

XML and RSS
Many regard syndication of site content as a Web 2.0 feature. Syndication uses standardized protocols to permit end-users to make use of a site's data in another context (such as another Web site, a browser plugin , or a separate desktop application). Protocols permitting syndication include RSS (really simple syndication, also known as Web syndication), RDF (as in RSS 1.1), and Atom , all of which are XML -based formats. Observers have started to refer to these technologies as Web feeds . Specialized protocols such as FOAF and XFN (both for social networking) extend the functionality of sites and permit end-users to interact without centralized Web sites.

Web APIs
Web 2.0 often uses machine-based interactions such as REST and SOAP . Servers often expose proprietary Application programming interfaces (API), but standard APIs (for example, for posting to a blog or notifying a blog update) have also come into use. Most communications through APIs involve XML or JSON payloads. REST APIs, through their use of self-descriptive messages and hypermedia as the engine of application state , should be self-describing once an entry URI is known. Web Services Description Language (WSDL) is the standard way of publishing a SOAP Application programming interface and there are a range of Web service specifications .

Criticism
Critics of the term claim that "Web 2.0" does not represent a new version of the World Wide Web at all, but merely continues to use so-called "Web 1.0" technologies and concepts. [5] First, techniques such as Ajax do not replace underlying protocols like HTTP , but add an additional layer of abstraction on top of them. Second, many of the ideas of Web 2.0 were already featured in implementations on networked systems well before the term "Web 2.0" emerged. Amazon.com , for instance, has allowed users to write reviews and consumer guides since its launch in 1995, in a form of self-publishing. Amazon also opened its API to outside developers in 2002. [59] Previous developments also came from research in computer-supported collaborative learning and computer supported cooperative work (CSCW) and from established products like Lotus Notes and Lotus Domino , all phenomena that preceded Web 2.0. Tim Berners-Lee , who developed the initial technologies of the Web, has been an outspoken critic of the term, while supporting many of the elements associated with it. [60] In the environment where the Web originated , each workstation had a dedicated IP address and always-on connection to the Internet. Sharing a file or publishing a web page was as simple as moving the file into a shared folder. [61]
Perhaps the most common criticism is that the term is unclear or simply a buzzword . For many people who work in software, version numbers like 2.0 and 3.0 are for software versioning or hardware versioning only, and to assign 2.0 arbitrarily to many technologies with a variety of real version numbers has no meaning. The web does not have a version number. For example, in a 2006 interview with IBM developerWorks podcast editor Scott Laningham, Tim Berners-Lee described the term "Web 2.0" as a jargon: [5]
Other critics labeled Web 2.0 "a second bubble" (referring to the Dot-com bubble of 1997–2000), suggesting that too many Web 2.0 companies attempt to develop the same product with a lack of business models . For example, The Economist has dubbed the mid- to late-2000s focus on Web companies as "Bubble 2.0". [62]
In terms of Web 2.0's social impact, critics such as Andrew Keen argue that Web 2.0 has created a cult of digital narcissism and amateurism, which undermines the notion of expertise by allowing anybody, anywhere to share and place undue value upon their own opinions about any subject and post any kind of content, regardless of their actual talent, knowledge, credentials, biases or possible hidden agendas. Keen's 2007 book, Cult of the Amateur , argues that the core assumption of Web 2.0, that all opinions and user-generated content are equally valuable and relevant, is misguided. Additionally, Sunday Times reviewer John Flintoff has characterized Web 2.0 as "creating an endless digital forest of mediocrity: uninformed political commentary, unseemly home videos, embarrassingly amateurish music, unreadable poems, essays and novels... [and that Wikipedia is full of] mistakes, half truths and misunderstandings". [63] In a 1994 Wired interview, Steve Jobs , forecasting the future development of the web for personal publishing, said "The Web is great because that person can't foist anything on you - you have to go get it. They can make themselves available, but if nobody wants to look at their site, that's fine. To be honest, most people who have something to say get published now." [64] Michael Gorman, former president of the American Library Association has been vocal about his opposition to Web 2.0 due to the lack of expertise that it outwardly claims, though he believes that there is hope for the future. [65]
There is also a growing body of critique of Web 2.0 from the perspective of political economy . Since, as Tim O'Reilly and John Batelle put it, Web 2.0 is based on the "customers... building your business for you," [20] critics have argued that sites such as Google, Facebook, YouTube, and Twitter are exploiting the "free labor" [66] of user-created content. [67] Web 2.0 sites use Terms of Service agreements to claim perpetual licenses to user-generated content, and they use that content to create profiles of users to sell to marketers. [68] This is part of increased surveillance of user activity happening within Web 2.0 sites. [69] Jonathan Zittrain of Harvard's Berkman Center for the Internet and Society argues that such data can be used by governments who want to monitor dissident citizens. [70] The rise of AJAX -driven web sites where much of the content must be rendered on the client has meant that users of older hardware are given worse performance versus a site purely composed of HTML, where the processing takes place on the server. [71] Accessibility for disabled or impaired users may also suffer in a Web 2.0 site. [72]

Trademark
In November 2004, CMP Media applied to the USPTO for a service mark on the use of the term "WEB 2.0" for live events. [73] On the basis of this application, CMP Media sent a cease-and-desist demand to the Irish non-profit organization IT@Cork on May 24, 2006, [74] but retracted it two days later. [75] The "WEB 2.0" service mark registration passed final PTO Examining Attorney review on May 10, 2006, and was registered on June 27, 2006. [73] The European Union application (which would confer unambiguous status in Ireland) [76] was declined on May 23, 2007.

See also
WebPage index: 00100
Scientific journal
In academic publishing , a scientific journal is a periodical publication intended to further the progress of science , usually by reporting new research . There are thousands of scientific journals in publication, and many more have been published at various points in the past (see list of scientific journals ). Most journals are highly specialized, although some of the oldest journals such as Nature publish articles and scientific papers across a wide range of scientific fields. Scientific journals contain articles that have been peer reviewed , in an attempt to ensure that articles meet the journal's standards of quality, and scientific validity . If the journal's editor considers the paper appropriate, at least two researchers preferably from the same field check the paper for soundness of its scientific argument, and must agree to publish it. Although scientific journals are superficially similar to professional magazines , they are actually quite different. Issues of a scientific journal are rarely read casually, as one would read a magazine. The publication of the results of research is an essential part of the scientific method . If they are describing experiments or calculations, they must supply enough details that an independent researcher could repeat the experiment or calculation to verify the results. Each such journal article becomes part of the permanent scientific record.
The history of scientific journals dates from 1665, when the French Journal des sçavans and the English Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society first began systematically publishing research results. Over a thousand, mostly ephemeral , were founded in the 18th century, and the number has increased rapidly after that. [1]
Articles in scientific journals can be used in research and higher education. Scientific articles allow researchers to keep up to date with the developments of their field and direct their own research. An essential part of a scientific article is citation of earlier work. The impact of articles and journals is often assessed by counting citations ( citation impact ). Some classes are partially devoted to the explication of classic articles, and seminar classes can consist of the presentation by each student of a classic or current paper. Schoolbooks and textbooks have been written usually only on established topics, while the latest research and more obscure topics are only accessible through scientific articles. In a scientific research group or academic department it is usual for the content of current scientific journals to be discussed in journal clubs . Academic credentials for promotion into academic ranks are established in large part by the number and impact of scientific articles published, and many doctoral programs allow for thesis by publication , where the candidate is required to publish a certain number of scientific articles.
The standards that a journal uses to determine publication can vary widely. Some journals, such as Nature , Science , PNAS , and Physical Review Letters , have a reputation of publishing articles that mark a fundamental breakthrough in their respective fields. [ citation needed ] In many fields, a formal or informal hierarchy of scientific journals exists; the most prestigious journal in a field tends to be the most selective in terms of the articles it will select for publication, and usually will also have the highest impact factor . In some countries, journal rankings can be utilized for funding decisions [2] and even evaluation of individual researchers, although they are poorly suited for that purpose. [3]
It is also common for journals to have a regional focus, specializing in publishing papers from a particular country or other geographic region, like African Invertebrates .
Articles tend to be highly technical, representing the latest theoretical research and experimental results in the field of science covered by the journal. They are often incomprehensible to anyone except for researchers in the field and advanced students. In some subjects this is inevitable given the nature of the content. Usually, rigorous rules of scientific writing are enforced by the editors; however, these rules may vary from journal to journal, especially between journals from different publishers. Articles are usually either original articles reporting completely new results or reviews of current literature. There are also scientific publications that bridge the gap between articles and books by publishing thematic volumes of chapters from different authors.

Types of articles
There are several types of journal articles; the exact terminology and definitions vary by field and specific journal, but often include:
The formats of journal articles vary, but many follow the general IMRAD scheme recommended by the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors . Such articles begin with an abstract , which is a one-to-four-paragraph summary of the paper. The introduction describes the background for the research including a discussion of similar research. The materials and methods or experimental section provides specific details of how the research was conducted. The results and discussion section describes the outcome and implications of the research, and the conclusion section places the research in context and describes avenues for further exploration.
In addition to the above, some scientific journals such as Science will include a news section where scientific developments (often involving political issues) are described. These articles are often written by science journalists and not by scientists. In addition, some journals will include an editorial section and a section for letters to the editor. While these are articles published within a journal, in general they are not regarded as scientific journal articles because they have not been peer-reviewed.

Electronic publishing
Electronic publishing is a new area of information dissemination . One definition of electronic publishing is in the context of the scientific journal. It is the presentation of scholarly scientific results in only an electronic (non-paper) form. This is from its first write-up, or creation, to its publication or dissemination. The electronic scientific journal is specifically designed to be presented on the internet. It is defined as not being previously printed material adapted, or re-tooled, and then delivered electronically. [6] [7]
Electronic publishing will exist alongside paper publishing, because printed paper publishing is not expected to disappear in the future. Output to a screen is important for browsing and searching but is not well adapted for extensive reading. Paper copies of selected information will definitely be required [ citation needed ] . Therefore, the article has to be transmitted electronically to the reader's local printer. Formats suitable both for reading on paper, and for manipulation by the reader's computer will need to be integrated. [6] [7] Many journals are electronically available in formats readable on screen via web browsers , as well as in portable document format PDF , suitable for printing and storing on a local desktop or laptop computer. New tools such as JATS and Utopia Documents provide a 'bridge' to the 'web-versions' in that they connect the content in PDF versions directly to the WorldWideWeb via hyperlinks that are created 'on-the-fly'. The PDF version of an article is usually seen as the version of record, but the matter is subject to some debate. [8]
Electronic counterparts of established print journals already promote and deliver rapid dissemination of peer reviewed and edited, "published" articles. Other journals, whether spin-offs of established print journals, or created as electronic only, have come into existence promoting the rapid dissemination capability, and availability, on the Internet. In tandem with this is the speeding up of peer review, copyediting, page makeup, and other steps in the process to support rapid dissemination. [9]
Other improvements, benefits and unique values of electronically publishing the scientific journal are easy availability of supplementary materials (data, graphics and video), lower cost, and availability to more people, especially scientists from non-developed countries. Hence, research results from more developed nations are becoming more accessible to scientists from non-developed countries. [6]
Moreover, electronic publishing of scientific journals has been accomplished without compromising the standards of the refereed, peer review process. [6] [7]
One form is the online equivalent of the conventional paper journal. By 2006, almost all scientific journals have, while retaining their peer-review process, established electronic versions; a number have moved entirely to electronic publication. In similar manner, most academic libraries buy the electronic version, and purchase a paper copy only for the most important or most-used titles.
There is usually a delay of several months after an article is written before it is published in a journal, making paper journals not an ideal format for announcing the latest research. Many journals now publish the final papers in their electronic version as soon as they are ready, without waiting for the assembly of a complete issue, as is necessary with paper. In many fields in which even greater speed is wanted, such as physics , the role of the journal at disseminating the latest research has largely been replaced by preprint databases such as arXiv.org . Almost all such articles are eventually published in traditional journals, which still provide an important role in quality control , archiving papers, and establishing scientific credit.

Cost
Many scientists and librarians have long protested the cost of journals, especially as they see these payments going to large for-profit publishing houses [ citation needed ] . To allow their researchers online access to journals, many universities purchase site licenses , permitting access from anywhere in the university, and, with appropriate authorization, by university-affiliated users at home or elsewhere. These may be quite expensive, sometimes much more than the cost for a print subscription, although this may reflect the number of people who will be using the license - while a print subscription is the cost for one person to receive the journal; a site-license can allow thousands of people to gain access. [ citation needed ]
Publications by scholarly societies , also known as not-for-profit-publishers, usually cost less than commercial publishers, but the prices of their scientific journals are still usually several thousand dollars a year. In general, this money is used to fund the activities of the scientific societies that run such journals, or is invested in providing further scholarly resources for scientists; thus, the money remains in and benefits the scientific sphere.
Despite the transition to electronic publishing, the serials crisis persists. [10]
Concerns about cost and open access have led to the creation of free-access journals such as the Public Library of Science (PLoS) family and partly open or reduced-cost journals such as the Journal of High Energy Physics . However, professional editors still have to be paid, and PLoS still relies heavily on donations from foundations to cover the majority of its operating costs; smaller journals do not often have access to such resources.
Based on statistical arguments, it has been shown that electronic publishing online, and to some extent open access , both provide wider dissemination and increase the average number of citations an article receives. [11]

Copyright
Traditionally, the author of an article was required to transfer the copyright to the journal publisher. Publishers claimed this was necessary in order to protect authors' rights, and to coordinate permissions for reprints or other use. However, many authors, especially those active in the open access movement, found this unsatisfactory, [12] and have used their influence to effect a gradual move towards a license to publish instead. Under such a system, the publisher has permission to edit, print, and distribute the article commercially, but the authors retain the other rights themselves.
Even if they retain the copyright to an article, most journals allow certain rights to their authors. These rights usually include the ability to reuse parts of the paper in the author's future work, and allow the author to distribute a limited number of copies. In the print format, such copies are called reprints; in the electronic format, they are called postprints . Some publishers, for example the American Physical Society , also grant the author the right to post and update the article on the author's or employer's website and on free e-print servers, to grant permission to others to use or reuse figures, and even to reprint the article as long as no fee is charged. [13] The rise of open access journals, in which the author retains the copyright but must pay a publication charge, such as the Public Library of Science family of journals, is another recent response to copyright concerns.

See also
WebPage index: 00101
Information retrieval
Information retrieval ( IR ) is the activity of obtaining information resources relevant to an information need from a collection of information resources. Searches can be based on full-text or other content-based indexing. Information retrieval is the science of searching for information in a document, searching for documents themselves, and also searching for metadata that describe data, and for databases of texts, images or sounds.
Automated information retrieval systems are used to reduce what has been called " information overload ". Many universities and public libraries use IR systems to provide access to books, journals and other documents. Web search engines are the most visible IR applications .

Overview
An information retrieval process begins when a user enters a query into the system. Queries are formal statements of information needs, for example search strings in web search engines. In information retrieval a query does not uniquely identify a single object in the collection. Instead, several objects may match the query, perhaps with different degrees of relevancy .
An object is an entity that is represented by information in a content collection or database . User queries are matched against the database information. However, as opposed to classical SQL queries of a database, in information retrieval the results returned may or may not match the query, so results are typically ranked. This ranking of results is a key difference of information retrieval searching compared to database searching. [1]
Depending on the application the data objects may be, for example, text documents, images, [2] audio, [3] mind maps [4] or videos. Often the documents themselves are not kept or stored directly in the IR system, but are instead represented in the system by document surrogates or metadata .
Most IR systems compute a numeric score on how well each object in the database matches the query, and rank the objects according to this value. The top ranking objects are then shown to the user. The process may then be iterated if the user wishes to refine the query. [5]

History
The idea of using computers to search for relevant pieces of information was popularized in the article As We May Think by Vannevar Bush in 1945. [6] It would appear that Bush was inspired by patents for a 'statistical machine' - filed by Emanuel Goldberg in the 1920s and '30s - that searched for documents stored on film. [7] The first description of a computer searching for information was described by Holmstrom in 1948, [8] detailing an early mention of the Univac computer. Automated information retrieval systems were introduced in the 1950s: one even featured in the 1957 romantic comedy, Desk Set . In the 1960s, the first large information retrieval research group was formed by Gerard Salton at Cornell. By the 1970s several different retrieval techniques had been shown to perform well on small text corpora such as the Cranfield collection (several thousand documents). [6] Large-scale retrieval systems, such as the Lockheed Dialog system, came into use early in the 1970s.
In 1992, the US Department of Defense along with the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), cosponsored the Text Retrieval Conference (TREC) as part of the TIPSTER text program. The aim of this was to look into the information retrieval community by supplying the infrastructure that was needed for evaluation of text retrieval methodologies on a very large text collection. This catalyzed research on methods that scale to huge corpora. The introduction of web search engines has boosted the need for very large scale retrieval systems even further.

Model types
For effectively retrieving relevant documents by IR strategies, the documents are typically transformed into a suitable representation. Each retrieval strategy incorporates a specific model for its document representation purposes. The picture on the right illustrates the relationship of some common models. In the picture, the models are categorized according to two dimensions: the mathematical basis and the properties of the model.

First dimension: mathematical basis

Second dimension: properties of the model

Performance and correctness measures
The evaluation of an information retrieval system is the process of assessing how well a system meets the information needs of its users. Traditional evaluation metrics, designed for Boolean retrieval or top-k retrieval, include precision and recall . Many more measures for evaluating the performance of information retrieval systems have also been proposed. In general, measurement considers a collection of documents to be searched and a search query. All common measures described here assume a ground truth notion of relevancy: every document is known to be either relevant or non-relevant to a particular query. In practice, queries may be ill-posed and there may be different shades of relevancy.
Virtually all modern evaluation metrics (e.g., mean average precision , discounted cumulative gain ) are designed for ranked retrieval without any explicit rank cutoff, taking into account the relative order of the documents retrieved by the search engines and giving more weight to documents returned at higher ranks. [ citation needed ]
The mathematical symbols used in the formulas below mean:

Precision
Precision is the fraction of the documents retrieved that are relevant to the user's information need.
In binary classification , precision is analogous to positive predictive value . Precision takes all retrieved documents into account. It can also be evaluated at a given cut-off rank, considering only the topmost results returned by the system. This measure is called precision at n or P@n .
Note that the meaning and usage of "precision" in the field of information retrieval differs from the definition of accuracy and precision within other branches of science and statistics .

Recall
Recall is the fraction of the documents that are relevant to the query that are successfully retrieved.
In binary classification, recall is often called sensitivity . So it can be looked at as the probability that a relevant document is retrieved by the query .
It is trivial to achieve recall of 100% by returning all documents in response to any query. Therefore, recall alone is not enough but one needs to measure the number of non-relevant documents also, for example by computing the precision.

Fall-out
The proportion of non-relevant documents that are retrieved, out of all non-relevant documents available:
In binary classification, fall-out is closely related to specificity and is equal to ( 1 − specificity ) {\displaystyle (1-{\mbox{specificity}})} . It can be looked at as the probability that a non-relevant document is retrieved by the query .
It is trivial to achieve fall-out of 0% by returning zero documents in response to any query.

F-score / F-measure
The weighted harmonic mean of precision and recall, the traditional F-measure or balanced F-score is:
This is also known as the F 1 {\displaystyle F_{1}} measure, because recall and precision are evenly weighted.
The general formula for non-negative real β {\displaystyle \beta } is:
Two other commonly used F measures are the F 2 {\displaystyle F_{2}} measure, which weights recall twice as much as precision, and the F 0.5 {\displaystyle F_{0.5}} measure, which weights precision twice as much as recall.
The F-measure was derived by van Rijsbergen (1979) so that F β {\displaystyle F_{\beta }} "measures the effectiveness of retrieval with respect to a user who attaches β {\displaystyle \beta } times as much importance to recall as precision". It is based on van Rijsbergen's effectiveness measure E = 1 − 1 α P + 1 − α R {\displaystyle E=1-{\frac {1}{{\frac {\alpha }{P}}+{\frac {1-\alpha }{R}}}}} . Their relationship is:
F-measure can be a better single metric when compared to precision and recall; both precision and recall give different information that can complement each other when combined. If one of them excels more than the other, F-measure will reflect it. [ citation needed ]

Average precision
Precision and recall are single-value metrics based on the whole list of documents returned by the system. For systems that return a ranked sequence of documents, it is desirable to also consider the order in which the returned documents are presented. By computing a precision and recall at every position in the ranked sequence of documents, one can plot a precision-recall curve, plotting precision p ( r ) {\displaystyle p(r)} as a function of recall r {\displaystyle r} . Average precision computes the average value of p ( r ) {\displaystyle p(r)} over the interval from r = 0 {\displaystyle r=0} to r = 1 {\displaystyle r=1} : [9]
That is the area under the precision-recall curve. This integral is in practice replaced with a finite sum over every position in the ranked sequence of documents:
where k {\displaystyle k} is the rank in the sequence of retrieved documents, n {\displaystyle n} is the number of retrieved documents, P ( k ) {\displaystyle P(k)} is the precision at cut-off k {\displaystyle k} in the list, and Δ r ( k ) {\displaystyle \Delta r(k)} is the change in recall from items k − 1 {\displaystyle k-1} to k {\displaystyle k} . [9]
This finite sum is equivalent to:
where rel ⁡ ( k ) {\displaystyle \operatorname {rel} (k)} is an indicator function equaling 1 if the item at rank k {\displaystyle k} is a relevant document, zero otherwise. [10] Note that the average is over all relevant documents and the relevant documents not retrieved get a precision score of zero.
Some authors choose to interpolate the p ( r ) {\displaystyle p(r)} function to reduce the impact of "wiggles" in the curve. [11] [12] For example, the PASCAL Visual Object Classes challenge (a benchmark for computer vision object detection) computes average precision by averaging the precision over a set of evenly spaced recall levels {0, 0.1, 0.2, ... 1.0}: [11] [12]
where p interp ( r ) {\displaystyle p_{\operatorname {interp} }(r)} is an interpolated precision that takes the maximum precision over all recalls greater than r {\displaystyle r} :
An alternative is to derive an analytical p ( r ) {\displaystyle p(r)} function by assuming a particular parametric distribution for the underlying decision values. For example, a binormal precision-recall curve can be obtained by assuming decision values in both classes to follow a Gaussian distribution. [13]

Precision at K
For modern (Web-scale) information retrieval, recall is no longer a meaningful metric, as many queries have thousands of relevant documents, and few users will be interested in reading all of them. Precision at k documents (P@k) is still a useful metric (e.g., P@10 or "Precision at 10" corresponds to the number of relevant results on the first search results page), but fails to take into account the positions of the relevant documents among the top k. [ citation needed ] Another shortcoming is that on a query with fewer relevant results than k, even a perfect system will have a score less than 1. [14] It is easier to score manually since only the top k results need to be examined to determine if they are relevant or not.

R-Precision
R-precision requires knowing all documents that are relevant to a query. The number of relevant documents, R {\displaystyle R} , is used as the cutoff for calculation, and this varies from query to query. For example, if there are 15 documents relevant to "red" in a corpus (R=15), R-precision for "red" looks at the top 15 documents returned, counts the number that are relevant r {\displaystyle r} turns that into a relevancy fraction: r / R = r / 15 {\displaystyle r/R=r/15} . [15]
Precision is equal to recall at the R -th position. [14]
Empirically, this measure is often highly correlated to mean average precision. [14]

Mean average precision
Mean average precision for a set of queries is the mean of the average precision scores for each query.
where Q is the number of queries.

Discounted cumulative gain
DCG uses a graded relevance scale of documents from the result set to evaluate the usefulness, or gain, of a document based on its position in the result list. The premise of DCG is that highly relevant documents appearing lower in a search result list should be penalized as the graded relevance value is reduced logarithmically proportional to the position of the result.
The DCG accumulated at a particular rank position p {\displaystyle p} is defined as:
Since result set may vary in size among different queries or systems, to compare performances the normalised version of DCG uses an ideal DCG. To this end, it sorts documents of a result list by relevance, producing an ideal DCG at position p ( I D C G p {\displaystyle IDCG_{p}} ), which normalizes the score:
The nDCG values for all queries can be averaged to obtain a measure of the average performance of a ranking algorithm. Note that in a perfect ranking algorithm, the D C G p {\displaystyle DCG_{p}} will be the same as the I D C G p {\displaystyle IDCG_{p}} producing an nDCG of 1.0. All nDCG calculations are then relative values on the interval 0.0 to 1.0 and so are cross-query comparable.

Other measures

Visualization
Visualizations of information retrieval performance include:

Timeline

Major Conferences

Awards in the field

Leading IR Research Groups

See also
WebPage index: 00102
Besançon
Besançon ( French and Arpitan : French pronunciation: [bəzɑ̃sɔ̃] ( listen ) ; archaic German : Bisanz , Latin : Vesontio ) is the capital of the department of Doubs and the former capital of Franche-Comté , a region in eastern France close to the border with Switzerland , which has since been merged with the neighbouring region of Burgundy to become Bourgogne-Franche-Comté , the capital of which is Dijon . In 2013, it had a population of 116,952.
Once proclaimed the first green city of France, it has been labeled a " Town of Art and History " since 1986. [1] Since 2008, the Citadel of Besançon has been listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site .

History

Toponymy
The city is first recorded in 58 BC as Vesontio in the Book I of Julius Caesar 's Commentarii de Bello Gallico . The etymology of Vesontio is uncertain. The most common explanation is that the name is of Celtic origin, derived from wes , meaning 'mountain'. During the 4th century, the letter B took the place of the V, and the city name changed to Besontio or Bisontion and then underwent several transformations to become Besançon in 1243.

Ancient history
The city sits within an oxbow of the Doubs River (a tributary of the Saône River ); a mountain closes the fourth side. During the Bronze Age , c.1500 BCE, tribes of Gauls settled the oxbow.
From the 1st century BC through the modern era, the town had a significant military importance because the Alps rise abruptly to its immediate south, presenting a significant natural barrier.
The Arar ( Saône ) River formed part of the border between the Haedui and their hereditary rivals, the Sequani . [2] According to Strabo , the cause of the conflict was commercial. [3] Each tribe claimed the Arar and the tolls on trade along it. The Sequani controlled access to the Rhine River and had built an oppidum (a fortified town) at Vesontio to protect their interests. The Sequani defeated and massacred the Haedui at the Battle of Magetobriga , with the help of the Arverni tribe and the Germanic Suebi tribe under the Germanic king Ariovistus .
Julius Caesar , in his commentaries detailing his conquest of Gaul , describes Vesontio (possibly Latinized ), as the largest town of the Sequani , a smaller Gaulic tribe, and mentions that a wooden palisade surrounded it.
Over the centuries, the name permutated to become Besantio , Besontion , Bisanz in Middle High German and gradually arrived at the modern French Besançon . The locals retain their ancient heritage referring to themselves as Bisontins ( feminine: Bisontine).
It has been an archbishopric since the 4th century.

Middle Ages
In 843, the Treaty of Verdun divided up Charlemagne 's empire. Besançon became part of Lotharingie, under the Duke of Burgundy .
As part of the Holy Roman Empire since 1034, the city became an archbishopric , and was designated the Free Imperial City of Besançon (an autonomous city-state under the Holy Roman Emperor ) in 1184. In 1157, Emperor Frederick Barbarossa held the Diet of Besançon . There, Cardinal Orlando Bandinelli (the future Pope Alexander III, then adviser of Pope Adrian IV ) openly asserted before the Emperor that the imperial dignity was a papal beneficium (in the more general sense of favour, not the strict feudal sense of fief ), which incurred the wrath of the German princes. He would have fallen on the spot under the battle-axe of his lifelong foe, Otto of Wittelsbach , had Frederick not intervened. The Imperial Chancellor Rainald of Dassel then inaugurated a German policy that insisted upon the rights and the power of the German kings, the strengthening of the Church in the German Empire, the lordship of Italy and the humiliation of the Papacy. The Archbishops were elevated to Princes of the Holy Roman Empire in 1288. The close connection to the Empire is reflected in the city's coat of arms.
In 1290, after a century of fighting against the power of the archbishops, the Emperor granted Besançon its independence.

Renaissance
In the 15th century, Besançon came under the influence of the dukes of Burgundy . After the marriage of Mary of Burgundy to Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor , the city was in effect a Habsburg fief. In 1519 Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor , King of Spain , became the Holy Roman Emperor. This made him master of Franche-Comté and Besançon, a francophone German city. In 1526 the city obtained the right to mint coins, which it continued to strike until 1673. Nevertheless, all coins bore the name of Charles V.
When Charles V abdicated in 1555, he gave Franche-Comté to his son, Philip II , King of Spain. Besançon remained a free imperial city under the protection of the King of Spain. In 1598, Philip II gave the province to his daughter on her marriage to an Austrian archduke. It remained formally a portion of the Empire until its cession at the peace of Westphalia in 1648. Spain regained control of Franche-Comté and the city lost its status as a free city. Then in 1667, Louis XIV claimed the province as a consequence of his marriage to Marie-Thérèse of Spain in the War of Devolution .
Louis conquered the city for the first time in 1668, but the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle returned it to Spain within a matter of months. While it was in French hands, the famed military engineer Vauban visited the city and drew up plans for its fortification. The Spaniards built the main centre point of the city's defences, "la Citadelle", siting it on Mont Saint-Étienne, which closes the neck of the oxbow that is the site of the original town. In their construction, the Spaniards followed Vauban's designs.
In 1674, French troops recaptured the city, which the Treaty of Nijmegen (1678) then awarded to France. At this time the city became the administrative centre for Franche-Comté, with its own Parlement of Besançon , which replaced Dole .
As a result of control passing to France, Vauban returned to working on the citadel's fortifications, and those of the city. This process lasted until 1711, some 30 years, and the walls built then surround the city. Between the train station and the central city there is a complex moat system that now serves road traffic. Numerous forts, some of which date back to that time and that incorporate Vauban's designs elements sit on the six hills that surround the city: Fort de Trois Châtels, Fort Chaudanne, Fort du Petit Chaudanne, Fort Griffon, Fort des Justices, Fort de Beauregard and Fort de Brégille . The citadel itself has two dry moats, with an outer and inner court. In the evenings, the illuminated Citadelle stands above the city as a landmark and a testament to Vauban's genius as a military engineer .

Modern Europe
In 1814 the Austrians invaded and bombarded the city. It also occupied an important position during the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71.
The Nazis occupied the citadel during World War II . Between 1940 and 1944, the Germans executed some one hundred French resistance fighters there. However, Besançon saw little action during the war. The allies bombed the railway complex in 1943, and the next year the Germans resisted the U.S. advance for four days.
Besançon was also the location, between 1940 and 1941, of an Internment Camp ( Konzentrationslager ), Frontstalag 142 , also known as Caserne Vauban , which the Germans set up for 3-4,000 holders of British passports, all women and children. The conditions were harsh; many hundreds of internees died of pneumonia, diarrhea, food poisoning, dysentery, and frostbite. [4]
In 1959, the French Army turned the citadel over to the city of Besançon, which turned it into a museum.
The forts of Brégille and Beauregard sit across the Doubs from the city. In 1913, a private company built a funicular to the Brégille Heights. The funicular passed from private ownership to the SNCF , who finally closed it in 1987. The funicular's tracks, stations and even road signs remain in place to this day.

Geography

Location
Besançon is located in the north-east quarter of France on the Doubs River . It is about 325 kilometres (202 miles) east of the national capital of Paris, 100 kilometres (62 miles) east of Dijon in Burgundy, 125 km (78 mi) northwest of Lausanne in Switzerland, and 100 km (62 mi) southwest of Belfort in Bourgogne-Franche-Comté. It is located at the edge of the Jura Mountains .

Topography
The city initially developed in a natural meander (or oxbow loop) of the Doubs River with a diameter of almost 1,000 metres (3,281 feet). The flat inner loop has an elevation of about 250 metres (820 feet), and is bounded to the south by a hill called Mont Saint-Étienne , which has a maximum height of 371 metres (1,217 feet). The city is surrounded by six other hills which range in elevation from 400 to 500 metres (1,312 to 1,640 feet): Brégille, Griffon, Planoise , Chaudanne, Montfaucon, and Montboucon. (There is a barge canal that cuts through rock under Mont Saint-Étienne, short-cutting the meander.)

Climate
Besançon is under the influence of both an oceanic climate (notable precipitations in quantity as much as in frequency) and a continental climate with hard winters (snow, frost) and warm and dry summers. The year-round average is 11.5 °C (53 °F). The warmest month is July 20 °C (68 °F) and the coldest is January 2.1 °C (36 °F). Besançon receives about 1,059 mm (42 in) of precipitation per year. The wettest month is May (108.4 mm (4.3 in)); the driest is August (76.9 mm (3.0 in)). The highest temperature ever, recorded on 28 July 1921, was 40.3 °C (104.5 °F), and the lowest was a −20.7 °C (−5.3 °F) reached on 1 January 1985.

Districts

Parks and gardens

Population
As of the French Census of 2012, the population of the City of Besançon was 116,353, lower than the historical peak of 120,315 in 1975. Grand Besançon covers 122 km 2 (47 sq mi), 11 municipalities and has a population of 135,652. The metropolitan area covers 1,652 km 2 (638 sq mi), 234 municipalities and has 236,968 inhabitants. It is the thirty-seventh of France. It increased by 6.6% between 1999 and 2008.

Government and politics
Besançon is the capital of the Franche-Comté région of France, a région including the four départements of Doubs, Haute-Saône , Jura and Territoire de Belfort . As such, it is the seat of the Franche-Comté regional council, and the regional préfecture (government offices).
Mayor of the City of Besançon is Jean-Louis Fousseret.

Economy
The city is famous for its microtechnology and watch industries. It is host of the biannual Micronora trade fair, one of Europe's major events in the field of microtechnologies. The city has a little-known specialty, automatic ticketing machines for car parking, airports, date stamping etc.
The watch industry, for which Besançon remains the French capital, endured a major crisis in the 1970s when the advent of quartz watches from Asia knocked out the traditional watch industry in the space of just a few years. The famous "Lip" affair epitomizes the industrial crisis. LIP is to this day the name of one of Besançon's most prestigious brands of watches. Refusing to let their factory close, the workers set up a cooperative to run it. The action produced a lot of notoriety and sympathy for the workers but also resulted in branding Besançon as a city of the radical left. It also did nothing to help revive the watch industry; the cooperative went out of business a short while later. The city took a long time to recover from the collapse of the watch industry and its other major industry of the industrial age, artificial textiles.
Since the 1980s, Besançon's watch industry has clawed its way back on the basis of its historic reputation and quartz watches, establishing itself in a number of niche markets including customized watches, high quality watches, and fashion articles. Since the 1990s, the town has developed a reputation as one of France's leading centres of technology in all fields, including telecommunications and biotechnology.

Education
Besançon is the seat of the Université de Franche-Comté . As of 2006 [update] , there were approximately 20,000 students enrolled at the university, including around 3,000 foreign students. The Institut Supérieur d'Ingénieurs de Franche-Comté [8] (ISIFC), part of the Université de Franche-Comté, is the first school created in the country specifically for the Biomedical engineering field. The city is also home of the École Nationale Supérieure de Mécanique et des Microtechniques (ENSMM), a technological school with a strong reputation in the fields of microtechnology and mechanics and the worldwide famous Centre for Applied Linguistics which teaches ten languages to non-native speakers (French, Arabic, Chinese, English, German, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish) and any other known language on request and which welcomes more than 4,000 students every year from all over the world.

Culture

Sites of interest
The city has one of the most beautiful historic centers of any major town in France. A broad horse-shoe of the river Doubs , "la Boucle", encircles the old town, while Vauban 's imposing Citadelle blocks off the neck. The historic center presents a remarkable ensemble of classic stone buildings, some dating back to the Middle Ages and others to the Spanish Renaissance. Among its most visited historic monuments are:
The Roman remains consist primarily of the Porte Noire, a 2nd-century CE triumphal arch at the foot of the hill on which the citadel stands, and the Square Castan , a semi-circular amphitheater. The Porte Noire may commemorate the victories of Marcus Aurelius over the Germans in 167 CE. It was partly rebuilt in 1820.
From 1534 to 1540, Cardinal Granvelle , chancellor to the Habsburg emperor Charles V , built the Palais Granvelle, in the heart of the town. [9] [10] It consists of arcades that surround an interior court, and is the most interesting of the secular buildings. The Palais contains a set of seven wool and silk blend tapestries from Bruges that were woven circa 1635 and that celebrate seven milestones in Charles V's life. These tapestries remained in Spain until 1888, when they were transferred to France. In 1950 they were transferred to the Palais.
UNESCO added the citadel, the city walls and Fort Griffon to its list of World Heritage Sites in 2008, as part of the " Fortifications of Vauban " group. Some older military architecture has also survived. There is a cylindrical, 15th-century tower near the Porte Notre-Dame, the southern gate of the city. The Porte Rivotte, a 16th-century gate, has two round towers. The citadel houses the Museum of the French Resistance and Deportation .
The Cathedral, which dates largely from the 12th century [11] though construction continued into the 14th century, contains the most remarkable of the city's masterpieces, a massive Virgin and saints altarpiece by the Italian Renaissance painter Fra Bartolomeo . It also houses a noteworthy 19th-century astronomical clock . The Cathedral has two apses, with the eastern apse and the tower dating from the reign of Louis XV .
Attractive quays border the old city, and in places there are shady promenades. On the right bank there is a bathing establishment in the Mouillere quarter that draws its water from the saline springs of Miserey-Salines .
Besançon also has one of the finest city art galleries in France outside Paris. The Museum of Fine Arts and Archeology has a collection whose origins date to 1694, and which a remarkable series of bequests have augmented over time. In the 1960s the architect Luis Miquel , a pupil of Le Corbusier , totally rebuilt the building. The building's interior takes the form of a gently rising concrete walkway that takes visitors up from classical antiquity to the modern age. Among the museum's treasures are a fine collection of classical antiquities and ancient Egyptian artifacts, as well as a very rich collection of paintings including works by Bellini , Bronzino , Tintoretto , Titian , Rubens , Jordaens , Ruisdael , Cranach , Zurbarán , Goya , Philippe de Champaigne , Fragonard , Boucher , David , Ingres , Géricault , Courbet , Constable , Bonnard , Matisse , Picasso and many others.
As well as being famed as one of France's finest "villes d'art" (art cities), Besançon is the seat of one of France's older universities, of France's National School of Mechanics and Micromechanics , and one of the best known French language schools in France, the CLA. It is also reputed [ citation needed ] to be France's environmentally friendliest city, with a public transport network that has often been cited as a model. On account of the topography, the historic city centre lies at the edge of the modern city, and hiking tracks lead straight from the centre and up into the surrounding hills. The city council has been in the hands of the Socialists and parties of the left since the Second World War. King Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands is also the Lord of Besançon .
The Christmas carol " Berger, Secoue Ton Sommeil Profond ", known in English as "Shepherds, Shake Off Your Drowsy Sleep" originated in Besançon in the 17th century.

Other institutions

Performing arts centers

Annual cultural events and fairs
Several major events occur annually in Besançon. One of the best-known is the Besançon International Music Festival , which takes place in September; it is one of the oldest and most prestigious Classical music festivals. Besançon hosts other music festivals such as the Herbe en Zik Festival (French rock and variety) in May, the Jazz en Franche-Comté Festival in June, the Franch Country Festival (country music) in August, and the Musiques de Rues Festival (street music) in October.

Sports
The major sports in Besançon are soccer, handball and basketball. The city's soccer club, called Besançon Racing Club plays in the French seventh division. The city has also the International Football Academy of Orchamps Besançon for young players from 4 to 13 years. Labelled by the French Football Federation since the creation of the label in 2004, its purpose is to teach young players in all aspects of football to become good competitive players. ASOB Foot Besançon also had a fairly successful hockey team in the early 21st century. The Séquanes, named after an ancient gallic tribe, reached the French Cup final in 2002 (which the city hosted) and briefly played in the country's top league, then called Super 16. However the Séquanes' free spending policy soon backfired. The team folded in the middle of the 2002/03 season due to financial problems. Today, senior hockey subsists in Besançon in the form of a low level amateur team. The city also had a good Canoe-Kayak Club, Sport Nautique Bisontin , one of the oldest in France.

Transport

Road
Besançon is situated at the crossing of two major lines of communication, the NE-SW route that follows the valley of the river Doubs and links Germany and North Europe with Lyon and southwest Europe, and the N-S route linking northern France and the Netherlands with Switzerland.

Air
Unusually for a city of its size, Besançon does not have a commercial airport. Two international airports, EuroAirport Basel-Mulhouse-Freiburg and Lyon Saint-Exupéry International Airport , are about two hours away by car.

Rail
Besançon is well connected with the rest of France by train. One can reach major destinations such as Paris , Dijon , Belfort , Mulhouse , Strasbourg , Lyon , Marseille , Montpellier and Lille directly. The city has some international connections to cities such as Basel and Zürich in Switzerland and Frankfurt am Main in Germany .

Tram
A tramway commenced service in September 2014. The length of the line is 13 kilometres (8.1 mi) and the route follows a mainly South-West-North East direction through the city between Hauts du Chazal and alternative destinations of Chalezeule ("parc Micaud") and the Besançon railway station at "Gare Viotte" . [ citation needed ]

Bus
Ginko runs Besançon's urban bus routes.

Births
Besançon was the birthplace of:

Literary references

International relations

Twin towns – sister cities
Besançon is twinned with:

See also
WebPage index: 00103
BBC Micro
The BBC Microcomputer System , or BBC Micro , is a series of microcomputers and associated peripherals designed and built by the Acorn Computer company for the BBC Computer Literacy Project , operated by the British Broadcasting Corporation . Designed with an emphasis on education, it was notable for its ruggedness, expandability, and the quality of its operating system . An accompanying 1982 television series " The Computer Programme " featuring Chris Serle learning to use the machine was also broadcast on BBC 2 .
After the Literacy Project's call for bids for a computer to accompany the TV programmes and literature, Acorn won the contract with the Proton , a successor of its Atom computer prototyped at short notice. Renamed the BBC Micro, the system was adopted by most schools in the United Kingdom , changing Acorn's fortunes. It was also moderately successful as a home computer in the UK despite its high cost. Acorn also employed the machine to simulate and develop the ARM architecture which, many years later, has become hugely successful for embedded systems , including tablets and cellphones . In 2013 ARM was the most widely used 32-bit instruction set architecture . [1] [2]
While nine models were eventually produced with the BBC brand, the phrase "BBC Micro" is usually used colloquially to refer to the first six (Model A, B, B+64, B+128, Master 128, and Master Compact), excluding the Acorn Electron ; subsequent BBC models are considered as part of Acorn's Archimedes series.

History
During the early 1980s, the BBC started what became known as the BBC Computer Literacy Project . The project was initiated partly in response to an ITV documentary series The Mighty Micro , in which Dr Christopher Evans of the UK's National Physical Laboratory predicted the coming microcomputer revolution and its effect on the economy, industry, and lifestyle of the United Kingdom. [3]
The BBC wanted to base its project on a microcomputer capable of performing various tasks which they could then demonstrate in the TV series The Computer Programme . The list of topics included programming , graphics , sound and music, teletext , controlling external hardware, and artificial intelligence . It developed an ambitious specification for a BBC computer, and discussed the project with several companies including Acorn Computers , Sinclair Research , Newbury Laboratories, Tangerine Computer Systems , and Dragon Data . [3]
The Acorn team had already been working on a successor to their existing Atom microcomputer. Known as the Proton , it included better graphics and a faster 2 MHz MOS Technology 6502 central processing unit . The machine was only at the design stage at the time, and the Acorn team, including Steve Furber and Sophie Wilson , had one week to build a working prototype from the sketched designs. [4] The team worked through the night to get a working Proton together to show the BBC. [5] Not only was the Acorn Proton the only machine to match the BBC's specification, it also exceeded it in nearly every parameter. [3] Based on the Proton prototype the BBC signed a contract with Acorn as early as February 1981; by June the BBC Micro's specifications and pricing were decided. [6]

Market impact
The machine was released as the BBC Microcomputer on 1 December 1981, although production problems pushed delivery of the majority of the initial run into 1982. [6] [7] Nicknamed "the Beeb", [8] it was popular in the UK, especially in the educational market; about 80% of British schools had a BBC microcomputer, [9] [10] as the government from 1981 to 1984 subsidized half the cost of a Research Machines 380Z or BBC Micro. [11]
BYTE called the BBC Micro Model B "a no-compromise computer that has many uses beyond self-instruction in computer technology". It called the Tube interface "the most innovative feature" of the computer, and concluded that "although some other British microcomputers offer more features for a given price, none of them surpass the BBC ... in terms of versatility and expansion capability". [12] As with Sinclair 's ZX Spectrum and Commodore 's Commodore 64 , both released later in 1982, demand greatly exceeded supply. For some months, there were long delays before customers received the machines they had ordered.
Efforts were made to market the machine in the United States and West Germany. [13] By October 1983, the US operation reported that American schools had placed orders with it totalling $21 million . [14] In October 1984, while preparing a major expansion of its US dealer network, Acorn claimed sales of 85 per cent of the computers in British schools, and delivery of 40,000 machines per month. [15] That December, Acorn stated its intention to become the market leader in US educational computing. [16] The New York Times considered the inclusion of local area networking to be of prime importance to teachers. [16] The operation resulted in advertisements by at least one dealer in Interface Age magazine, [17] but ultimately the attempt failed. The success of the machine in the UK was due largely to its acceptance as an "educational" computer – UK schools used BBC Micros to teach computer literacy , information technology skills and a generation of games programmers. [3] Acorn became more known for its model B computer than for its other products. [18] Some Commonwealth countries, including India , started their own Computer Literacy programs around 1987 and used the BBC Micro, a clone of which was produced by Semiconductor Complex Limited and named the SCL Unicorn. [19] [20] [21]
The Model A and the Model B were priced initially at £235 and £335 respectively, but increasing almost immediately to £299 and £399 due to increased costs. [22] The Model B price of nearly £400 was roughly £1200 [23] (€1393) [24] in 2011 prices. Acorn anticipated the total sales to be around 12,000 units, but eventually more than 1.5 million BBC Micros were sold. [10] [25]
The cost of the BBC Models was high compared to competitors such as the ZX Spectrum and the Commodore 64, and from 1983 on Acorn attempted to counter this by producing a simplified but largely compatible version intended for game playing, the 32K Acorn Electron . [ citation needed ]

Description

Hardware features: Models A and B
The Model A had 16 KB of user RAM, while the Model B had 32 KB. A feature that the Micro shared with other 6502 computers such as the Apple and the early Commodore models was that the RAM was clocked twice as fast as the CPU, [6] [26] with alternating access given to the CPU and the video display circuits. [22] This gave the BBC Micro a fully unified memory address structure without speed penalties. To use the CPU at full speed (2 MHz ) required the memory system to be capable of performing four million access cycles per second. Hitachi was the only company, at the time, that made a DRAM that went that fast. So for the prototype the only four 4816s in the country got hand-carried by the rep. [27] Most competing microcomputers with memory-mapped display incurred CPU speed penalties depending on the actions of the video circuits (e.g. the Amstrad CPC and to a lesser extent the ZX Spectrum ) or kept video memory completely separate from the CPU address pool (e.g. the MSX ).
The machine included a number of extra input/output interfaces: serial and parallel printer ports; an 8-bit general purpose digital I/O port; a port offering four analogue inputs, a light pen input, and switch inputs; and an expansion connector (the "1 MHz bus") that enabled other hardware to be connected. Extra ROMs could be fitted (four on the PCB or sixteen with expansion hardware) and accessed via paged memory . An Econet network interface and a disk drive interface were available as options. All motherboards had space for the electronic components, but Econet was rarely fitted. Additionally, an Acorn proprietary interface named the " Tube " allowed a second processor to be added. Three models of second processor were offered by Acorn, based on the 6502 , Z80 and 32016 CPUs. The Tube was later used in third-party add-ons, including a Zilog Z80 board and hard disk drive from Torch that allowed the BBC machine to run CP/M programs.
Separate pages, each with a codename, were used to control the access to the I/O: [28]
The Tube interface allowed Acorn to use BBC Micros with ARM CPUs as software development machines when creating the Acorn Archimedes . This resulted in the ARM development kit for the BBC Micro in 1986, priced at around £4000. [29] From 2006 a kit with an ARM7TDMI CPU running at 64 MHz, with as much as 64 MB of RAM, was released for the BBC Micro and Master, using the Tube interface to upgrade the old 8-bit micros into 32-bit RISC machines. [30] Among the software that operated on the Tube were an enhanced version of the Elite video game (see below) and a computer-aided design system that required a second 6502 CPU and a 5-dimensional joystick named a "Bitstik" [1] .
The Model A and the Model B were built on the same printed circuit board (PCB) and a Model A could be upgraded to a Model B without too much difficulty. Users wishing to operate Model B software needed only to add the extra RAM and the user/printer 6522 VIA (which many games used for timers) and snip a link, a task that could be achieved without soldering. To do a full upgrade with all the external ports did, however, require soldering the connectors to the motherboard. The original machines shipped with "OS 0.1", with later updates advertised in magazines, supplied as a clip-in integrated circuit, with the last official version being "OS 1.2". Variations in the Acorn OS exist as a result of home-made projects and modified machines can still be bought on internet auction sites such as eBay , as of 2011.
The BBC Model A was phased out of production with the introduction of the Electron , with chairman Chris Curry stating at the time that Acorn "would no longer promote it" (the Model A). [ citation needed ]
Early BBC Micros used linear power supplies at the insistence of the BBC's engineering specification, but these very hot-running PSUs were soon replaced in production by switched mode units. [ citation needed ]
An apparent oversight in the manufacturing process resulted in a significant number of Model Bs producing a constant buzzing noise from the built-in speaker. This fault could be rectified partly by soldering a resistor across two pads. [31]
There were five developments of the main BBC micro circuit board that addressed various issues through the models production, from 'Issue 1' through to 'Issue 7' with variants 5 and 6 not being released. The 1985 'BBC Microcomputer Service Manual' from Acorn documented the details of the technical changes.
Per Watford Electronics comments in their '32K Ram Board Manual':

Export models
Two export models were developed: one for the US, [33] with Econet and speech hardware as standard; the other for West Germany . [34] Both were fitted with radio frequency shielding as required by the respective countries, and they were still based on the Intel 8271 floppy drive controller. From June 1983 the name was always spelled out completely – "British Broadcasting Corporation Microcomputer System" – to avoid confusion with Brown, Boveri & Cie in international markets. [35]
US models included the BASIC III ROM chip, modified to accept the American spelling of COLOR , but the height of the graphics display was reduced to 200 scan lines to suit NTSC TVs, [36] severely affecting applications written for British computers. After the failed US marketing campaign the unwanted machines were remanufactured for the British market and sold, [37] resulting in a third 'UK export' variant. [38]

Side product
In October 1984, the Acorn Business Computer (ABC)/Acorn Cambridge Workstation range of machines was announced, based primarily on BBC hardware.

Hardware features

B+64 and B+128
Acorn introduced the Model B+ in mid-1985, increasing the total RAM to 64 KB but this had modest market effect. The extra RAM in the Model B+ BBC Micro was assigned as two blocks, a block of 20 KB dedicated solely for screen display (so-called " Shadow " RAM) and a block of 12 KB of 'special' Sideways RAM. The B+128 came with an additional 64 KB (4 × 16 KB "Sideways" RAM banks) to give a total RAM of 128 KB.
The new B+ was incapable of operating some original BBC B programs and games, such as, for example, the very popular Castle Quest . A particular problem was the replacement of the Intel 8271 floppy disk controller [39] with the Western Digital 1770 – not only was the new controller mapped to different addresses, [40] it was fundamentally incompatible and the 8271 emulators that existed were necessarily imperfect for all but basic operation. [41] A piece of software that used copy protection techniques involving direct access to the controller, simply would not operate on the new system. [42] Acorn attempted to alleviate this, starting with version 2.20 of the 1770 DFS, via an 8271-backward- compatible Ctrl+Z+Break option.
There was also a long-running problem late in the B/B+'s commercial life infamous amongst B+ owners, when Superior Software released Repton Infinity , which refused to operate on the B+. A series of unsuccessful replacements were issued before one compatible with both was finally released.

BBC Master
During 1986, Acorn followed up with the BBC Master , which offered memory sizes from 128 KB and many other refinements which improved on the 1981 original. It had essentially the same 6502-based BBC architecture, with many of the upgrades that the original design had intentionally made possible (extra ROM software, extra paged RAM, second processors) now included on the circuit board as internal plug-in modules.

Software and expandability
The BBC Micro platform amassed a large software base of both games and educational programs for its two main uses as a home and educational computer. Notable examples of each include the original release of Elite [43] and Granny's Garden . Programming languages and some applications were supplied on ROM chips to be installed on the motherboard. These loaded instantly and left the RAM free for programs or documents.
Although appropriate content was little-supported by television broadcasters, telesoftware could be downloaded via the optional Teletext Adapter and the third-party teletext adaptors that emerged.
The built-in operating system, Acorn MOS , provided an extensive API to interface with all standard peripherals, ROM-based software and the screen. [44] Features private to some versions of BASIC, like vector graphics , keyboard macros , cursor-based editing, sound queues and envelopes , were placed in the MOS ROM and made available to any application. BBC BASIC itself, being in a separate ROM, could be replaced with any equivalent language.
BASIC, other languages and utility ROM chips resided in any of four 16 KB paged ROM sockets, with OS support for sixteen sockets via expansion hardware. The five (total) sockets were located partially obscured under the keyboard, with the leftmost socket hard-wired for the OS. While the original usage for the perforated panel on the left of the keyboard was for a Serial ROM or Speech ROM, a ZIF socket or edgecard connector could be installed in that location instead. The socket could be connected to one of the empty Sideways/PagedROM sockets via a header cable. The paged ROM system was essentially modular. A language-independent system of star commands , prefixed with an asterisk, provided the ability to select a language (for example *BASIC , *PASCAL ), a filing system ( *TAPE , *DISC ), change settings ( *FX , *OPT ) or carry out ROM-supplied tasks ( *COPY , *BACKUP ) from the command line. The MOS recognised a handful of built-in commands, and polled the paged ROMs in descending order for service otherwise; if none of them claimed the command then the OS returned a Bad command error. Connecting an external EPROM programmer, one could write extensive programs, copy to programmable ROM (PROM) or EPROM, then invoke them without taxing user memory.
Not all ROMs offered star commands (ROMs containing data files, for instance), but any ROM could " hook " into certain vectors to enhance the system's functionality. Often the ROM was a device driver for mass storage combined with a filing system, starting with Acorn's 1982 Disc Filing System whose API became the de facto standard for floppy disc access. The Acorn Graphics Extension ROM (GXR) expanded the VDU routines to draw geometric shapes, flood fills and sprites. During 1985 Micro Power designed and marketed a Basic Extension ROM, [45] introducing statements such as WHILE , ENDWHILE , CASE , WHEN , OTHERWISE , and ENDCASE , as well as direct mode commands including VERIFY .
Acorn strongly discouraged programmers from directly accessing the system variables and hardware, favouring official system calls . [46] This was ostensibly to make sure programs kept working when migrated to coprocessors that utilised the Tube interface, but it also made BBC Micro software more portable across the Acorn range. Whereas untrappable PEEKs and POKEs were commonly used by other computers to reach the system elements, [47] programs in either machine code or BBC BASIC would instead pass parameters to an operating system routine. In this way the MOS could translate the request for the local machine or send it across the Tube interface, as direct access was impossible from the coprocessor. Published programs largely conformed to the API except for games, which routinely engaged with the hardware for greater speed, and thus required a particular Acorn model.
As the early BBC Micros had ample I/O allowing machines to be interconnected, and as many schools and universities employed the machines in Econet networks, numerous networked multiplayer games were created. With the exception of a tank game, Bolo , few became popular, in no small measure due to the limited number of machines aggregated in one place. A relatively late but well documented example can be found in a dissertation based on a ringed RS-423 interconnect. [48]

Peripherals
In line with its ethos of expandability Acorn produced its own range of peripherals for the BBC Micro, including:
Other manufactures also produced an abundance of add-on hardware, some the most common being:

BBC BASIC built-in programming language
The built-in ROM-resident BBC BASIC programming language interpreter realised the system's educational emphasis and was key to its success; not only was it the most comprehensive BASIC compared to other contemporary implementations but it ran very efficiently and was therefore fast. Advanced programs could be written without resorting to non-structured programming or machine code (necessary with many competing computers). Should one want or need to do some assembly programming, BBC BASIC featured a built-in assembler that allowed a very easy mixture of BBC BASIC and assembler for whatever processor BBC BASIC was operating on.
When the BBC Micro was released, many competing home computers used Microsoft BASIC , or variants typically designed to resemble it. Compared to Microsoft BASIC, BBC BASIC featured IF…THEN…ELSE, REPEAT…UNTIL, named procedures and functions, but retained Goto and GOSUB for compatibility. It also supported high-resolution graphics, four-channel sound, pointer-based memory access (borrowed from BCPL ) and rudimentary macro assembly. Long variable names were accepted and distinguished completely, not just by the first two characters.

Other languages
Acorn had made a point of not just supporting BBC Basic but a number of contemporary languages, some of which were supplied as ROM chips to fit the spare 'Sideways-ROM' sockets on the motherboard. Other languages were supplied on tape or disk based.
Programming Languages from Acorn:

Successor machines
Acorn produced their own 32-bit Reduced Instruction Set (RISC) CPU during 1985, the ARM1. Furber composed a reference model of the processor on the BBC Micro with 808 lines of BASIC, and ARM Holdings retains copies of the code for intellectual property purposes. [49] The first prototype ARM platforms, the ARM Evaluation System and the A500 workstation, functioned as second processors attached to the BBC Micro's Tube interface. Acorn staff developed the A500's operating system in situ through the Tube until, one by one, the on-board I/O ports were enabled and the A500 ran as a stand-alone computer. [50] With an upgraded processor this was eventually released during 1987 as four models in the Archimedes series, the lower-specified two models (512 KB and 1 MB) continuing the BBC Microcomputer brand with the distinctive red function keys. Although the Archimedes ultimately was not a major success, the ARM family of processors has become the dominant processor architecture in mobile embedded consumer devices, particularly mobile telephones.
Acorn's last BBC-related model, the BBC A3000, was released in 1989. It was essentially a 1 MB Archimedes back in a single case form factor .

Retro computing scene
As of 2005, thanks to its ready expandability and I/O functions, there are still numbers of BBC Micros in use, and a retrocomputing community of dedicated users finding new tasks for the old hardware. They still survive in a few interactive displays in museums across the United Kingdom, and the Jodrell Bank observatory was reported to be still using a BBC Micro to steer its 42 ft radio telescope during 2004. [51] The Archimedes came with 65Arthur, an emulator which BYTE stated "lets many programs for the BBC Micro run"; [52] other emulators exist for many operating systems. [53]
In March 2008, the creators of the BBC Micro met at the Science Museum in London. There was to be an exhibition about the computer and its legacy during 2009. [8]
The UK National Museum of Computing at Bletchley Park uses BBC Micros as part of a scheme to educate school children about computer programming. [54]
In March 2012, the BBC and Acorn teams responsible for the BBC Micro and Computer Literacy Project met for a 30th anniversary party, entitled "Beeb@30". This was held at ARM 's offices in Cambridge and was co-hosted by the Centre for Computing History . [55]

Continued development and support
Long after the "venerable old Beeb" [56] was superseded, additional hardware and software has been developed. Such developments have included Sprow's 1999 zip compression utility and a ROM Y2K bugfix for the BBC Master . [56]
There are also a number of websites still supporting both hardware and software development for the BBC micros and Acorn in general. [57] [58]

Specifications (Model A to Model B+128)

Display modes
Like the IBM PC with the contemporary Color Graphics Adapter , the video output of the BBC Micro could be switched by software between a number of display modes . These varied between 20 and 40-column text suitable for a domestic TV, to 80-column text best viewed with a high-quality RGB-connected monitor (The 80-column mode was often too blurred to view when using a domestic TV via the UHF output). The variety of modes offered applications a flexible compromise between colour depth, resolution and memory economy. In the first models, the OS and applications were left with the RAM left over from the display mode.
Mode 7 was a Teletext mode, extremely economical on memory and an original requirement due to the BBC's own use of broadcast teletext (Ceefax). It also made the computer useful as a Prestel terminal. The teletext characters were generated on board, for use with monitors and TV sets without a Teletext receiver. Train time displays at UK stations were driven by BBC Master computers in this mode until around the late 1990s. [ citation needed ]
Modes 0 to 6 (the ' ASCII ' modes) could display colours from a logical palette of sixteen: the eight basic colours at the vertices of the RGB colour cube and eight flashing colours made by alternating the basic colour with its inverse. The palette could be freely reprogrammed without touching display memory. Modes 3 and 6 were special text-only modes that used less RAM by reducing the number of text rows and inserting blank scan lines below each row. Mode 6 was approximately the same size as Teletext. Modes 0 to 6 could show diacritics and other user defined characters. All modes besides the two text modes supported bitmapped graphics .
The BBC B+ and the later Master provided 'shadow modes', where the 1–20 KB frame buffer was stored in an alternative RAM bank, freeing the main memory for user programs. This feature was requested by setting bit 7 of the mode variable, i.e. by requesting modes 128–135.

Optional extras
A speech synthesis upgrade based on the Texas Instruments TMS5220 featured sampled phonemes spoken by BBC newscaster Kenneth Kendall . The speech system was standard on the US model where it had an American vocabulary. Elsewhere it sold poorly and was eventually largely replaced by Superior Software 's software-based synthesiser using the standard sound hardware.
The speech upgrade also added two empty sockets next to the keyboard intended to take 16 KB serial ROM cartridges containing either extra speech phoneme data (in addition to the default speech ROM fitted to the motherboard), or general software accessed through the ROM Filing System. The original plan was that some games would be released on cartridges, but due to the limited sales of the speech upgrade, little or no software was ever produced for these sockets. The cut-out space next to the keyboard (nicknamed the "ashtray") was more commonly used to install other upgrades, such as a ZIF socket for conventional paged ROMs.

Use in the entertainment industry
The BBC Domesday Project , a pioneering multimedia experiment, was based on a modified version of the BBC Micro's successor, the BBC Master .
Musician Vince Clarke of the British synth pop bands Depeche Mode , Yazoo , and Erasure used a BBC Micro (and later a BBC Master ) with the UMI music sequencer to compose many hits. [63] In music videos from the 1980s featuring Vince Clarke, a BBC Micro is often present or provides text and graphics such as a clip for Erasure's "Oh L'Amour". The musical group Queen used the UMI Music Sequencer on their record A Kind of Magic . The UMI is also mentioned in the CD booklet. Other bands who have used the Beeb for making music are A-ha and the reggae band Steel Pulse . Paul Ridout is credited as "UMI programmer" on Cars ' bassist/vocalist Benjamin Orr 's 1986 solo album, The Lace . Black Uhuru used the Envelope Generator from SYSTEM software (Sheffield) running on a BBC Micro, to create some of the electro-dub sounds on Try It ( Anthem album 1983).
The BBC Micro was used extensively to provide graphics and sound effects for many early 1980s BBC TV shows. These included, notably, series 3 and 4 of The Adventure Game ; [64] the children's quiz game "First Class" (where the onscreen scoreboard was provided by a BBC Micro nicknamed "Eugene"); and numerous 1980s episodes of Doctor Who including " Castrovalva ", " The Five Doctors ", and " The Twin Dilemma ".

See also
WebPage index: 00104
Susning.nu
Susning.nu was a Swedish language wiki , started in October 2001 by Lars Aronsson (also the founder of Project Runeberg ). In its first three years (2001–2004), Susning.nu ran as an open wiki that anyone could edit. Susning didn't have a pronounced ambition and could perhaps be compared in scope to Everything2 ; Aronsson's stated original aim for Susning was "to make it into whatever the users want it to be". [ citation needed ] As such, Susning was an encyclopedia , a dictionary , and a discussion forum about any concept of interest to its users. Because of this, Susning grew and became Sweden 's biggest and the world's next biggest wiki. In April 2004, Susning had over 60,000 articles on various topics, which was more than any other Swedish wiki at that time. During its first few years it was in direct competition with the Swedish Wikipedia . However, because of the website's popularity, Susning was highly affected by vandals. In attempt at preventing vandalism, many efforts were made by Susning's founder Lars Aronsson, which were mostly unsuccessful. Users who regularly edited at Susning were called susare .
In August 2009, access to Susning.nu was shut down entirely. No explanation for this was ever given.

Susning starts
Susning.nu was started on August 31, 2001, by Lars Aronsson and functioned as part of his personal website. It changed to Susning.nu on September 29, and was released on October 1. During October that year, Susning.nu was indexed by the bigger web search engines , and the article collection firmly increased. In one year, Susning.nu grew with 10,000 articles, and more features were added. Among them were link statistics for all pages, and date searching which automatically generated dates and search-links in several languages. The first edit war broke out on July 31, 2002.
Susning used a heavily modified version of UseModWiki as its wiki engine . The domain name .nu , which belongs to the 260 km² island of Niue but which is sold primarily to foreigners, was chosen because it means "now" in Swedish (as well as Danish and Dutch ). " Skaffa dig en susning.nu " was the slogan of Susning and translates to " Get a clue.now ". The standard top level domain for Sweden is .se .

Issues with vandalism
A significant difference to the Swedish Wikipedia was that Susning did not have any voluntary administrators who could assist in blocking vandals; the only person who could do that on Susning was Lars Aronsson. As Susning grew, the issue with vandalism became bigger. In December 2003, Susning was affected by a vandal who had automatized their activity through a script . In just a few minutes, thousands of articles were deleted. Several users were forced to spend hours restoring them. The issues increased even further with vandals who added pornographic images and made the site inaccessible. The issues with vandalism were practically going on daily. To aid removal of vandalism and discoveries of vandalism, a " karma system" was added on February 22, 2004. The system derailed fairly soon, as the karma only could decrease. Because of this, even the most established "susare" were affected by bad karma. The karma system was shut down on March 25, 2004.
As a last attempt at preventing vandalism, the ability to see images was shut down entirely on April 5, 2004. However, a couple of days later it was possible to add images from certain chosen domain names . Due to a bug in the system, there were ways to evade this, which the vandals utilised. The bug was fixed on April 15, 2004, but a few minutes later that day, all editing on Susning.nu was shut down. Aronsson announced that the editing abilities would be shut down until a solution to the vandalism issues had been found, and that a password system would be imposed. No details were given for the time being. A couple dozen of logged in "susare" had edited a fairly huge amount of articles since the password lock was imposed.
After the imposing of the password lock, Susning became a more inactive project, and a dozen users made almost all edits. In March 2004, before the password system was imposed, articles were saved approximately 36,000 times. In May, articles were saved approximately 1,600 times, which is just a few percent of the activity in March 2004. On May 11, 2004, editing on Susning.nu was temporarily opened for non-logged in users as well. But after just 18 hours, vandalism had once again become such a big problem that the ability for non-logged in editing was once again shut down. In March 2006, editing by non-logged in users was opened on Sunday afternoons between 12:00–16:00. A year later, editing between 06:00–07:00 each day was enabled as well. Overall it worked well but with a bit of vandalism. In mid-2008, the website was affected by a persistent spammer who used proxy servers to spam different articles with English advertisement links. In April 2009, this forced Aronsson to remove the daily editing abilities between 06:00–07:00. The editing abilities during Sunday afternoons, however, continued to be open despite returning spam attacks. In April 2009, very few users still created and edited articles on the website.

Opinions
An aired opinion was that Susning's status as a one-man project on the technical side was a big aberration. Some meant that divided responsibility of the site probably would've meant increased innovation tact, bigger predictability and better communication between technicians and "susare". Lars Aronsson clarified that he saw Susning.nu as his own project and that he was not interested in letting others control it. After the imposed editing on Sunday afternoons only, Aronsson himself used Susning mostly as a logbook where he saved links regarding, for example, Google and Wikipedia .

Advertisement
Unlike its main competitor, the Swedish Wikipedia, Susning.nu placed advertisements on some of its articles. It also had no license agreement , which meant that the contributions remained copyrighted by their submitters (the right to modify was said to be implicit in the site's function). This in turn meant that third parties, such as Wikipedia editors, cannot legally use Susning.nu materials contributed by others without permission. It also meant that Susning.nu depended solely on Lars Aronsson's willingness to continue the project.

See also

Further reading

External links
WebPage index: 00105
Scholarpedia
Scholarpedia is an English-language online wiki -based encyclopedia with features commonly associated with open-access online academic journals , which aims to have quality content.
Scholarpedia articles are written by invited expert authors and are subject to peer review . [4] Scholarpedia lists the real names and affiliations of all authors, curators and editors involved in an article: however, the peer review process (which can suggest changes or additions, and has to be satisfied before an article can appear) is anonymous. Scholarpedia articles are stored in an online repository, and can be cited as conventional journal articles ( Scholarpedia has the ISSN number ISSN 1941-6016 ). Scholarpedia ' s citation system includes support for revision numbers.
The project was created in February 2006 by Eugene M. Izhikevich, while he was a researcher at the Neurosciences Institute , San Diego, California . Izhikevich is also the encyclopedia's editor-in-chief.

Scope
Scholarpedia content is grouped into separate "encyclopedias". Currently seven of these are described as "focal areas": Astrophysics , Celestial mechanics , Computational neuroscience , Computational intelligence , Dynamical systems , Physics and Touch - but a further 12 include such diverse area such as Play Science [5] and Models of brain disorders [6] [7] and by February 2015, Scholarpedia had 2,342 content pages. [8]

Authorship
To ensure that the articles are written by experts, authors of the various articles in Scholarpedia are either invited by the editor-in-chief or other curators, or selected by a public election. For example, Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger were nominated for the article on Wikipedia. [9] As of May 2009, the list of authors included four Fields medalists and sixteen Nobel prize winners. [10] Registered users must provide their full real name, and a recognised affiliation to an academic institution. Only registered users can edit an article, and those edits are subject to approval by the curator of the article, who is typically the author. [11] Curatorship is transferrable. Users have a curator index attribute which is incremented or decremented by various activities and which affects the user's capabilities on the website.
After October 20, 2011, anyone can propose an article for Scholarpedia , but articles must be sponsored by Editors or Curators before the article can be published. [12]

Copyright
Articles are available online without charge for non-commercial use, but may not be copied in bulk. Authors are credited on the article page. [ citation needed ]
As of January 2008 [update] , Scholarpedia changed their licensing policy and now also accepts articles under the GNU Free Documentation License and the Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 license, in addition to the earlier system in which the author gives a non-exclusive license directly to Scholarpedia . [13] [14]

Software
Scholarpedia uses the same wiki engine as Wikipedia , MediaWiki , with modifications to support voting on revisions. The software's development is done privately. [15]

See also
WebPage index: 00106
Interpedia
Interpedia was one of the first-proposed Internet encyclopedias which would allow anyone to contribute by writing articles and submitting them to the central catalogue of all Interpedia pages.

History
Interpedia was initiated by Rick Gates , who posted a message titled "The Internet Encyclopedia" on October 25, 1993 to the PACS-L (Public-Access Computer Systems Forum) Listserv . [1] That message included the following musings:
The term Interpedia was coined by R. L. Samuell, a participant in early discussions on the topic. [ citation needed ]
In November, 1993, discussions moved to a dedicated mailing list , [2] supplemented later by Usenet newsgroup comp.infosystems.interpedia . [3] [4]
There was some disagreement about whether all pages should be in HTML , plain text , or whether all formats should be allowed ( e.g. , as with Gopher ). Another point of discussion was whether outside Internet resources not specifically written for the Interpedia could become part of it by simply including them in the catalog. [ citation needed ]
Furthermore, several independent "Seal-of-approval" (SOAP) agencies were envisioned which would rate Interpedia articles based on criteria of their own choosing; users could then decide which agencies' recommendations to follow. [5]
The project was actively discussed for around half a year, but in the end never left the planning stages and finally died, perhaps partly due to the unprecedented growth of the World Wide Web . [6]

See also
WebPage index: 00107
QRpedia
QRpedia is a mobile Web based system which uses QR codes to deliver Wikipedia articles to users, in their preferred language. [1] [2] [3] QR codes can easily be generated to link directly to any Uniform Resource Identifier (URI), but the QRpedia system adds further functionality. It is owned and operated by a subsidiary of Wikimedia UK (WMUK).
QRpedia was conceived by Roger Bamkin, a Wikipedia volunteer, coded by Terence Eden, and unveiled in April 2011. It is currently in use at museums and other institutions in countries including Australia , Bulgaria , the Czech Republic , Estonia , Macedonia , Spain , India , the United Kingdom , Germany and the United States . The project's source code is freely reusable under the MIT License .

Process
When a user scans a QRpedia QR code on their mobile device , the device decodes the QR code into a Uniform Resource Locator (URL) using the domain name " languagecode .qrwp.org" and whose path (final part) is the title of a Wikipedia article, and sends a request for the article specified in the URL to the QRpedia web server . It also transmits the language setting of the device. [4]
The QRpedia server then uses Wikipedia's API [1] to determine whether there is a version of the specified Wikipedia article in the language used by the device, and if so, returns it in a mobile-friendly format. [4] If there is no version of the article available in the preferred language, then the QRpedia server offers a choice of the available languages, or a Google translation .
In this way, one QRcode can deliver the same article in many languages, [4] even when the museum is unable to make its own translations. QRpedia also records usage statistics. [4] [5]

Origins
QRpedia was conceived by Roger Bamkin, [1] [6] a Wikipedia volunteer, and Terence Eden, [1] a mobile web consultant, [7] and was unveiled on 9 April 2011 [1] [8] at Derby Museum and Art Gallery 's Backstage Pass event, [1] [7] part of the "GLAM/Derby" collaboration between the museum and Wikipedia, [9] during which over 1,200 Wikipedia articles, in several languages, were also created. [10] The project's name is a portmanteau word, combining the initials "QR" from "QR ( Quick Response ) code" and "pedia" from "Wikipedia". [11] [ not in citation given ]
The project's source code is freely reusable under the MIT License . [12]

Implementations
Though created in the United Kingdom, QRpedia can be used in any location where the user's phone or tablet has a data signal (or remembers URLs until a signal is available) and is in use at venues including:
QRpedia also has uses outside of such institutions. For example, the Occupy movement uses it on campaign posters. [22]

Award
In January 2012, QRpedia was one of four projects (from 79 entrants) declared the most innovative mobile companies in the UK of 2011 by the Smart UK Project, and thus chosen to compete at Mobile World Congress in Barcelona, on 29 February 2012. [18] The criteria were "to be effective, easy to understand and with global potential and impact". [23]

Wikimedia UK dispute
A conflict of interest case involving QRpedia was identified as one of the "main incidents" leading to a 2012 review of the governance of Wikimedia UK (WMUK). The review found that the amount of time taken to resolve ownership caused the risk of outsiders perceiving a potential conflict of interest, and that Bamkin's acceptance of consultancy fees on projects (jointly funded by WMUK) involving QRpedia provided an opportunity for damage to the reputation of WMUK. This conflict of interest led to the resignation of WMUK trustee Joscelyn Upendran. [24] Shortly before her resignation on 31 August 2012, Upendran stated that "the charity has in effect agreed to take on responsibility [...] for a service that is 'co-owned' by a trustee", and suggested that "the conflict of interest may present a legal risk under charity and corporate law". [25] On 9 February 2013, WMUK announced that the intellectual property in QRpedia, and the qrpedia.org and qrwp.org domains, were to be transferred to the chapter at no cost. [26] On 12 February 2013, Michael Peel registered two QRpedia related domain names on behalf of WMUK. [27] On 2 April 2013, WMUK announced that Roger Bamkin and Terence Eden were transferring ownership of QRpedia to Wikimedia UK. [28] On 16 November 2013, WMUK announced that the agreement for the transfer had been signed and the IP rights in QRpedia were held by Cultural Outreach Limited, a wholly owned subsidiary of WMUK, and that following the agreement, the transfer of the domain names was an administrative process that could begin immediately. [29]
At least one Wikimedia chapter has received letters alleging that QRpedia infringes various patents. [30] Though WMUK believes that this is not the case and that the risk of litigation is not high, Cultural Outreach Limited has been set up to hold QRpedia, in order to shield WMUK should such a challenge arise. [31]

See also
WebPage index: 00108
Hitwise
Hitwise is a division of Connexity , that measures behavior across desktop, tablet and smartphone devices. The service provides data on trends in visitor and search behavior, visitor and website profiling and measures website market share . Hitwise helps companies optimize marketing efforts and improve the effectiveness of search, display, affiliate, mobile, email and social-media marketing campaigns.
In 2006 Hitwise was valued at £180m [1] and was subsequently acquired by Experian for $240m on 19 April 2007. [2]
In 2015 Hitwise was acquired by Digital marketing company, Connexity, in a combined worth $47 Million on 14 December 2015.

History

Awards

See also
Competitors in the internet market research space include Alexa , comScore , Netcraft , Quantcast , SimilarWeb and Spyfu .
WebPage index: 00109
Jim Giles (reporter)
Jim Giles is a journalist and co-founder of MATTER , an online publication specialising in long-form articles on science and technology.
He has written about science, politics and the environment for The Atlantic , the New York Times , [ citation needed ] Nature , [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] New Scientist and The Guardian . [ citation needed ]
Until April 2007, Giles wrote full-time for the journal Nature . In December 2005, he and colleagues published a story that compared the accuracy of science articles in English Wikipedia to those in Encyclopædia Britannica . Peer reviewers recruited by Nature identified an average of four inaccuracies in the English Wikipedia articles they examined and an average of around three in articles on the same topics in Britannica. [1] Britannica subsequently criticized the story, [8] prompting Nature to clarify the methodology used [9] to compile the results. [10]
In 2009, Giles asked ten prominent scientists to come together and discuss the future of the Nobel Prizes . The group, which included Tim Hunt , winner of the 2001 Nobel Prize in physiology or medicine, called for the creation of new Nobel prizes for the environment and public health. The group also recommended expanding the medicine prize to include disciplines such as ecology , which are not currently covered by the prize. The group's recommendation were published on 5 October 2009 in an open letter to the Nobel Foundation . [11]
In March 2012, Giles and fellow journalist Bobbie Johnson completed a successful " Kickstarter " campaign for MATTER, a new science and technology publication. The campaign raised $140,201. [ citation needed ] MATTER published its first article, [12] a 7,800-word story about a rare neurological condition, in November 2012. It currently [ when? ] publishes monthly. [ citation needed ]
Giles studied physics at the University of Bristol . He received a master's degree in computational neuroscience from the University of Oxford . Giles initially developed exhibitions at the Science Museum in London , joining Nature in 2001 as a news and features editor and becoming a reporter for the journal in 2003. [ citation needed ]
WebPage index: 00110
History News Network
History News Network ( HNN ) at George Washington University is a platform for historians writing about current events.

History
HNN, originally hosted by George Mason University moved to George Washington University in 2017. [1]

Details
Although the HNN resides on GMU's server, it operates independently of the university as a non-profit corporation registered in Washington State . The editor and founder of HNN is Richard Shenkman , associate professor of history at George Mason University ; its Advisory Board includes other academic scholars such as historians Pauline Maier , Gil Troy and Joyce Appleby , and Leonard Steinhorn . HNN sponsors several history-oriented blogs including Liberty and Power (coordinated by David T. Beito ), and Cliopatria (coordinated by Ralph E. Luker ). [2] [3] [4]
WebPage index: 00111
Jonathan Zittrain
Jonathan L. Zittrain (born 24 December 1969) is an American professor of Internet law and the George Bemis Professor of International Law at Harvard Law School . He is also a professor at the Harvard Kennedy School , a professor of computer science at the Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences , and co-founder and director of Harvard's Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society . Previously, Zittrain was Professor of Internet Governance and Regulation at the Oxford Internet Institute of the University of Oxford and visiting professor at the New York University School of Law and Stanford Law School . He is the author of The Future of the Internet and How to Stop It , as well as co-editor of the books, Access Denied ( MIT Press , 2008), Access Controlled (MIT Press, 2010), and Access Contested (MIT Press, 2011).
Zittrain works in several intersections of the Internet with law and policy including intellectual property , censorship and filtering for content control , and computer security . He founded a project at the Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society that develops classroom tools. [1] In 2001 he helped found Chilling Effects , a collaborative archive created by Wendy Seltzer to protect lawful online activity from legal threats. He also served as vice dean for Library and Information Resources at Harvard. [2]

Family and education
Zittrain is the son of two attorneys, Ruth A. Zittrain and Lester E. Zittrain. In 2004 with Jennifer K. Harrison, Zittrain published The Torts Game: Defending Mean Joe Greene , a book the authors dedicated to their parents. [3] His brother, Jeff, is an established Bay Area musician. [4] [5] His sister, Laurie Zittrain Eisenberg, is a scholar of the Arab and Israeli conflict [6] and teaches at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh. [7]
Zittrain, who grew up in the suburb of Churchill outside of Pittsburgh, graduated in 1987 from Shady Side Academy , a private school in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania . [8] He holds a bachelor's summa cum laude in cognitive science and artificial intelligence from Yale University , 1991, where he was a member of the Yale Political Union , Manuscript Society and Davenport College , a J.D. magna cum laude from Harvard Law School , 1995, where he was the winner of the Williston Negotiation Competition , and a master of public administration from Harvard's John F. Kennedy School of Government , 1995. [9] [10]
He was law clerk for Stephen F. Williams of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit and served with the U.S. Department of Justice and, in 1991, with the Department of State , as well as at the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence in 1992 and 1994. [11] He was a longtime forum administrator, or sysop , for the online service CompuServe , serving for many years as the chief administrator for its private forum for all of its forum administrators. [10]

Later career
Zittrain joined the staff of the University of Oxford in Oxford in the United Kingdom as of September 2005. [12] He held the Chair in Internet Governance and Regulation, was a principal of the Oxford Internet Institute , and was a Professorial Fellow of Keble College , which has developed a particular interest in computer science and public policy. [12] In the United States, he was also the Jack N. & Lillian R. Berkman Visiting Professor for Entrepreneurial Legal Studies at Harvard Law School in Cambridge, Massachusetts and director and founder with Charles Nesson of its Berkman Center for Internet & Society . Zittrain was a visiting professor at the Stanford Law School in 2007 [13] and was a visiting professor at New York University School of Law in Manhattan for the spring 2008 semester.
Zittrain taught, or taught with others, Harvard's courses on Cyberlaw: Internet Points of Control , The Exploding Internet: Building A Global Commons in Cyberspace , Torts , Internet & Society: The Technologies and Politics of Control , The Law of Cyberspace , The Law of Cyberspace: Social Protocols , Privacy Policy , The Microsoft Case , and The High Tech Entrepreneur . [14] He searched for novel ways to use technology unobtrusively in the classroom at Harvard, [15] founded H2O [16] and used the system to teach his classes. Students are polled, assigned opposing arguments, and use H2O to develop their writing skills. Students enrolled in his The Internet and Society class could participate both orally and via the Internet. A teaching fellow seated in the classroom supplied Zittrain with the comments received from students in real time via e-mail as well as through "chat" or "instant message" from students participating in the class while logged into Second Life. (www.secondlife.com) [17]
He has been critical of the process used by ICANN , the International Telecommunication Union and the World Summit on the Information Society . [18] Although he describes their approach as, in some ways, simple and naïve, Zittrain sees more hope in the open Internet Engineering Task Force model and in the ethical code and assumption of good faith that govern Wikipedia . [19] He wrote in 2008, "Wikipedia—with the cooperation of many Wikipedians—has developed a system of self-governance that has many indicia of the rule of law without heavy reliance on outside authority or boundary." [19]
In 2009 Zittrain was elected to the Internet Society 's board of trustees for a four-year term. [20] In February 2011 he joined the board of the Electronic Frontier Foundation . [21] In May 2011 Zittrain was made for Federal Communications Commission Distinguished Scholar. [22] In May 2012 he was made for Chair at Federal Communications Commission Open Internet Advisory Committee. [23]

Internet filtering
The OpenNet Initiative (ONI) monitors Internet censorship by national governments. Between 2001 and 2003 at Harvard's Berkman Center, Zittrain and Benjamin Edelman studied Internet filtering. In their tests during 2002, when Google had indexed almost 2.5 billion pages, they found sites blocked, from approximately 100 in France and Germany to 2,000 in Saudi Arabia , and 20,000 in the People's Republic of China . The authors published a statement of issues and a call for data that year. [24]
Building on the work completed at the Berkman Center, ONI published special reports, case studies, and bulletins beginning in 2004, [25] and as of 2008, offered research on filtering in 40 countries as well as by regions of the world. [26] As of 2016, Zittrain remains a principal investigator at ONI, together with Ronald Deibert of the University of Toronto , John Palfrey , who was previously the executive director of the Berkman Center (now the head of School at Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts [27] ), and Rafal Rohozinski of the University of Cambridge . [28]
In 2001, Zittrain cofounded Chilling Effects with his students and former students, including its creator and leader, Wendy Seltzer . It monitors cease and desist letters. Google directs its users to Chilling Effects when its search results have been altered at the request of a national government. [15] [29] Since 2002, researchers have been using the clearinghouse (renamed "Lumen" in 2015) to study the use of cease-and-desist letters, primarily looking at DMCA 512 takedown notices, non-DMCA copyright, and trademark claims. [30] [31]

Copyright
On October 9, 2002, Zittrain and Lawrence Lessig argued a landmark case, known as Eldred v. Ashcroft , before the United States Supreme Court . As co-counsel for the plaintiff, they argued that the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act (CTEA) was unconstitutional. [32] The court ruled 7–2 on January 15, 2003 to uphold the CTEA which extended existing copyrights 20 years, from the life of the author plus 50 years, to plus 70 years. In the words of Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg , the petitioners did "not challenge the CTEA's 'life-plus-70-years' time span itself. They maintain that Congress went awry not with respect to newly created works, but in enlarging the term for published works with existing copyrights." The court found that the act did "not exceed Congress' power" and that "CTEA's extension of existing and future copyrights does not violate the First Amendment ". [33] In 2003 Zittrain said he was concerned that Congress will hear the same arguments after the 20-year extension passes, and that the Internet is causing a "cultural reassessment of the meaning of copyright". [34]

Security
After Zittrain joined the staff at Oxford, Zittrain and John Palfrey at the Berkman Center founded StopBadware.org in 2006 to function as a clearinghouse for what has become proliferation of malware . [35] Borrowing Wikipedia's "ethical code that encourages users to do the right thing rather than the required thing", [36] the organization wished to assign the task of data collection—and not analysis—about malware to Internet users at large. [35] When its scans find dangerous code, Google places StopBadware alerts in its search results and rescans later to determine whether a site thereafter had been cleaned. [37]
One of StopBadware's goals is to "preempt" the stifling of the Internet. [38] The founders think that centralized regulation could follow a serious Internet security breach, and that consumers might then choose to purchase closed, centrally managed solutions like tethered appliances that are modified by their vendor rather than owner, or might flee to services in walled gardens. In Zittrain's word, "generative" devices and platforms, including the Internet itself, offer an opening forward. [1] In 2007, he cautioned, "...we're moving to software-as-service, which can be yanked or transformed at any moment. The ability of your PC to run independent code is an important safety valve." [39]
Reactions in the Boston Review accompanied the publication of his book, The Future of the Internet and How to Stop It , in 2008. Support came from David D. Clark and Susan P. Crawford . Criticism ranged from Richard Stallman 's finding no evidence of a flight to closed systems and his message that software developers need control and software patents must end, [40] to a request for cost-benefit analysis, [41] to the belief that netizenship won't scale to the business world [42] to faith that consumers will buy only open, non-proprietary systems. [43]
Directed by Palfrey and Zittrain, StopBadware receives high-level guidance from its advisory board: Vint Cerf of Google, Esther Dyson , George He of Lenovo , Greg Papadopoulos (formerly CTO of Sun Microsystems ), and Ari Schwartz of the Center for Democracy and Technology. The working group, which has included Ben Adida, Scott Bradner, Beau Brendler, Jerry Gregoire, Eric L. Howes, and Nart Villeneuve at various times, frames the project's research agenda and methodology and is the body which helps to inform the public about StopBadware's work. [44] StopBadware has been supported by AOL , Google, eBay / PayPal , Lenovo, Trend Micro , and VeriSign and its use has been advised by Consumer Reports WebWatch. [45]

Stock markets and spam
Writing with Laura Freider of Purdue University , in 2008 Zittrain published Spam Works: Evidence from Stock Touts and Corresponding Market Activity , in the Hastings Communications and Entertainment Law Journal to document the manipulation of stock prices via spam e-mail . [46] They found evidence that "stocks experience a significantly positive return on days prior to heavy touting via spam" and that "prolific spamming greatly affects the trading volume of a targeted stock". Apart from transaction costs, in some circumstances the spammer earned over 4% while the average investor who bought on the day of receipt of the spam would lose more than 5% if they sold two days later. [47] Frieder said in 2006 that she knew of no other explanation for their results, but that people do follow the stock tips in their spam e-mail. [46]

Recent publications

Notes

External links
WebPage index: 00112
Association for Computing Machinery
The Association for Computing Machinery ( ACM ) is an international learned society for computing . It was founded in 1947 and is the world's largest [1] scientific and educational computing society. It is a not-for-profit professional membership group. [2] Its membership is more than 100,000 as of 2011. Its headquarters are in New York City.
The ACM is an umbrella organization for academic and scholarly interests in computer science . Its motto is "Advancing Computing as a Science & Profession".

Activities
ACM is organized into over 171 local chapters and 37 Special Interest Groups (SIGs), through which it conducts most of its activities. Additionally, there are over 500 college and university chapters. The first student chapter was founded in 1961 at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette .
Many of the SIGs, such as SIGGRAPH , SIGPLAN , SIGCSE and SIGCOMM , sponsor regular conferences, which have become famous as the dominant venue for presenting innovations in certain fields. The groups also publish a large number of specialized journals, magazines, and newsletters.
ACM also sponsors other computer science related events such as the worldwide ACM International Collegiate Programming Contest (ICPC), and has sponsored some other events such as the chess match between Garry Kasparov and the IBM Deep Blue computer.

Services

Publications
ACM publishes over 50 journals [3] including the prestigious [4] Journal of the ACM , and two general magazines for computer professionals, Communications of the ACM (also known as Communications or CACM ) and Queue . Other publications of the ACM include:
Although Communications no longer publishes primary research, and is not considered a prestigious venue, many of the great debates and results in computing history have been published in its pages.
ACM has made almost all of its publications available to paid subscribers online at its Digital Library and also has a Guide to Computing Literature . Individual members additionally have access to Safari Books Online and Books24x7. ACM also offers insurance, online courses, and other services to its members.
In 1997, ACM Press published Wizards and Their Wonders: Portraits in Computing ( ISBN 0897919602 ), written by Christopher Morgan, with new photographs by Louis Fabian Bachrach . The book is a collection of historic and current portrait photographs of figures from the computer industry.

Portal and Digital Library
The ACM Portal is an online service of the ACM. [6] Its core are two main sections: ACM Digital Library and the ACM Guide to Computing Literature . [7]
The ACM Digital Library is the full-text collection of all articles published by the ACM in its articles, magazines and conference proceedings. The Guide is a bibliography in computing with over one million entries. [6] The ACM Digital Library contains a comprehensive archive starting in the 1950s of the organization's journals, magazines, newsletters and conference proceedings. Online services include a forum called Ubiquity and Tech News digest. There is an extensive underlying bibliographic database containing key works of all genres from all major publishers of computing literature. This secondary database is a rich discovery service known as The ACM Guide to Computing Literature.
ACM adopted a hybrid Open Access (OA) publishing model in 2013. Authors who do not choose to pay the OA fee must grant ACM publishing rights by either a copyright transfer agreement or a publishing license agreement. [8]
ACM was a "green" publisher before the term was invented. Authors may post documents on their own websites and in their institutional repositories with a link back to the ACM Digital Library's permanently maintained Version of Record.
All metadata in the Digital Library is open to the world, including abstracts , linked references and citing works, citation and usage statistics, as well as all functionality and services. Other than the free articles, the full-texts are accessed by subscription.
There is also a mounting challenge to the ACM's publication practices coming from the open access movement. Some authors see a centralized peer–review process as less relevant and publish on their home pages or on unreviewed sites like arXiv . Other organizations have sprung up which do their peer review entirely free and online, such as Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research (JAIR) , Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR) and the Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology.

Membership grades
In addition to student and regular members, ACM has several advanced membership grades to recognize those with multiple years of membership and "demonstrated performance that sets them apart from their peers". [9]

Fellows
The ACM Fellows Program was established by Council of the Association for Computing Machinery in 1993 "to recognize and honor outstanding ACM members for their achievements in computer science and information technology and for their significant contributions to the mission of the ACM." There are presently [ when? ] about 958 Fellows [10] out of about 75,000 professional members.

Distinguished Members
In 2006 ACM began recognizing two additional membership grades, one which was called Distinguished Members. Distinguished Members (Distinguished Engineers, Distinguished Scientists, and Distinguished Educators) have at least 15 years of professional experience and 5 years of continuous ACM membership and "have made a significant impact on the computing field". Note that in 2006 when the Distinguished Members first came out, one of the three levels was called "Distinguished Member" and was changed about two years later to "Distinguished Educator". Those who already had the Distinguished Member title had their titles changed to one of the other three titles.

Senior Members
Also in 2006, ACM began recognizing Senior Members. Senior Members have ten or more years of professional experience and 5 years of continuous ACM membership.

Chapters
ACM has three kinds of chapters: Special Interest Groups , [11] Professional Chapters, and Student Chapters. [12]
As of 2011, ACM has professional & SIG Chapters in 56 countries. [13]
As of 2014, there exist ACM student chapters in 41 different countries. [14]

Special Interest Groups

Conferences
ACM and its Special Interest Groups (SIGs) sponsors numerous conferences with 170 hosted worldwide in 2017. ACM Conferences page has an up-to-date complete list while a partial list is shown below. Most of the SIGs also have an annual conference. ACM conferences are often very popular publishing venues and are therefore very competitive. For example, the 2007 SIGGRAPH conference attracted about 30000 visitors, and CIKM only accepted 15% of the long papers that were submitted in 2005.
The ACM is a co–presenter and founding partner of the Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing (GHC) with the Anita Borg Institute for Women and Technology . [21]
There are some conferences hosted by ACM student branches; this includes Reflections Projections , which is hosted by UIUC ACM. [ citation needed ] . In addition, ACM sponsors regional conferences. Regional conferences facilitate increased opportunities for collaboration between nearby institutions and they are well attended.
For additional non-ACM conferences, see this list of computer science conferences .

Awards
The ACM presents or co–presents a number of awards for outstanding technical and professional achievements and contributions in computer science and information technology. [22] [23] [24] Over 30 of ACM's Special Interest Groups also award individuals for their contributions. [25]

Leadership
The President of ACM for 2016–2018 is Vicki L. Hanson , Distinguished Professor in the Department of Information Sciences and Technologies at the Rochester Institute of Technology and Professor and Chair of Inclusive Technologies at the University of Dundee , UK. She is successor of Alexander L. Wolf (2014–2016), Dean of the Jack Baskin School of Engineering at the University of California, Santa Cruz ; Vint Cerf (2012–2014), an American computer scientist who is recognized as one of "the fathers of the Internet"; Alain Chesnais (2010–2012), a French citizen living in Toronto, Ontario , Canada, where he runs his company named Visual Transitions; and Dame Wendy Hall of the University of Southampton , UK (2008–2010). [27]
ACM is led by a Council consisting of the President, Vice-President, Treasurer, Past President, SIG Governing Board Chair, Publications Board Chair, three representatives of the SIG Governing Board, and seven Members–At–Large. This institution is often referred to simply as "Council" in Communications of the ACM .

Infrastructure
ACM has five "Boards" that make up various committees and subgroups, to help Headquarters staff maintain quality services and products. These boards are as follows:

ACM Council on Women in Computing
ACM-W , [28] the ACM council on women in computing , supports, celebrates, and advocates internationally for the full engagement of women in computing. ACM–W's main programs are regional celebrations of women in computing, ACM-W chapters, and scholarships for women CS students to attend research conferences. In India and Europe these activities are overseen by ACM-W India and ACM-W Europe respectively. ACM-W collaborates with organizations such as the Anita Borg Institute, the National Center for Women and IT, CRA-W.

Athena Lectures
The ACM-W gives an annual Athena Lecturer Award to honor outstanding women researchers who have made fundamental contributions to computer science. [29] This program began in 2006. Speakers are nominated by SIG officers. [30]

Cooperation
ACM's primary partner has been the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE-CS), which is the largest subgroup of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). The IEEE focuses more on hardware and standardization issues than theoretical computer science , but there is considerable overlap with ACM's agenda. They have many joint activities including conferences, publications and awards. [32] ACM and its SIGs co-sponsor about 20 conferences each year with IEEE-CS and other parts of IEEE. [33] Eckert-Mauchly Award and Ken Kennedy Award , both major awards in computer science, are given jointly by ACM and the IEEE-CS. [34] They occasionally cooperate on projects like developing computing curricula. [35]
ACM has also jointly sponsored on events with other professional organizations like the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM). [36]

See also
WebPage index: 00113
The New York Times International Edition
The New York Times International Edition , previously known as the The International New York Times and before that as International Herald Tribune , is an English language newspaper printed at 38 sites throughout the world and sold in more than 160 countries and territories. From 1967 to 2013, the paper was known as the International Herald Tribune , and was renamed The International New York Times on October 15, 2013. [2] [3]
In October 2016, the newspaper was fully integrated with its parent and renamed The New York Times International Edition . [4] Autumn that year also saw the closing of editing and preproduction operations in the Paris newsroom, [5] where the paper, under various names, had been headquartered since 1887. [6]

History
The Paris Herald was founded on 4 October 1887, as the European edition of the New York Herald by the parent paper’s owner, James Gordon Bennett, Jr. [7] [8] The company was based in Neuilly-sur-Seine , a suburb of Paris, France.
After the death of Bennett in 1918, Frank Andrew Munsey bought the New York Herald and the Paris Herald . Munsey sold the Herald newspapers in 1924 to the New York Tribune , and the Paris Herald became the Paris Herald Tribune , while the New York paper became New York Herald Tribune .
The newspaper became a mainstay of American expatriate culture in Europe. In Ernest Hemingway ’s 1926 novel, The Sun Also Rises , the first thing the novel’s protagonist Jake Barnes does on returning from Spain to France is to buy the New York Herald from a kiosk in Bayonne and read it at a cafe. [9] In Jean-Luc Godard ’s 1960 film Breathless , the female lead character Patricia (played by Jean Seberg ) is an American student journalist who sells the New York Herald Tribune on the streets of Paris. [9] Pages from the day’s paper can be seen tacked up through the office windows, a tradition that was to continue with the International Herald Tribune .
In 1959 John Hay Whitney , a businessman and United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom , bought the New York Herald Tribune and its European edition. In 1966 the New York Herald Tribune was merged into the short-lived New York World Journal Tribune and ceased publication, but the Whitney family kept the Paris paper going through partnerships. In December 1966 The Washington Post became a joint owner.
The New York Times became a joint owner of the Paris Herald Tribune in May 1967, whereupon the newspaper became known as the International Herald Tribune (IHT). [7]
In 1974, the IHT began transmitting facsimile pages of the paper between nations and opened a printing site near London. In 1977 the paper opened a second site in Zürich .
The ' IHT began transmitting electronic images of newspaper pages from Paris to Hong Kong via satellite in 1980, making the paper simultaneously available on opposite sides of the planet. This was the first such intercontinental transmission of an English-language daily newspaper and followed the pioneering efforts of the Chinese-language newspaper Sing Tao Daily (星島日報) .
In 1991, The Washington Post and The New York Times became sole and equal shareholders of the IHT . In February 2005 it opened its Asia newsroom in Hong Kong.
In April 2001, the Japanese newspaper Asahi Shimbun (朝日新聞) tied up with the IHT and published an English-language newspaper, the International Herald Tribune / Asahi Shimbun . [10] After The Washington Post sold their stake in the IHT , it continued being published under the name International Herald Tribune / Asahi Shimbun , but it was discontinued on February 2011. [10]

Acquisition by The New York Times Company
On 30 December 2002 The New York Times Company took control of the paper by buying the 50% stake owned by The Washington Post Company . The takeover ended a 35-year partnership between the two US domestic competitors. The Post was forced to sell when the Times threatened to pull out and start a competing paper. [ citation needed ] As a result, the Post entered into an agreement to publish selected Post articles in The Wall Street Journal ’s European edition. After the takeover the IHT was subtitled The Global Edition of the New York Times .
In 2008, the NYT Company announced the merger of the New York Times and IHT websites. In March 2009 the IHT website became the global version of NYTimes.com. In 2013, the New York Times Company announced that the newspaper itself would be renamed The International New York Times to reflect the company’s focus on its core New York Times newspaper and to build its international presence. [2] On 14 October 2013 the International Herald Tribune appeared on newsstands for the last time. It came with a supplemental section, titled Turning the Page , a retrospective on the Herald Tribune ’s past articles, photographs and place in newspaper history. On October 15, 2013, the International New York Times debuted with a ‘Premier Edition’ flash above the masthead . It came with a supplement titled Turning the Page II , which discussed and predicted likely developments in many global areas including energy, finance, technology and media.

Columnists
While the International Edition shares many columnists with The New York Times , it has its own voice, particularly in the field of culture. Well-known commentators include Alice Rawsthorn on design and Souren Melikian on art.

Jonathan Spollen
Jonathan Spollen , an Irish copy editor at the paper’s Hong Kong bureau went missing while in northern India in February 2012, sparking an international campaign to locate him. [11] Spollen’s local Teachta Dála Eoghan Murphy appealed for support for the campaign in the Dáil Éireann . [12]

Affiliations
Affiliations with international newspapers include:
Typically, the affiliation consists of an English-language edition of the local newspaper circulated together with the NYT International Edition .
WebPage index: 00114
Fernanda Viégas
Fernanda Bertini Viégas (born 1971) is a Brazilian scientist and designer, whose work focuses on the social, collaborative and artistic aspects of information visualization.

Biography
Viégas received a Ph.D. in Media Arts and Sciences from the MIT Media Lab in 2005. The same year she began work at the Cambridge, Massachusetts location of IBM's Thomas J. Watson Research Center as part of the Visual Communication Lab.
In April 2010, she and Martin M. Wattenberg started a new venture called Flowing Media, Inc., to focus on visualization aimed at consumers and mass audiences. [1] Four months later, both of them joined Google as the co-leaders of the Google's "Big Picture" data visualization group in Cambridge, MA. [2] [3]

Work

Social visualization
Viégas began her research while at the MIT Media Lab , focusing on graphical interfaces for online communication . Her Chat Circles system introduced ideas such as proximity-based filtering of conversation and a visual archive of chat history displaying the overall rhythm and form of a conversation. [4] Her email visualization designs (including PostHistory and Themail) are the foundation for many other systems; her findings on how visualizations are often used for storytelling influenced subsequent work on the collaborative aspects of visualization. [5] While at MIT, she also studied usage of Usenet and blogs . [6]

Collective intelligence and public visualization
A second stream of work, in partnership with Martin Wattenberg , centers on collective intelligence and the public use of data visualization.
Her work with visualizations such as History Flow and Chromogram led to some of the earliest publications on the dynamics of Wikipedia, including the first scientific study of the repair of vandalism . [7]
Viégas is one of the founders of IBM's experimental Many Eyes website, created in 2007, [8] [9] which seeks to make visualization technology accessible to the public. In addition to broad uptake from individuals, the technology from Many Eyes has been used by nonprofits and news outlets such as the New York Times Visualization Lab. [10]

Art
Viégas is also known for her artistic work, which explores the medium of visualization for explorations of emotionally charged digital data. An early example is Artifacts of the Presence Era, an interactive installation at the Boston Center for the Arts in 2003, which featured a video-based timeline of visitor interactions with the museum. She often works with Martin Wattenburg to visualize emotionally charged information. An example of these works is their piece "Web Seer", which is a visualization of gole suggest. [11] The Fleshmap series (started in 2008) uses visualization to portray aspects of sensuality, and includes work on the web, video, and installations. [12] In 2012, she launched the Wind Map project , [13] which displays continuously updated forecasts of wind patterns across the United States.

Publications
WebPage index: 00115
Slate (magazine)
Slate is an online magazine that covers current affairs, politics and culture in the United States. It was created in 1996 by former New Republic editor Michael Kinsley , initially under the ownership of Microsoft as part of MSN . On 21 December 2004, it was purchased by The Washington Post Company , later renamed the Graham Holdings Company . Since 4 June 2008, Slate has been managed by The Slate Group , an online publishing entity created by the Graham Holdings Company to develop and manage web-only magazines. Slate is based in New York City, with an additional office in Washington, DC. [2]
A French version (slate.fr) was launched in February 2009 by a group of four journalists, including Jean-Marie Colombani , Eric Leser, and economist Jacques Attali . Among them, the founders hold 50% in the publishing company, while The Slate Group holds 15%. [3] [4] In 2011, slate.fr started a separate site covering African news, Slate Afrique , with a Paris-based editorial staff. [5]
In July 2014, Julia Turner replaced David Plotz , who had been editor of Slate since 2008. [6] Plotz had been the deputy editor to Jacob Weisberg , Slate's editor from 2002 until his designation as the Chairman and Editor-in-Chief of The Slate Group. The Washington Post Company's John Alderman is Slate ' s publisher.
Slate ( ISSN 1091-2339 ), which is updated throughout the day, covers politics, arts and culture, sports, and news. According to Turner, the magazine is "not fundamentally a breaking news source," but rather aimed at helping readers to "analyze and understand and interpret the world" with witty and entertaining writing. [7] As of mid-2015, it publishes about 1500 stories per month. [8]
Slate is also known (and sometimes criticized) for adopting contrarian views, giving rise to the term "Slate Pitches." [9] [10] [11] It is ad-supported and has been available to read free of charge since 1999, but restricted access for non-US readers via a metered paywall in 2015.

Background
Slate features regular and semi-regular columns such as Explainer, Moneybox, Spectator, Transport , and Dear Prudence . Many of the articles are short (under 2,000 words) and argument-driven. Around 2010, the magazine also began running long-form journalism. Many of the longer stories are an outgrowth of the "Fresca Fellowships", so-called because former editor Plotz liked the soft drink Fresca . "The idea is that every writer and editor on staff has to spend a month or six weeks a year not doing their regular job, but instead working on a long, ambitious project of some sort," Plotz said in an interview. [12]
In 1998, Slate introduced a paywall -based business model that attracted up 20,000 subscribers but was abandoned afterwards. [13] A similar subscription model would later be implemented by Slate ' s independently owned competitor, Salon.com , in April 2001.
On November 30, 2005, Slate started a daily feature ”Today's Pictures”, featuring fifteen to twenty photographs from the archive at Magnum Photos that share a common theme. The column also features two flash animated ”Interactive Essays” a month.
In June 2006, on its tenth anniversary, Slate unveiled a redesigned website. In 2007, it introduced Slate V , [14] an online video magazine with content that relates to or expands upon their written articles. In 2013, the magazine was redesigned under the guidance of Design Director Vivian Selbo .
In 2011, Slate was nominated for four digital National Magazine Awards and won the NMA for General Excellence. In the same year, the magazine laid off several high-profile journalists, including co-founder Jack Shafer and Timothy Noah (author of the Chatterbox column). [15] At the time, it had around 40 full-time editorial staff. [15] The following year, a dedicated ad sales team was created. [16]
In 2012, Slate launched the Slate Book Review, a monthly books section edited by Dan Kois. [17]
In 2013, Slate became profitable after preceding years had seen layoffs and falling ad revenues. [7]
In 2014, Slate introduced a paywall system called "Slate Plus" offering ad-free podcasts as well as some bonus materials. A year later, it had attracted 9,000 subscribers generating about $500,000 in annual revenue. [13]
In June 2015, Slate started moving all content behind a metered paywall for international readers, explaining that "our U.S.-based sales team sells primarily to domestic advertisers, many of whom only want to reach a domestic audience. ...The end result is that, outside the United States, we are not covering our costs." [18] At the same time, it was stated that there were no plans for a domestic paywall. [8]

Reputation for counterintuitive arguments ("Slate pitches")
Since at least 2006, [10] Slate has been known for publishing contrarian pieces arguing against commonly held views about a subject, giving rise to the #slatepitches Twitter hashtag in 2009. [11] The Columbia Journalism Review has defined Slate pitches as "an idea that sounds wrong or counterintuitive proposed as though it were the tightest logic ever" and explained their success as follows: "Readers want to click on Slate Pitches because they want to know what a writer could possibly say that would support their logic". [19] In 2014, Slate ' s editor-in-chief Julia Turner acknowledged that a reputation for counterintuitive arguments forms part of Slate's "distinctive" brand, but argued that the hashtag misrepresents the site's journalism: "We are not looking to argue that up is down and black is white for the sake of being contrarian against all logic or intellectual rigor. But journalism is more interesting when it surprises you either with the conclusions that it reaches or the ways that it reaches them." [7]

Podcasts
According to NiemanLab, Slate has been involved in podcasts "almost from the very beginning" of the medium. [20] Their first podcast offering, released on July 15, 2005, [21] featured selected stories from the site read by Andy Bowers, who had joined Slate after leaving NPR in 2003. [20] [22] By June 2012, Slate had expanded their lineup to nineteen podcasts, with Political Gabfest and Culture Gabfest being the most popular. [20] This count had shrunk to fourteen by February 2015, with all receiving six million downloads per month. [22] The podcasts are "a profitable part of [ Slate' s] business"; the magazine charges more for advertising in its podcasts than in any of its other content. [20]
Slate podcasts have gotten longer over the years. The original Gabfest ran fifteen minutes; by 2012, most ran about 45 minutes. [20]

Notable contributors and their departments

Other recurring features

Blogs

Summary columns

Past notable contributors

Company overview

Key executives
WebPage index: 00116
Stacy Schiff
Stacy Madeleine Schiff (born October 26, 1961) [1] is a Pulitzer Prize -winning American nonfiction author. She was formerly a guest columnist for The New York Times . [2] Writing in The Wall Street Journal , Brad Gooch has called her "perhaps the most seductive writer of nonfiction prose in America in our time." [3]

Biography
Schiff, born in Adams, Massachusetts , is a graduate of Phillips Academy (Andover) preparatory school, and earned her B.A. degree from Williams College in 1982. She was a senior editor at Simon & Schuster until 1990. Her essays and articles have appeared in The New Yorker , The New York Times , The New York Review of Books , and The Times Literary Supplement . [4] [5]
Schiff won the 2000 Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography for Vera , a biography of Vera Nabokov , wife and muse of Vladimir Nabokov . She was also a finalist for the 1995 Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography for Saint-Exupéry: A Biography of Antoine de Saint Exupéry . [1]
Schiff’s A Great Improvisation: Franklin, France, and the Birth of America (2005) won the George Washington Book Prize . [6] Her fourth book, Cleopatra: A Life , was published to great acclaim in 2010. As the Wall Street Journal 's reviewer put it, "Schiff does a rare thing: She gives us a book we'd miss if it didn't exist." [ citation needed ] The New Yorker termed the book "a work of literature;" [ citation needed ] Simon Winchester predicted "it will become a classic." [ citation needed ] Ron Chernow wrote, "Even if forced to at gunpoint, Stacy Schiff would be incapable of writing a dull page or a lame sentence." [ citation needed ] Cleopatra appeared on most year-end best books lists, including the New York Times 's Top Ten Books of 2010, and won the PEN/Jacqueline Bograd Weld Award for biography. A #1 bestseller, it was translated into 30 languages. [ citation needed ]
Little, Brown published The Witches: Salem, 1692 in 2015. The New York Times hailed it as "an almost novelistic, thriller-like narrative." [7] David McCullough declared the book "brilliant from start to finish." [8] A former guest columnist at The New York Times , Schiff resides in New York City and is a trustee of the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation . [9]

Awards and honors

Works

Books

Selected essays and articles

See also
WebPage index: 00117
Robert McHenry
Robert Dale McHenry (born April 30, 1945) is an American editor, encyclopedist , philanthropist and writer. McHenry worked from 1967 for Encyclopædia Britannica Inc. or associated companies, becoming editor-in-chief of the Encyclopædia Britannica in 1992, a position he held until 1997. McHenry is also author of the book How to Know (2004), and a frequent contributor to journals.

Early life and education
McHenry was born in St. Louis, Missouri . He attended Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois , and received a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1966. He also received a master's degree from the University of Michigan in 1967. Later in life, McHenry undertook further study at Northwestern University, where he graduated from Northwestern's Kellogg School of Management with a Master of Business Administration in 1987. [1]

Editorial career
McHenry's career at Encyclopædia Britannica Inc. began in 1967. After two years, he transferred to San Francisco Productions to work for Mortimer Adler , where he co-edited (with Charles Van Doren ) Webster's Guide to American History , A Documentary History of Conservation in America , and Webster's American Biographies . McHenry transferred in 1975 to G. & C. Merriam Co. (later renamed Merriam-Webster Inc. ) where he edited Webster's American Military Biographies , Famous American Women , Liberty's Women , and Webster's New Biographical Dictionary . [1] [2] [3]
McHenry returned to Britannica in 1982 as editor of Compton's Yearbook , which was an annual supplement to Compton's Encyclopedia . McHenry later joined the editorial staff of the Encyclopædia Britannica , initially as director of Britannica yearbooks, later progressing to become managing editor of the encyclopedia itself in 1986, general editor in 1990, and editor-in-chief in 1992. [1]
McHenry played a key role in the launch in 1994 of the Encyclopædia Britannica in two electronic forms; a CD-ROM version, Britannica CD , and an Internet version, Britannica Online , which was the first Internet-based encyclopedia. [1]
McHenry believes that Britannica failed to exploit its early advantages in the market for electronic encyclopedias. Britannica had, for example, published the first multimedia encyclopedia ( Compton's MultiMedia Encyclopedia ) as early as 1989, but did not launch Britannica CD until 1994, one year after Microsoft launched their Encarta encyclopedia. McHenry believes these failures were due to a reluctance amongst senior management to fully embrace new technology, caused largely by the overriding influence of the sales staff and management. The sales personnel earned commissions from door-to-door selling of the print encyclopedias, which McHenry believes led to decisions about the distribution and pricing of the electronic products, being driven by the desires of the sales personnel, rather than market conditions and customer expectations. [4]
Aided by Britannica's failings, Microsoft took a dominant position in the market for CD-ROM encyclopedias in the 1990s. McHenry had little respect for their achievement, which he believed to be the result of, not only large resources and wide market reach, but a "casual disregard for quality work". [4] In particular, in an article in 1996 (which the senior management at Britannica refused permission to publish) McHenry criticized Microsoft for its policy of having factually different versions of the same article in the various national issues of the encyclopedia. McHenry regarded this practice as " pandering to local prejudices" in order to suit local markets, instead of presenting subjects objectively. [5]
McHenry was replaced as the editor-in-chief of the Encyclopædia Britannica by Dale Hoiberg in 1997. [6]

Life after Britannica
In 1998, McHenry wrote the book How to Know , in which he explored the questions of what we can know and how we know that we know it. Though written in 1998, the book was not published until 2004. [7]
During 2002 and 2003, McHenry worked part-time in a used-book store, [8] [9] and for a company producing Internet content-filtering software . [10] During the same period, McHenry had several articles published in the The Chronicle of Higher Education and The Vocabula Review . [11] The articles were mainly about low standards in writing and verbal communication. One exception was a defence of Oprah's Book Club , following hostile comments from some critics. [12]
In 2004, McHenry began writing regularly for TCS Daily about a variety of issues. [11] A favourite topic has been Intelligent design (ID), which he has criticized on several occasions. McHenry has argued that ID is not a theory in the scientific meaning of the word, because it is not based on evidence, it does not generate predictions, and thus cannot be tested. [13] He has described ID as anti-science, because it begins with a conclusion, that some unknown things are unknowable, which is then supported by selected evidence. [14] McHenry has argued that science is the engine of society and the root of economic success. He believes that ID supporters want to stop the engine, not just for themselves, but for everyone else. He views the support of politicians for ID as particularly dangerous. [15]
McHenry has proposed two laws. McHenry's First Law states that 88% of all human behavior amounts to shouting "Hey! Look at me!". McHenry's Second Law states that the flow of 'information' expands to fill any available channel, while actual knowledge remains scarce and available only to those willing to work at it. [16]
McHenry's articles are normally critical in nature, though there is a humorous side to McHenry. One example was an article about his thoughts of the possible meanings of a "No deadly weapons in building" sign he had seen outside a public library. [17] Another example was an article where he weighed up the pros and cons of a suggestion that candidates for the United States Congress be selected by lot, but every apparent con became a pro after further consideration. [18]
McHenry's most recent articles appear in The American , the online magazine of The American Enterprise Institute for which he became a contributing writer in July 2008. [19]

Criticism of Wikipedia
In 2004, McHenry participated in a review of 7 Wikipedia articles of general interest, reviewing the entry for Encyclopedia, repeating his concerns about the entry's usefulness and giving it a 5/10 rating. [20]
In November 2004, McHenry wrote an article for Tech Central Station (later renamed TCS Daily ) in which he criticized Wikipedia, a free-content encyclopedia that anyone can edit. In essence, McHenry's main criticism was that Wikipedia was operating on what he believed was a false premise; that allowing anyone to edit articles, whether or not they were knowledgeable, would lead to evolution of article quality. Belief in the ability of Wikipedia to succeed, he argued, required a faith that "some unspecified quasi-Darwinian process will assure that those writings and editings by contributors of greatest expertise will survive". A secondary criticism was that editors were being self-indulgent, because they spent time on minor alterations while leaving important factual inaccuracies in place, and thus were disregarding the needs of the readers. [21] In a later article about Wikipedia, following the Seigenthaler incident , McHenry restated his earlier objections, and added a criticism that the Wikipedia organisation had been unable to respond adequately to the event. [22]
McHenry's articles about Wikipedia have produced responses from other writers. In a response to McHenry's first article, Aaron Krowne of freesoftwaremagazine.com considered McHenry's article to be an attack on the credibility of the commons-based peer production , for which he saw already strong evidence of success. [23] In a response to McHenry's later article, Tim Worstall , a fellow contributor to TCS Daily , argued that McHenry was wrongly assuming that the editorial process of traditional encyclopedias was effective in preventing inaccuracies. Worstall, drawing on his own experience as a contributor to traditional encyclopedias, argued that the editorial process often fails, because human nature leads editors to take the easy option of consulting other secondary sources , rather than take the extra effort to check primary sources . [24] McHenry published responses to both of these articles. [25] [26]

Sources

External links
WebPage index: 00118
The Register
The Register (nicknamed El Reg ) is a British technology news and opinion website co-founded in 1994 by Mike Magee , John Lettice and Ross Alderson. [2] Situation Publishing Ltd is listed as the site's publisher. Drew Culllen is an owner, Linus Birtles the managing director and Andrew Orlowski is the Executive Editor.

History
The Register was founded in London as an email newsletter called Chip Connection . In 1998 The Register became a daily online news source. Magee left in 2001 to start competing publications The Inquirer , and later the IT Examiner and TechEye . [3]
In 2002, The Register expanded to have a presence in London and San Francisco , creating The Register USA at theregus.com through a joint venture with Tom's Hardware . [4] In 2003, that site moved to theregister.com. [5] That content was later merged onto theregister.co.uk. The Register carries syndicated content including Simon Travaglia 's BOFH stories. [6]
In 2010 The Register supported the successful launch of the Paper Aircraft Released Into Space , a project they announced in 2009 that released a paper plane in the extreme upper atmosphere. [7]
Editorial staffers include Andrew Orlowski , Paul Kunert, Gavin Clarke, Joe Fay, Chris Williams (San Francisco bureau), Iain Thomson and Simon Sharwood (Sydney office). Jude Karabus is head of production.

Readership and content
In 2011 it was read daily by over 350,000 users according to the Audit Bureau of Circulations ., [8] rising to 468,000 daily and nearly 9.5 million monthly in 2013. [9] In November 2011 the UK and US each accounted for approximately 42% and 34% of page impressions respectively, with Canada being the next most significant origin of page hits at 3%. [8] In 2012 the UK and US accounted for approximately 41% and 28% of page impressions respectively, with Canada at 3.61%. [9]
In October 2013, Alexa reported that the site ranked #3,140 in the world for its web traffic, up approximately 1,516 slots over the previous 3 months. It was #2,343 in the USA.
In April 2015, following a redesign of the website, Alexa reported that the site ranking dropped to #3,430 in the world, and traffic had dropped by over 6%.
As of 11 April 2016, Alexa gives a global ranking for the site of #4,750.
Channel Register covers computer business and trade news, which includes business press releases. News and articles for computer hardware and consumer electronics is covered by Reg Hardware . Reg Research is an in-depth resource on technologies and how they relate to business.

Controversies
On October 7, 2010, The Register published a story allegedly misrepresenting the work of Professor Joanna Haigh from Imperial College London . [10] [11]
WebPage index: 00119
Computerworld
Computerworld is a publication website and digital magazine for information technology (IT) and business technology professionals. [5] It is published in many countries around the world under the same or similar names. Each country's version of Computerworld includes original content and is managed independently. The parent company of Computerworld US is IDG Communications .

Background
Computerworld US serves IT and business management with coverage of information technology , emerging technologies, career information and analysis of technology trends. Computerworld also publishes several notable special reports each year, including the 100 Best Places to Work in IT, IT Salary Survey, the DATA+ Editors' Choice Awards and the annual Forecast research report. Computerworld articles frequently criticizes the effects of immigration to the U.S. (e.g. the H-1B visa) on U.S. software engineers. [6] [7]

Staff
The editor-in-chief of Computerworld in the U.S. is Scot Finnie, who leads a staff of almost 20 editors and writers, including executive editor/features and design Ellen Fanning, managing editor/news Ken Mingis, managing editor/online Sharon Machlis, managing editor/technologies Johanna Ambrosio and managing editor/production Bob Rawson. [8]

History
When IDG established the Swedish edition in 1983, the title "Computerworld" was already registered in Sweden by another publisher. This is why the Swedish edition is named Computer Sweden. It is distributed as a morning newspaper in tabloid format (41 cm) in 51,000 copies (2007) with an estimated 120,000 readers. From 1999 to 2008, it was published three days a week, but since 2009, it is published only on Tuesdays and Fridays. [9] [10] [11]
In June 2014, Computerworld US abandoned its print edition, becoming an exclusively digital publication. [1] In late July 2014, Computerworld debuted the monthly Computerworld Digital Magazine. [12]
WebPage index: 00120
American Broadcasting Company
The American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) is an American commercial broadcast television network that is owned by the Disney–ABC Television Group , a subsidiary of the Disney Media Networks division of The Walt Disney Company . The network is headquartered on Columbus Avenue and West 66th Street in Manhattan , New York City . There are additional major offices and production facilities elsewhere in New York City, as well as in Los Angeles and Burbank, California .
Since 2007, when ABC Radio (also known as Cumulus Media Networks) was sold to Citadel Broadcasting , ABC has reduced its broadcasting operations almost exclusively to television. The fifth-oldest major broadcasting network in the world and the youngest of the Big Three television networks , ABC is often nicknamed as " The Alphabet Network ", as its initialism also represents the first three letters of the English alphabet , in order.
ABC originally launched on October 12, 1943, as a radio network , separated from and serving as the successor to the NBC Blue Network , which had been purchased by Edward J. Noble . It extended its operations to television in 1948, following in the footsteps of established broadcast networks CBS and NBC . In the mid-1950s, ABC merged with United Paramount Theatres , a chain of movie theaters that formerly operated as a subsidiary of Paramount Pictures . Leonard Goldenson , who had been the head of UPT, made the new television network profitable by helping develop and greenlight many successful series. In the 1980s, after purchasing an 80% interest in cable sports channel ESPN , the network's corporate parent, American Broadcasting Companies, Inc., merged with Capital Cities Communications , owner of several print publications, and television and radio stations. In 1996, most of Capital Cities/ABC's assets were purchased by The Walt Disney Company.
The television network has eight owned-and-operated and over 232 affiliated television stations throughout the United States and its territories. Most Canadians have access to at least one U.S.-based ABC affiliate, either over-the-air (in areas located within proximity to the Canada–United States border ) or through a cable , satellite or IPTV provider, although most ABC programs are subject to simultaneous substitution regulations imposed by the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission that allow pay television providers to replace an American station's signal with the feed of a Canadian broadcaster to protect domestic programming rights and advertising revenue. ABC News provides news and features content for select radio stations owned by Citadel Broadcasting , which purchased the ABC Radio properties in 2007.

History

Blue Network (1927–1945)
In the 1930s, radio in the United States was dominated by three companies: the Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS), the Mutual Broadcasting System and the National Broadcasting Company (NBC). The last was owned by electronics manufacturer Radio Corporation of America (RCA), which owned two radio networks that each ran different varieties of programming, NBC Blue and NBC Red . The NBC Blue Network was created in 1927 for the primary purpose of testing new programs on markets of lesser importance than those served by NBC Red, which served the major cities, [4] and to test drama series. [5]
In 1934, Mutual filed a complaint with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regarding its difficulties in establishing new stations, in a radio market that was already being saturated by NBC and CBS. [5] In 1938, the FCC began a series of investigations into the practices of radio networks [5] and published its report on the broadcasting of network radio programs in 1940. The report recommended that RCA give up control of either NBC Red or NBC Blue. [4] At that time, the NBC Red Network was the principal radio network in the United States and, according to the FCC, RCA was using NBC Blue to eliminate any hint of competition. Having no power over the networks themselves, the FCC established a regulation forbidding licenses to be issued for radio stations if they were affiliated with a network which already owned multiple networks [4] that provided content of public interest. [5]
Once Mutual's appeals against the FCC were rejected, RCA decided to sell NBC Blue in 1941, and gave the mandate to do so to Mark Woods. [6] RCA converted the NBC Blue Network into an independent subsidiary, formally divorcing the operations of NBC Red and NBC Blue on January 8, 1942, [5] [7] with the Blue Network being referred to on-air as either "Blue" or "Blue Network". [8] The newly separated NBC Red and NBC Blue divided their respective corporate assets. Between 1942 and 1943, Woods offered to sell the entire NBC Blue Network, [9] [10] a package that included leases on landlines, three pending television licenses (WJZ-TV in New York City , KGO-TV in San Francisco and WENR-TV in Chicago ), 60 affiliates, four operations facilities (in New York City, Chicago, Los Angeles and Washington D.C.), contracts with actors, and the brand associated with the Blue Network. Investment firm Dillon, Read & Co. (which was later acquired by the Swiss Bank Corporation in 1997) offered $7.5 million to purchase the network, but the offer was rejected by Woods and RCA president David Sarnoff . [9]
Edward John Noble , the owner of Life Savers candy, drugstore chain Rexall and New York City radio station WMCA , purchased the network for $8 million. [4] [5] Due to FCC ownership rules, the transaction, which was to include the purchase of three RCA stations by Noble, would require him to resell his station with the FCC's approval. [9] The Commission authorized the transaction on October 12, 1943. [6] [11] Soon afterward, the Blue Network was purchased by the new company Noble founded, the American Broadcasting System. [5] Noble subsequently acquired the rights to the "American Broadcasting Company" name from George B. Storer in 1944; its parent company adopted the corporate name American Broadcasting Companies, Inc. [5] [9] Woods retained his position as president and CEO of ABC until December 1949, and was subsequently promoted to vice-chairman of the board before leaving ABC altogether on June 30, 1951. [12]
Meanwhile, in August 1944, the West Coast division of the Blue Network, which owned San Francisco radio station KGO , bought Los Angeles station KECA from Earle C. Anthony for $800,000. [13] Both stations were then managed by Don Searle, the vice-president of the Blue Network's West Coast division. [14]

Entry into television (1945–1949)
The ABC Radio Network created its audience slowly. The network's acquisition of Detroit radio station WXYZ from KingTrendle Broadcasting in 1946 for a little less than $3 million (and which remained under ABC ownership until 1984), [15] allowed it to acquire several radio serials, including The Lone Ranger , Sergeant Preston , and The Green Hornet , which had originated on that station. [16]
ABC became an aggressive competitor to NBC and CBS when, continuing NBC Blue's traditions of public service, it aired symphony performances conducted by Paul Whiteman , [5] performances from the Metropolitan Opera , and jazz concerts aired as part of its broadcast of The Chamber Music Society of Lower Basin Street announced by Milton Cross . [17] The network also became known for such suspenseful dramas as Sherlock Holmes , Gang Busters and Counterspy , as well as several mid-afternoon youth-oriented programs. [17] However, ABC made a name for itself by utilizing the practice of counterprogramming , with which it often placed shows of its own against the offerings of NBC and CBS, adopting the use of the Magnetophon tape recorder, brought to the U.S. from Nazi Germany after its conquest, to pre-record its programming. [16] With the help of the Magnetophon, ABC was able to provide its stars with greater freedom in terms of time, and also attract several big names, such as Bing Crosby [16] at a time when NBC and CBS did not allow pre-taped shows.
While its radio network was undergoing reconstruction, ABC found it difficult to avoid falling behind on the new medium of television . [18] To ensure a space, in 1947, ABC submitted five applications for television station licenses, one for each market where it owned and operated a radio station (New York City, Los Angeles, Chicago, San Francisco and Detroit). [19] These applications all requested for the stations to broadcast on VHF channel 7 , as Frank Marx , then ABC's vice-president of engineering, thought that the low-band VHF frequencies (corresponding to channels 2 through 6) would be requisitioned from broadcasting use and reallocated for the U.S. Army . [19]
The ABC television network made its debut on April 19, 1948, with WFIL-TV in Philadelphia (now WPVI-TV ) becoming its first primary affiliate. [20] The first program ever broadcast on the network was On the Corner , featuring satirist Henry Morgan . Other stations carrying the initial broadcast were WMAR-TV in Baltimore , WMAL-TV in Washington, D.C. and WABD , the DuMont station in New York City, since ABC's New York station had yet to sign on. [21]
The network's flagship owned-and-operated station, WJZ-TV in New York City (later re-called WABC-TV ), signed on the air on August 10, 1948, [20] with its first broadcast running for two hours that evening. [22] ABC's other owned-and-operated stations launched over the course of the next 13 months: [20] WENR-TV in Chicago signed on the air on September 17, [23] while WXYZ-TV in Detroit went on the air on October 9, 1948. [24] In October 1948, as a result of an influx of television station license applications that it had issued as well as a study it undertook on the use of the VHF spectrum for broadcasting purposes, the FCC implemented a freeze on new station applications . [25] However, KGO-TV in San Francisco, which had received its license prior to the freeze, made its debut on May 5, 1949. [26] [27] On May 7, 1949, Billboard revealed that ABC had proposed an investment of $6.25 million, of which it would spend $2.5 million to convert 20 acres (80,937 m 2 ) of land in Hollywood into what would become The Prospect Studios , and construct a transmitter on Mount Wilson , in anticipation of the launch of KECA-TV , which was scheduled to begin operations on August 1 [28] (but would not actually sign on until September 16). [29] [30]
In the fall of 1949, ABC found itself in the position of an outsider, with less coverage than two of its competing networks, CBS and NBC, even though it was on par with them in some major cities and had a headstart over its third rival at the time, the DuMont Television Network . [31] Before the freeze ended in 1952, there were only 108 existing television stations in the United States; a few major cities (such as Boston ) had only two television stations, many other cities (such as Pittsburgh and St. Louis ) had only one, and still many others (such as Denver and Portland ) did not yet have any television service. [31] The result was an uneven transition period where television flourished in certain areas and network radio remained the sole source of broadcast entertainment and news in others.

American Broadcasting-Paramount Theatres
At the end of 1949, movie theater operator United Paramount Theatres (UPT) was forced by the U.S. Supreme Court to become an independent entity, separating itself from Paramount Pictures . [32] For its part, ABC was on the verge of bankruptcy, with only five owned-and-operated stations and nine full-time affiliates. [33] Its revenues, which were related to advertising and were indexed compared to the number of listeners/viewers, failed to compensate for its heavy investments in purchasing and building stations. In 1951, a rumor even mentioned that the network would be sold to CBS. [19] [34] In 1951, Noble held a 58% ownership stake in ABC, [35] giving him $5 million with which to prevent ABC from going bankrupt; as banks refused further credit, [36] that amount was obtained through a loan from the Prudential Insurance Company of America . [37]
Leonard Goldenson , the president of UPT (which sought to diversify itself at the time), approached Noble in 1951 on a proposal for UPT to purchase ABC. [36] Noble received other offers, including one from CBS founder William S. Paley ; however, a merger with CBS would have forced that network to sell its New York City and Los Angeles stations at the very least. [38] Goldenson and Noble reached a tentative agreement in the late spring of 1951 [36] in which UPT would acquire ABC and turn it into a subsidiary of the company that would retain autonomy in its management. [39] On June 6, 1951, the tentative agreement was approved by UPT's board of directors. [39] However, the transaction had to be approved by the FCC because of the presence of television networks and the recent separation between Paramount and UPT. Insofar as Paramount Pictures was already a shareholder in the DuMont Television Network, the FCC conducted a series of hearings to ensure whether Paramount was truly separated from United Paramount Theatres, and whether it was violating antitrust laws . [18]
In 1952, when the release of the FCC's Sixth Report and Order announced the end of its freeze on new station license applications, among the issues the Commission was slated to address was whether to approve the UPT-ABC merger. [25] One FCC Commissioner saw the possibility of ABC, funded by UPT, becoming a viable and competitive third television network. [40] On February 9, 1953, the FCC approved UPT's purchase of ABC in exchange for $25 million in shares. [40] [41] The merged company, renamed American Broadcasting-Paramount Theatres , Inc. and headquartered in the Paramount Building at 1501 Broadway in Manhattan, [42] owned six AM and several FM radio stations, five television stations and 644 cinemas in 300 U.S. cities. [37] To comply with FCC ownership restrictions in effect at the time that barred common ownership of two television stations in the same market , UPT sold its Chicago television station, WBKB-TV, to CBS (which subsequently changed the station's call letters to WBBM-TV ) for $6 million, [43] while it kept ABC's existing Chicago station, WENR-TV. The merged company acquired the WBKB call letters for channel 7, which would eventually become WLS-TV . [44] Goldenson began to sell some of the older theaters to help finance the new television network. [37]
On May 1, 1953, ABC's New York City flagship stations – WJZ, WJZ-FM and WJZ-TV – changed their respective callsigns to WABC , WABC-FM and WABC-TV , [45] and moved their operations to facilities at 7 West 66th Street , one block away from Central Park . [37] The WABC call letters were previously used by the flagship station of CBS Radio (now WCBS (AM) ) until 1946. The WJZ calls would later be reassigned to the then-ABC affiliate in Baltimore in 1959, in an historical nod to the fact that WJZ was originally established by the Baltimore station's owner at the time, Westinghouse .
However, a problem emerged regarding the directions taken by ABC and UPT. In 1950, Noble appointed Robert Kintner to be ABC's president while he himself served as its CEO, a position he would hold until his death in 1958. [18] Despite the promise of non-interference between ABC and UPT, Goldenson had to intervene in ABC's decisions because of financial problems and the FCC's long period of indecision. Goldenson added to the confusion when, in October 1954, [46] he proposed a merger between UPT and the DuMont Television Network, which was also mired in financial trouble. [18] As part of this merger, the network would have been renamed "ABC-DuMont" for five years, and DuMont would have received $5 million in cash, room on the schedule for existing DuMont programming, and guaranteed advertising time for DuMont Laboratories receivers. [18] In addition, to comply with FCC ownership restrictions, it would have been required to sell either WABC-TV or DuMont owned-and-operated station WABD in the New York City market, as well as two other stations. [18] The merged ABC-DuMont would have had the resources to compete with CBS and NBC. [46]
Goldenson sought to develop the ABC television network by trying to convince local stations to agree to affiliate with the network. [18] In doing this, he contacted local entrepreneurs who owned television stations themselves, many of whom had previously invested in Paramount cinemas and had worked with him when he undertook the responsibility of restructuring United Paramount Theatres. [18]

Hollywood begins to produce television series
At the same time he made attempts to help grow ABC, Goldenson had been trying since mid-1953 to provide content for the network by contacting his old acquaintances in Hollywood, with whom he had worked when UPT was a subsidiary of Paramount Pictures. [18] ABC's merger with UPT led to the creation of relationships with Hollywood's film production studios, breaking a quarantine that had existed at that time between film and television, [47] the latter of which had previously been more connected to radio. ABC's flagship productions at the time were The Lone Ranger , based on the radio program of the same title, and The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet , the latter of which (at 14 seasons, running from 1952 to 1966) held the record for the longest-running prime time comedy in U.S. television history, until it was surpassed by The Simpsons in 2003.
Goldenson's efforts paid off, and on October 27, 1954, the network launched a campaign ushering in the "New ABC", with productions from several studios, including Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer , Warner Bros. and 20th Century Fox . [48]
Warner tried with mixed success to adapt some of its most successful films as ABC television series, and showcase these adaptations as part of the wheel series Warner Bros. Presents . Airing during the 1955–56 season , it showcased television adaptations of the 1942 films Kings Row and Casablanca ; Cheyenne (adapted from the 1947 film Wyoming Kid ); Sugarfoot (a remake of the 1954 film The Boy from Oklahoma ); and Maverick . [47] However, the most iconic of ABC's relationships with Hollywood producers was its agreement with Walt Disney ; after the start of the network's bond with the Disney studio, James Lewis Baughman, who worked as a columnist at that time, observed that "at ABC's headquarters in New York, the secretaries [were now] wearing hats with Mickey Mouse ears". [47]

First bonds with 
Walt Disney and his brother Roy contacted Goldenson at the end of 1953 [49] for ABC to agree to finance part of the Disneyland project in exchange for producing a television program for the network. [50] [51] [52] Walt wanted ABC to invest $500,000 and accrued a guarantee of $4.5 million in additional loans, a third of the budget intended for the park. [50] [53] Around 1954, ABC agreed to finance Disneyland in exchange for the right to broadcast a new Sunday night program, Disneyland , which debuted on the network on October 27, 1954 [50] [51] [52] as the first of many anthology television programs that Disney would broadcast over the course of the next 50 years.
When Disneyland opened on July 17, 1955, ABC aired a special live broadcast commemorating the park's first day of operation, Dateline: Disneyland . [54] Shortly thereafter, on October 3, 1955, a second regularly scheduled program produced by Disney made its debut, The Mickey Mouse Club , a children's program that aired Monday through Friday afternoons, which starred a group of 24 children known as the "Mouseketeers". [51] [55] The two Disney programs made 1955 the year that the network was first profitable and as a station owner. [56]

Affiliate issues
By 1954, all U.S. networks had regained control of their programming, with higher advertising revenues: ABC's revenue increased by 67% (earning $26 million), NBC's went up by 30% ($100 million) and CBS's rose by 44% ($117 million). [57] However that year, ABC had only 14 primary affiliates compared to the 74 that carried the majority of CBS programs and the 71 that were primarily affiliated with NBC. Most markets outside the largest ones were not large enough to support three full-time network affiliates. In some markets that were large enough for a third full-time affiliate, the only available commercial allocation was on the less-desirable UHF band. Until the All-Channel Receiver Act (passed by Congress in 1961) mandated the inclusion of UHF tuning, most viewers needed to purchase a converter to be able to watch UHF stations, and the signal quality was marginal at best even with a converter. Additionally, during the analog television era, UHF stations were not adequately receivable in rugged terrain. These factors made many prospective station owners skittish about investing in a UHF station, especially one that would have had to take on an affiliation with a weaker network.
As a result, with the exception of the largest markets, ABC was relegated to secondary status on one or both of the existing stations, usually via off-hours clearances (a notable exception during this time was WKST-TV in Youngstown, Ohio , now WYTV , despite the small size of the surrounding market and its close proximity to Cleveland and Pittsburgh even decades before the city's economic collapse ). According to Goldenson, this meant that an hour of ABC programming reported five times lower viewership than its competitors. [58] However, the network's intake of money at the time would allow it to accelerate its content production. Still, ABC's limited reach would continue to hobble it for the next two decades; several smaller markets would not grow large enough to support a full-time ABC affiliate until the 1960s, with some very small markets having to wait as late as the 1980s or even the advent of digital television in the 2000s, which allowed stations like WTRF-TV in Wheeling, West Virginia to begin airing ABC programming on a digital subchannel after airing the network's programs outside of recommended timeslots decades before.
The DuMont Television Network ceased broadcasting on September 15, 1955, [46] and went bankrupt the next year. ABC then found itself as the third U.S. television network, dubbed the "little third network", [59] but still continued to look for successful programming. That same year, Kintner was forced to resign due to disagreements between Noble and Goldenson, [18] a consequence of Goldenson's many interventions in ABC's management. [60]

Counterprogramming: successful, but criticized
It was not until the late 1950s that the ABC network became a serious contender to NBC and CBS, and this was in large part due to the diverse range of programming that met the expectations of the public, such as westerns and detective series. Despite an almost 500% increase in advertising revenues between 1953 and 1958, the network only had a national reach of between 10% and 18% of the total U.S. population, as it still had relatively fewer affiliates than NBC and CBS. [61] In 1957, ABC Entertainment president Ollie Treiz discovered that the locally produced variety show Bandstand had pulled very strong ratings in the Philadelphia market on WFIL-TV; Treiz ultimately negotiated a deal to take the show national, under the revised title American Bandstand ; [62] the show quickly became a social phenomenon by presenting new musical talent and dances to America's youth [62] and helped make a star out of its host, Dick Clark .
On September 3, 1958, the Disneyland anthology series was retitled Walt Disney Presents [52] as it became disassociated with the theme park of the same name. The movement in westerns, which ABC is credited for having started, represented a fifth of all primetime series on American television in January 1959, at which point detective shows were beginning to rise in popularity as well. [63] ABC requested additional productions from Disney. [64] In late 1958, Desilu Productions pitched its detective series The Untouchables to CBS; after that network rejected the show because of its use of violence, Desilu then presented it to ABC, which agreed to pick up the show, [65] and debuted The Untouchables in April 1959. The series went on to quickly become "immensely popular". [65]
These kinds of programs presented ABC with an image of the "philosophy of counterprogramming against its competitors", offering a strong lineup of programs that contrasted with those seen on its rival networks, [64] which helped Goldenson give the network a continuum between film and television. [66] ABC's western series (as well as series such as the actioner Zorro ) went up against and defeated the variety shows aired by NBC and CBS in the fall of 1957, and its detective shows did the same in the fall of 1959. To captivate the network's audiences, short 66-minute series were scheduled a half-hour before their hour-long competition. [66] In May 1961, Life criticized the public enthusiasm and sponsorship for these types of shows at the expense of news programming and denounced an unofficial law "replacing the good programs with the bad ones". [67]

Transition to color (1960s)
During the 1960s, ABC continued on the same path that it began to take in the mid-1950s, by consolidating the network as part of its effort to gain loyalty from the public. The network's finances improved and allowed it to invest in other properties and programming. In May 1960, ABC purchased Chicago radio station WLS , which had shared airtime with WENR since the 1920s. [68] This acquisition allowed ABC to consolidate its presence in the market. On May 9, 1960, WLS launched a new lineup consisting of ABC Radio programming. [69] In 1960, Canadian entrepreneur John Bassett , who was trying to establish a television station in Toronto , sought the help of ABC to launch the station. [70] Leonard Goldenson agreed to acquire a 25% interest in CFTO-TV ; however, legislation by the Canadian Radio-Television Commission prohibited ABC's involvement, resulting in the company withdrawing from the project before the station's launch. [70]

Children's programming and the debut of ABC Sports (1960–1965)
The 1960s would be marked by the rise of family-oriented series in an attempt by ABC to counterprogram its established competitors, but the decade was also marked by the network's gradual transition to color. [71] On September 30, 1960, ABC premiered The Flintstones , another example of counterprogramming; although the animated series from William Hanna and Joseph Barbera was filmed in color from the beginning, it was initially broadcast in black-and-white , as ABC had not made the necessary technical upgrades to broadcast its programming in color at the time. [72] The Flintstones allowed ABC to present a novelty, that of prime-time animated programming, but it also allowed the network to begin filling the hole opened by the conclusion of the Disney partnership by carrying family-oriented programming from other producers. [72]
In 1959, Walt Disney Productions, having improved its financial situation, had purchased ABC's shares in the Disneyland theme park for $7.5 million [50] and initiated discussions to renew ABC's television contract for Walt Disney Presents , which was due to expire in 1961. [71] Walt Disney was approached by NBC to produce color broadcasts of his anthology series (which would be renamed Walt Disney's Wonderful World of Color ). [71] Goldenson said ABC could not counter the offer, because the network did not have the technical and financial resources to carry the program in the format. [71] As a result, ABC and Disney's first television collaboration ended in 1961 [50] (the network would resume its relationship with Disney in 1985, when the anthology series returned to the network for a three-season run as the Disney Sunday Movie until it lost the rights to NBC again in 1988; the Disney anthology series would return to ABC in 1996, following the company's purchase of the future Capital Cities/ABC, as The Wonderful World of Disney ).
However, in 1961, ABC continued with its niche in animated series with Calvin and the Colonel , Matty's Funday Funnies , Top Cat and The Bugs Bunny Show , [72] the latter of which showcased classic Looney Tunes and Merrie Melodies shorts.
Always in search of new programs that would help it compete with NBC and CBS, ABC's management believed that sports could be a major catalyst in improving the network's market share. [73] On April 29, 1961, ABC debuted Wide World of Sports , an anthology series created by Edgar Scherick through his company Sports Programs, Inc. and produced by a young Roone Arledge which featured a different sporting event each broadcast. [74] [75] ABC purchased Sports Programs, Inc. in exchange for shares in the company, [76] leading it to become the future core of ABC Sports , with Arledge as the executive producer of that division's shows. [77] Wide World of Sports , in particular, was not merely devoted to a single sport, but rather to generally all sporting events. [73]
Due to pressure from film studios wanting to increase their production, as the major networks began airing theatrically released films, [78] ABC joined CBS and NBC in broadcasting films on Sunday nights in 1962, with the launch of the ABC Sunday Night Movie , which debuted a year behind its competitors and was initially presented in black-and-white. [78] Despite a significant increase in viewership (with its audience share having increased to 33% from the 15% share it had in 1953), ABC remained in third place; the company had a total revenue of $15.5 million, a third of the revenue pulled in by CBS at the same period. [78] To catch up, ABC followed up The Flintstones with another animated series from Hanna-Barbera , The Jetsons , which debuted on September 23, 1962 as the first television series to be broadcast in color on the network. [79] On April 1, 1963, ABC debuted the soap opera General Hospital , [80] which would go on to become the television network's long-running entertainment program. That year also saw the premiere of The Fugitive (on September 17), [81] a drama series centering on a man on the run after being accused of committing a murder he did not commit.
The 1964–65 season was marked by the debuts of several classic series including Bewitched (on September 17) [82] and The Addams Family (on September 18). Arledge's success with acquiring prime sports content was confirmed in 1964 when he was appointed vice-president of ABC Sports. [83]

New regulations and the radio network's recovery (1966–1969)
It was not until the 1965–66 season that color became the dominant format for the three broadcast television networks. ABC, meanwhile, remained in third place and still needed money to grow itself into a major competitor. However, ABC's issues with its transition to color became secondary compared to the network's financial problems; in 1964, the network found itself, as Goldenson later wrote in the 1991 book Beating the Odds: The Untold Story Behind the Rise of ABC , "in the middle of a war [where] the battlefield was Wall Street ". [84] Many companies sought to take over ABC, including Norton Simon , [78] General Electric , Gulf and Western Industries , International Telephone and Telegraph [85] and Litton Industries . [86]
In 1965, the corporate entity, American Broadcasting-Paramount Theatres , was renamed as the American Broadcasting Companies, [87] [88] while its cinema division became ABC Theatres ; its recording division was renamed ABC Records in 1966. [89] In December of that year, the ABC television network premiered The Dating Game , a pioneer series in its genre , which was a reworking of the blind date concept in which a suitor selected one of three contestants sight unseen based on the answers to selected questions. This was followed up in July 1966 by The Newlywed Game , featuring three recently married couples who guessed the responses to their partner's questions (some of which were fairly risque). As ABC began to outgrow its facilities at 7 West 66th Street, Goldenson found a new headquarters for ABC in a 44 story building located at 1330 Avenue of the Americas in Manhattan, at the corner of 54th Street [90] [91] (now occupied by The Financial Times ' s New York office). This operation allowed for the conversion of the premises at 66th Street into production facilities for television and radio programs. [91]
On December 7, 1965, Goldenson announced a merger proposal with ITT to ABC management; the two companies agreed to the deal on April 27, 1966. [86] The FCC approved the merger on December 21, 1966; however, the previous day (December 20), Donald F. Turner , head antitrust regulator for the United States Department of Justice , expressed doubts related to such issues as the emerging cable television market, [92] and concerns over the journalistic integrity of ABC and how it could be influenced by the overseas ownership of ITT. [93] ITT management promised that the company would allow ABC to retain autonomy in the publishing business. [92] The merger was suspended, and a complaint was filed by the Department of Justice in July 1967, with ITT going to trial in October 1967; the merger was officially canceled after the trial's conclusion on January 1, 1968. [94]
On January 12, 1966, ABC replaced The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet with Batman , an action series based on the DC Comics series starring Adam West that was known for its kitschy style. [95] In 1967, WLS radio CEO Ralph Beaudin was appointed as the president of ABC Radio. [96] Under his leadership, ABC Radio was divided into four "networks" devoted to different types of programming: news, informative series, pop music , and talk shows . [96] Two other networks were later created to provide rock music and traffic reporting.
In 1968, ABC took advantage of new FCC ownership regulations that allowed broadcasting companies to own a maximum of seven radio stations nationwide in order to purchase Houston radio stations KXYZ and KXYZ-FM for $1 million in shares and $1.5 million in bonds. [97] That year, Roone Arledge was named president of ABC Sports; the company also founded ABC Pictures, a film production company which released its first picture that year, the Ralph Nelson -directed Charly . It was renamed ABC Motion Pictures in 1979; the unit was dissolved in 1985. [98] The studio also operated two subsidiaries, Palomar Pictures International and Selmur Pictures. In July 1968, ABC continued its acquisitions in the amusement parks sector with the opening of ABC Marine World in Redwood City, California ; [99] that park was sold in 1972 and demolished in 1986, with the land that occupied the park later becoming home to the headquarters of Oracle Corporation .
In July 1968, ABC Radio launched a special programming project for its FM stations, which was spearheaded by Allen Shaw, [100] a former program manager at WCFL in Chicago [101] who was approached by ABC Radio president Harold L. Neal to develop a format to compete with the new progressive rock and DJ -helmed stations. [102] The new concept called "LOVE Radio", which featured a limited selection of music genres, was launched on ABC's seven owned-and-operated FM stations in late November 1968; the concept replaced nearly all of the programming provided by these stations; however, several affiliates (such as KXYZ) retained the majority of their content. [102] In August 1970, Shaw announced that ABC FM's music choice policy should be reviewed to allow listeners access to many styles of music. [103]
On the television side, in September 1969, ABC launched the Movie of the Week , a weekly showcase aimed at capitalizing on the growing success of made-for-TV movies since the early 1960s. The Movie of the Week broadcast feature-length dramatic films directed by such talented filmmakers as Aaron Spelling , David Wolper and Steven Spielberg (the latter of whom gained early success through the showcase for his 1971 film Duel ) that were produced on an average budget of $400,000–$450,000. [104] Hits for the television network during the late 1960s and early 1970s included The Courtship of Eddie's Father , The Brady Bunch and The Partridge Family .

Success in television (1971–1980)
In the early 1970s, ABC completed its transition to color; the decade as a whole would mark a turning point for ABC, as it began to pass CBS and NBC in the ratings to become the first place network. [105] It also began to use behavioral and demographic data to better determine what types of sponsors to sell advertising slots to and provide programming that would appeal towards certain audiences. [106] ABC's gains in audience share were greatly helped by the fact that several smaller markets had grown large enough to allow full-time affiliations from all three networks.
In 1970, ABC debuted Monday Night Football as part of its Monday prime time schedule; [107] the program became a hit for the network and served as the National Football League (NFL)'s premier game of the week until 2006, when Sunday Night Football , which moved to NBC that year as part of a broadcast deal that in turn saw MNF move to ESPN , took over as the league's marquee game. According to Goldenson, Monday Night Football helped earn ABC regularly score an audience share of 15%–16%; ABC Sports managed the budget for the Monday night time slot to reallocate the weekly budget for ABC's prime time schedule to just six days, as opposed to seven on competing networks. [108] 1970 also saw the premieres of several soap operas including the long-running All My Children , which ran on the network for 41 years.
In 1970, the FCC voted to pass the Financial Interest and Syndication Rules , a set of regulations aimed at preventing the major networks from monopolizing the broadcast landscape by barring them from owning any of the prime time programming that they broadcast. [109] In 1972, the new rules resulted in the company's decision to split ABC Films into two separate companies: the existing Worldvision Enterprises, which would produce and distribute programming for U.S. syndication, and ABC Circle Films as a production unit. [110] [111] Worldvision was sold to a consortium of ABC executives for nearly $10 million. [111]
In April 1970, Congress passed the Public Health Cigarette Smoking Act which banned cigarette advertising from all television and radio networks, including ABC, when it took effect on January 2, 1971. [112] Citing limited profitability of its cinemas, ABC Great States, the Central West division of ABC Theatres, was sold to Henry Plitt in 1974. [110] On January 17, 1972, Elton Rule was named President and Chief Operating Officer of ABC a few months after Goldenson reduced his role in the company after suffering a heart attack . [34]
In the early 1970s, Michael Eisner , who joined ABC in 1966, became the network's program development manager. [113] He helped bring about ideas for many series including Happy Days (which originated as a segment on the anthology series Love, American Style ), [113] [114] as well as several soap operas; however, Eisner's main credit at ABC was for developing youth-oriented programming. [115] He was responsible for reacquiring the rights to the Looney Tunes-Merrie Melodies library, bringing the shorts back to ABC after spending several years on CBS, as well as developing The Jackson 5ive animated series and a series about the Osmonds , and greenlighting Super Friends , based on DC Comics' Justice League of America series [113] He also laid ground-work for the development of educational children's programming (predating the 1990 Congressional passage of the Children's Television Act ) through interstitials such as Time for Timer , The Bod Squad and, perhaps most famously, Schoolhouse Rock! . Eisner left ABC in 1976 to become president of Paramount Pictures; [116] he would later become the President of ABC's eventual parent company, Disney.
In the spring of 1975, Fred Pierce, the newly appointed president of ABC Television, convinced Fred Silverman to become the first president and director of programming of the independent television production subsidiary ABC Entertainment, created from the network's namesake programming division. [117] [118] In 1974, ABC premiered the detective series S.W.A.T. That same year, the network made the decision to compete with NBC's morning news-talk program Today . Its first attempt at such competition was AM America ; however, that show's success was not straightforward. [119] One of its affiliates, WCVB-TV premiered morning show Good Day! . First premiering in 1973 as Good Morning! , it was groundbreaking for being entirely produced on the road and broadcasting from locations outside of the Boston area. Also, in the summer of 1975, ABC discovered that its Cleveland affiliate WEWS-TV was producing its own morning program The Morning Exchange , which debuted in 1972 and was now locally pre-empting AM America ; it was the first morning show to utilize a set modeled after a living room , and established a concept now commonplace among network morning shows in which news and weather updates were featured at the top and bottom of each hour. Discovering that their formats seemed to appeal to their viewers, [119] the network became the first to adopt them for a new national morning show, Good Morning America , which debuted on November 3, 1975. [119]
The 1970s were highlighted by several successful comedy, fantasy, action and superhero-themed series for the network including Kung Fu , The Six Million Dollar Man , Wonder Woman , Starsky & Hutch , Charlie's Angels , The Bionic Woman , Fantasy Island and Battlestar Galactica . Many of these series were greenlit by Silverman, who left ABC in 1978 to become president of NBC's entertainment division. The rousing success of Happy Days also led to a successful spin-off series, Laverne & Shirley , which debuted during the 1975–76 season. Charlie's Angels and Three's Company (which debuted during the 1976–77 season) were two prime examples of a trend among the major networks during the 1970s known as " jiggle TV ", featuring attractive, often buxom, women in main and guest roles.
In 1977, Henry Plitt, who at the time was associated with Thomas Klutznick, a real estate entrepreneur in Chicago, purchased the southern division of ABC Theatres, ABC Southern. [110] The sale stripped ABC of control over its theaters as a result of changes in the theater operation sector, mainly the fact that the population was migrating to the suburbs and moving away from older cinemas in larger cities [110] ( Plitt Theatres was later purchased by Cineplex Odeon Corporation in 1987 [110] ).
For its part, the television network produced a few new hits during 1977: January saw the premiere of Roots , a miniseries based on an Alex Haley novel that was published the previous year. Roots went on to become one of the highest-rated programs in American television history, with unprecedented ratings for its finale. [120] [121] In September, The Love Boat , a comedy-drama anthology series produced by Aaron Spelling which was based around the crew of a cruise ship and featured three stories centered partly on the ship's various passengers; although critically lambasted, the series turned out to be a ratings success and lasted nine seasons. The success of Roots , Happy Days and The Love Boat allowed the network to take first place in the ratings for the first time in the 1976–77 season . [70] On September 13, 1977, the network debuted Soap , a controversial soap opera parody which became known for being the first television series to feature an openly gay main character (played by a then-unknown Billy Crystal ); it last ran on the network on April 20, 1981.
Meanwhile, ABC News , which formed as a newly separate division, sought to become a global leader in television news. [122] In 1977, Roone Arledge was named president of the new ABC News in addition to being president of ABC Sports. [123] That same year, ABC launched a major expansion of its office facilities in New York City. The company first constructed a new 10-story building on land previously occupied by an abandoned warehouse on the corner of Columbus Avenue and West 66th Street; the facility that was built in its place is nicknamed "7 Lincoln Square" (although it is actually located at 149 Columbus Avenue). Meanwhile, a former parking lot, located at 30 West 67th Street, was transformed into an impressive 15-story building. Both buildings were completed in June 1979. WABC-TV moved its operations from offices at 77 West 66th Street to 149 Columbus Avenue, freeing up space for the ABC network to house some of its operations.
In June 1978, Arledge created the newsmagazine 20/20 ; [124] after its first episode received harshly negative reviews, the program – which debuted as a summer series, before becoming a year-round program in 1979 – was immediately revamped to feature a mix of in-depth stories and interviews, with Hugh Downs appointed as its anchor (later paired alongside his former Today colleague Barbara Walters ). In February 1979, ABC sold its recording division to MCA Inc. for $20 million; the label was discontinued by March 5 of that year, and all of its 300 employees were laid off [125] (the rights to the works of ABC Records and all of MCA's other labels have since been acquired by Universal Music Group ).

Merger with Capital Cities, purchase of ESPN and reprogramming Friday nights (1981–1990)
ABC dominated the American television landscape during the 1970s and early 1980s (by 1980, the three major networks represented 90% of all prime-time television viewership in the U.S. [126] ). Several flagship series debuted on the network during this time including Dynasty , an opulent drama from Aaron Spelling that became a hit when it premiered as a midseason series in 1981, five months before Spelling's other ABC hit Charlie's Angels ended its run. The network was also propelled during the early 1980s by the continued successes of Happy Days , Three's Company , Laverne & Shirley and Fantasy Island , and gained new hits in Too Close for Comfort , Soap spinoff Benson and Happy Days spinoff Mork & Mindy . In 1981, ABC (through its ABC Video Services division) launched the Alpha Repertory Television Service (ARTS), a cable channel operated as a joint venture with the Hearst Corporation offering cultural and arts programming, which aired as a nighttime service over the channel space of Nickelodeon . [127]
On August 9, 1982, ABC purchased a 10% stake in the Entertainment and Sports Programming Network (ESPN) for $20 million; in exchange for the interest, ESPN gained the U.S. television rights to the British Open , which ABC had not been able to broadcast in its entirety. [128] The purchase provided ABC the option of purchasing additional shares of up to 49% under certain conditions, [129] which included the option to purchase at least 10% of Getty Oil 's shares in the channel prior to January 2, 1984. [129]
In 1983, ABC sold KXYZ to the Infinity Broadcasting Corporation . [130] On January 4, 1984, The New York Times reported that ABC, through its subsidiary ABC Video Enterprises, had exercised its option to purchase up to 15% (or between $25 million and $30 million) of Getty Oil's shares in ESPN, which would allow it to expand its shares at a later date. [129] In June 1984, ABC's executive committee approved the company's interest acquisition in ESPN, and ABC arranged with Getty Oil to obtain an 80% stake in the channel, while selling the remaining 20% to Nabisco . [131] That year, ABC and Hearst reached an agreement with RCA to merge ARTS and competing arts service, The Entertainment Channel, into a single cable channel called Arts & Entertainment Television ( A&E ); the new channel subsequently leased a separate satellite transponder, ending its sharing agreement with Nickelodeon to become a 24-hour service. [127] Meanwhile, ABC withdrew from the theme park business for good when it sold the Silver Springs Nature Theme Park. [99]
In December 1984, Thomas S. Murphy , chief executive officer of Capital Cities Communications , contacted Leonard Goldenson about a proposal to merge their respective companies. [132] On March 16, 1985, ABC's executive committee accepted the merger offer, [133] which was formally announced on March 18, 1985, with Capital Cities purchasing ABC and its related properties for $3.5 billion and $118 for each of ABC's shares as well as a guarantee of 10% (or $3) for a total of $121 per share. [132] To finance the purchase, Capital Cities borrowed $2.1 billion from a consortium of banks, which sold certain assets that Capital Cites could not acquire or retain due to FCC ownership rules for a combined $900 million and sold off several cable television systems, which were sold to The Washington Post Company (forming the present-day Cable One ). [134] The remaining $500 million was loaned by Warren Buffett , who promised that his company Berkshire Hathaway would purchase $3 million in shares, at $172.50 apiece. [134] [135] Due to an FCC ban on same-market ownership of television and radio stations by a single company (although the deal would have otherwise complied with new ownership rules implemented by the FCC in January 1985, that allowed broadcasters to own a maximum of 12 television stations [132] ), ABC and Capital Cities respectively decided to sell WXYZ-TV and Tampa independent station WFTS-TV to the E. W. Scripps Company (although Capital Cities/ABC originally intended to seek a cross-ownership waiver to retain WXYZ and Capital Cities-owned radio stations WJR and WHYT ).
The merger between ABC and Capital Cities received federal approval on September 5, 1985. After the ABC/Capital Cities merger was finalized on January 3, 1986, the combined company – which became known as Capital Cities/ABC, Inc. – added four television stations (WPVI-TV/Philadelphia, KTRK-TV /Houston, KFSN-TV / Fresno and WTVD / Raleigh ) and several radio stations to ABC's broadcasting portfolio, and also included Fairchild Publications and four newspapers (including The Kansas City Star and Fort Worth Star-Telegram ). [136] It also initiated several changes in its management: [137] Frederick S. Pierce was named president of ABC's broadcasting division; Michael P. Millardi became vice president of ABC Broadcasting, and president of ABC Owned Stations and ABC Video Enterprises; John B. Sias was appointed president of the ABC Television Network; Brandon Stoddard became president of ABC Entertainment (a position to which he had been appointed in November 1985); and Roone Arledge became president of ABC News and ABC Sports. In February 1986, Thomas S. Murphy, who had been serving as CEO of Capital Cities since 1964, was appointed chairman and CEO emeritus of ABC. [138] Jim Duffy stepped down as ABC Television president for a management position at ABC Communications, a subsidiary that specialized in community service programming, including shows related to literary education. [122]
As far as programming is concerned, four of ABC's marquee shows of the 1970s ended their runs during the mid-1980s: Laverne & Shirley ended its run in 1983, Happy Days and Three's Company ended in 1984 (with the latter producing a short-lived spinoff that year), while The Love Boat ended its run in 1986. After nearly a decade of ratings trouble, NBC had regained the ratings lead among the Big Three networks in 1984 on the success of series such as The Cosby Show , Cheers and Miami Vice . To counteract NBC, ABC decided to refocus itself on comedies and family-oriented series beginning in the mid-1980s including Who's the Boss? , Mr. Belvedere , Growing Pains , Perfect Strangers , Head of the Class , Full House , The Wonder Years , Just the Ten of Us and Roseanne .
Following the initial success of these series, ABC revamped its Friday night schedule around family-friendly comedies in the late 1980s, culminating in the 1989 debut of the " TGIF " block (which promotions referenced stood for "Thank Goodness It's Funny"). [139] Many of the series featured during the run of the block were produced by Miller-Boyett Productions , a Warner Bros.-based studio that briefly programmed the entire Friday lineup during the 1990–91 season (with Going Places joining Family Matters , Full House and Perfect Strangers on the "TGIF" schedule) and through its development deal with Paramount Television prior to 1986 (as Miller-Milkis, and later, Miller-Milkis-Boyett Productions), had earlier produced Happy Days and its various spinoffs among other series for the network.
In 1988, ABC constructed a new building to serve as the network's headquarters, located near the studios of WABC-TV on West 66th Street. The television network's restructuring program, launched in 1974, helped with the purchases and exchanges of nearly 70 stations during the late 1980s, and aided in increasing its ratings by more than 2 million viewers. [122]

Continued success and acquisition by Disney (1991–2000)
In 1990, Thomas S. Murphy delegated his position as president to Daniel B. Burke while remaining ABC's chairman and CEO. [138] Capital Cities/ABC reported revenues of $465 million. [140] Now at a strong second place, the network entered the 1990s with additional family-friendly hits including America's Funniest Home Videos (which has gone on to become the longest-running prime time entertainment program in the network's history), Step by Step , Hangin' with Mr. Cooper , Boy Meets World and Perfect Strangers spinoff Family Matters , as well as series such as Doogie Howser, M.D. , Life Goes On , cult favorite Twin Peaks and The Commish . In September 1991, the network premiered Home Improvement , a sitcom starring stand-up comic Tim Allen centering on the family and work life of an accident-prone host of a cable-access home improvement show. Lasting eight seasons, its success led ABC to greenlight additional sitcom projects helmed by comedians during the 1990s including The Drew Carey Show ; Brett Butler vehicle Grace Under Fire ; and Ellen , which became notable for a 1997 episode which served as the coming out of series star Ellen DeGeneres (as well as her character in the series) as a lesbian .
In 1993, the FCC repealed the Financial Interest and Syndication Rules, once again allowing networks to hold interests in television production studios. [141] That same year, Capital Cities/ABC purchased the French animation studio DIC Entertainment ; [142] it also signed an agreement with Time Warner Cable to carry its owned-and-operated television stations on the provider's systems in ABC O&O markets. [143] By that year, ABC had a total viewership share of 23.63% of American households, just below the limit of 25% imposed by the FCC. [141]
Daniel Burke departed from Capital Cities/ABC in February 1994, with Thomas Murphy taking over as president [138] before ceding control to Robert Iger . September 1993 saw the debut of NYPD Blue , a gritty police procedural from Steven Bochco (who created Doogie Howser, M.D. and the critically pilloried Cop Rock for ABC earlier in the decade); lasting twelve seasons, the drama became known for its boundary pushing of network television standards (particularly its occasional use of graphic language and rear nudity), which led some affiliates to initially refuse to air the show in its first season.
In order to compete with CNN , ABC proposed a 24-hour news channel called ABC Cable News, with plans to launch the network in 1995; however, the plan would ultimately be shelved by company management. ABC would reattempt such a concept in July 2004 with the launch of ABC News Now , a 24-hour news channel distributed for viewing on the Internet and mobile phones . On August 29, 1994, ABC purchased Flint, Michigan affiliate WJRT-TV and WTVG in Toledo, Ohio (which was previously affiliated with ABC from 1958 to 1970) from SJL Broadcast Management , with the latter switching to ABC once its contract with NBC expired two months after the purchase was finalized in early 1995. [144] Both stations were acquired as a contingency plan in the event that CBS reached an affiliation deal with WXYZ-TV (to replace WJBK , which switched to Fox as a result of that network's group affiliation agreement with New World Communications ) in order to allow the network to retain some over-the-air presence in the Detroit market (the E.W. Scripps Company and ABC would reach a group affiliation deal that renewed affiliation agreements with WXYZ and WEWS, and switch four other stations, including two whose Fox affiliations were displaced by the New World deal, with the network). [145]
On July 31, 1995, The Walt Disney Company announced an agreement to merge with Capital Cities/ABC for $19 billion. [50] [146] Disney shareholders approved the merger at a special conference in New York City on January 4, 1996, [146] [147] with the acquisition of Capital Cities/ABC being completed on February 9; following the sale, Disney renamed its new subsidiary ABC Inc. [146] In addition to the ABC network, the Disney acquisition integrated ABC's ten owned-and-operated television and 21 radio stations; its 80% interest in ESPN, ownership interests in The History Channel , A&E Television Networks , and Lifetime Entertainment ; and Capital Cities/ABC's magazine and newspaper properties into the company. [50] As FCC ownership rules forbade the company from keeping both it and KABC-TV, Disney sold Los Angeles independent station KCAL-TV to Young Broadcasting for $387 million. [148] On April 4, Disney sold the four newspapers that ABC had controlled under Capital Cities to Knight Ridder for $1.65 billion. [149] Following the merger, Thomas S. Murphy left ABC with Robert Iger taking his place as president and CEO. [150] Around the time of the merger, Disney's television production units had already produced series for the network such as Home Improvement and Boy Meets World , while the deal also allowed ABC access to Disney's children's programming library for its Saturday morning block. In 1998, ABC premiered the Aaron Sorkin -created sitcom Sports Night , centering on the travails of the staff of a SportsCenter -style sports news program; despite earning critical praise and multiple Emmy Awards , the series was cancelled in 2000 after two seasons.
On May 10, 1999, Disney reorganized its publishing division, the Buena Vista Publishing Group, renaming it as Disney Publishing Worldwide ; the rechristened division became a subsidiary of Disney Consumer Products while Hyperion Books became affiliated with ABC. [151] On July 8, 1999, Disney consolidated Walt Disney Television Studio , Buena Vista Television Productions and ABC's primetime division into the ABC Entertainment Television Group .
In August 1999, ABC premiered a special series event, Who Wants to Be a Millionaire , a game show based on the British program of the same title. Hosted throughout its ABC tenure by Regis Philbin , the program became a major ratings success throughout its initial summer run, which led ABC to renew Millionaire as a regular series, returning on January 18, 2000. At its peak, the program aired as much as six nights a week. [152] Buoyed by Millionaire , during the 1999–2000 season , ABC became the first network to move from third to first place in the ratings during a single television season. Millionaire ended its run on the network's primetime lineup after three years in 2002, with Buena Vista Television relaunching the show as a syndicated program (under that incarnation's original host Meredith Vieira ) in September of that year.

New century, new programs; divisional restructuring (2001–2010)
In addition to Who Wants to Be a Millionaire , the network entered the 2000s with hits held over from the previous decade such as The Practice , NYPD Blue and The Wonderful World of Disney and new series such as My Wife and Kids and According to Jim , all of which managed to help ABC stay ahead of the competition in the ratings in spite of the later departure of Millionaire . 2000 saw the end of "TGIF", which was struggling to find new hits (with Boy Meets World and Sabrina, the Teenage Witch , the latter of which moved to The WB in October 2006, beginning to wane as well by this point) following the loss of Family Matters and Step by Step to CBS as part of its own failed attempt at a family-oriented Friday comedy block in the 1997–98 season . Outside of 20/20 , Friday nights remained a weak spot for ABC for the next 11 years.
On April 30, 2000, as a result of a carriage dispute with ABC, Time Warner Cable removed ABC owned-and-operated stations from the cable provider's systems in four markets (WABC-TV in New York City, KABC-TV in Los Angeles, KTRK in Houston and WTVD in Raleigh-Durham). The network had earlier reached an eleventh-hour deal to renew its carriage agreement with the provider on December 31, 1999. [143] ABC filed an emergency petition to the Federal Communications Commission on May 1 to force TWC to restore the affected stations; the FCC ruled in favor of ABC, ordering Time Warner Cable to restore the stations, doing so on the afternoon of May 2. [143] ABC ended the 2000–01 season as the most-watched network, ahead of NBC.
Networks affiliates approved a two-year affiliate agreement in 2002. In September 2006, Disney Chairman/CEO Michael Eisner outlined a proposed realignment of the ABC broadcast network day parts with the similar unit in its cable channels: ABC Sunday mornings with Disney Channels ( Toon & Playhouse ), ABC daytime with Soapnet and ABC prime time with ABC Family. [153] 2002 saw the debut of the network's first hit reality series, The Bachelor (the elimination-style dating show's success led to a spinoff, The Bachelorette , which premiered the following year, as well as two additional spinoffs that later debuted in the early 2010s).
In 2004, ABC's average viewership declined by ten ratings points, landing the network in fourth place, behind NBC, CBS and Fox (by the following year, the combined season-ending average audience share of ABC, NBC and CBS represented only 32% of U.S. households [126] ). However, during the 2004–05 season , the network experienced unexpected success with new series such as Desperate Housewives , Lost and Grey's Anatomy as well as reality series Dancing with the Stars , which helped ABC rise to second place, jumping ahead of CBS, but behind a surging Fox. On April 21, 2004, Disney announced a restructuring of its Disney Media Networks division with Marvin Jacobs being named president of ABC parent Disney–ABC Television Group , and ESPN president George Bodenheimer becoming co-CEO of the division with Jacobs, as well as president of ABC Sports. [154] On December 7, 2005, ABC Sports and ESPN signed an eight-year broadcast rights agreement with NASCAR , allowing ABC and ESPN to broadcast 17 NASCAR Cup Series races each season (comprising just over half of the 36 races held annually) effective with the 2006 season. [155]

Separation of the radio network
Between May and September 2005, rumors circulated that Disney–ABC was considering a sale of ABC Radio, with Clear Channel Communications and Westwood One (which had earlier purchased NBC's radio division, as well as the distribution rights to CBS's, and the Mutual Broadcasting System during the 1990s) as potential buyers. On October 19, 2005, ABC announced the restructuring of the group into six divisions: Entertainment Communications, Communications Resources, Kids Communications, News Communications, Corporate Communications, and International Communications.
On February 6, 2007, The Walt Disney Company announced an agreement with Citadel Broadcasting to merge the ABC Radio Network with Citadel. The new entity, Citadel Communications , [156] was majority owned (52%) by Disney, in conjunction with Forstmann Little (32%) and former shareholders of Citadel Broadcasting (16%). Citadel eventually merged with Cumulus Media in September 2011.

Entertainment reorganization and struggles with new shows (2007–2009)
In February 2007, Disney announced that it would rename its Touchstone Television production unit as the ABC Television Studio (simplified to ABC Studios by that summer), as part of a corporate move to eliminate secondary production brands such as Buena Vista . [157] In May 2007, ABC unveiled a new image campaign, revolving around the slogan "Start Here", which highlighted the multi-platform availability of ABC's program content. [158]
The Writers Guild of America strike that halted production of network programs for much of the 2007–08 season affected the network in 2007–08 and 2008–09 , as various ABC shows that premiered in 2007, such as Dirty Sexy Money , Pushing Daisies , Eli Stone and Samantha Who? , did not live to see a third season; other series such as Boston Legal and the U.S. version of Life on Mars suffered from low viewership, despite the former, a spin off of The Practice , being a once-highlighted breakout series when it debuted in 2005. [159] One of the network's strike-replacement programs during that time was the game show Duel , which premiered in December 2007. The program would become a minor success for the network during its initial six-episode run, which led ABC to renew Duel as a regular series starting in April 2008. However, Duel suffered from low viewership during its run as a regular series, and ABC canceled the program after sixteen episodes. On August 15, 2008, Disney denied rumors started by Caris & Co. that it would be selling the ten ABC owned-and-operated stations. [160]
In early 2009, Disney–ABC Television Group merged ABC Entertainment and ABC Studios into a new division, ABC Entertainment Group, which would be responsible for both its production and broadcasting operations. [161] [162] [163] [164] [165] During this reorganization, the group announced that it would lay off 5% of its workforce. [166] On April 2, 2009, Citadel Communications announced that it would rebrand ABC Radio as Citadel Media; [167] however, ABC News continued to provide news content for Citadel. On December 22, Disney–ABC Television Group announced a partnership with Apple Inc. to make individual episodes of ABC and Disney Channel programs available for purchase on iTunes . [168]

Current state
In March 2010, reports suggested that The Walt Disney Company was considering spinning off ABC into an independent company because "it [did not] add a lot of value to Disney's other divisions". [169] The company entered advanced negotiations with two private equity firms to sell ABC; however, the planned sale was cancelled as a result of an FBI investigation into allegations of attempted insider trading by an ex-employee which they later denied. [170]
The network began running into some trouble in the ratings by 2010. That year, the sixth and final season of Lost became the drama's lowest-rated season since its debut in 2004. Ratings for the once-instant hit Ugly Betty collapsed dramatically after it was moved to Fridays at the start of its fourth season in the fall of 2009; an attempt to boost ratings by moving the dramedy to Wednesdays failed, with its ultimate cancellation by the network eliciting negative reaction from the public, and particularly the show's fanbase. [171] With the network's two former hit shows now out of the picture, the network's remaining top veteran shows Desperate Housewives and Grey's Anatomy , and another hit drama Brothers & Sisters , all ended the 2009–10 season recorded their lowest ratings ever.
Among the few bright spots during this season were the midseason crime dramedy Castle as well as the success of two family sitcoms that anchored the network's revamped Wednesday comedy lineup, The Middle and Modern Family , the latter of which was both a critical and commercial success. Shark Tank (based on the Dragon's Den reality format) also became a midseason sleeper hit on Sundays in the spring of 2010; the following season, it became the tentpole of the network's Friday night schedule, gradually helping make ABC a strong competitor (after being paired with 20/20 and beginning with the 2012–13 season , the Tim Allen sitcom Last Man Standing ) against CBS' long-dominant drama/reality lineup on that night for the first time since the "TGIF" lineup ended in 2000.
The network's troubles with sustaining existing series and gaining new hits spilled over into its 2010–11 schedule : ABC's dramas during that season continued to fail, with the midseason forensic investigation drama Body of Proof being the only one that was renewed for a second season. [172] The network also struggled to establish new comedies to support the previous year's debuts, with only late-season premiere Happy Endings earning a second season. [172] Meanwhile, the new lows hit by Brothers & Sisters led to its cancellation, and the previous year's only drama renewal, V , also failed to earn another season after a low-rated midseason run. [173] Despite this and another noticeable ratings decline, ABC would manage to outrate NBC for third place by a larger margin than the previous year. [174]
With relatively little buzz surrounding its 2010–11 pilots, compounded by a sexual harassment lawsuit against him, Stephen McPherson resigned as ABC Entertainment Group president on July 27, 2010. Paul Lee (who previously served as the president of sister cable channel ABC Family) was announced as his replacement that same day. [175] [176]
On April 14, 2011, ABC canceled the long-running soap operas All My Children and One Life to Live after 41 and 43 years on the air, respectively [177] (following backlash from fans, ABC sold the rights to both shows to Prospect Park , which eventually revived the soaps on Hulu for one additional season in 2013 and with both companies suing one another for allegations of interference with the process of reviving the shows, failure to pay licensing fees and issues over ABC's use of certain characters from One Life to Live on General Hospital during the transition [178] [179] ). The talk/lifestyle show that replaced One Life to Live , The Revolution , failed to generate satisfactory ratings and was in turn canceled after only seven months. The 2011–12 season saw ABC drop to fourth place in the 18–49 demographic despite renewing a handful of new shows (including freshmen dramas Scandal , Revenge and Once Upon a Time ) for second seasons. [180]
In 2012, ABC News and Univision Communications announced a partnership to launch an English-language cable news channel primarily aimed at younger English-speaking Hispanics; the new network, Fusion , launched on October 28, 2013. [181] [182] [183] The 2012–13 season failed to live up to the previous year, with only one drama, Nashville , and one comedy, The Neighbors , earning a second season renewal.
The 2013–14 season was a slight improvement for ABC with three new hits in The Goldbergs , Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. and Resurrection , all of which were renewed; however, that season saw the cancellations of holdovers The Neighbors (which languished in its new Friday time slot despite being bookended by Last Man Standing and Shark Tank ) and Suburgatory . NBC, which had lagged behind ABC for eight years, finished the season in first place in the 18–49 demographic for the first time since 2004, and in second place in total viewership behind long-dominant CBS. ABC itself would finish the season in third place as Fox crashed to fourth in both demographics.
The 2014–15 season saw moderate hits in Black-ish (the first series on the four major U.S. networks to feature a predominately African-American cast since 2006) and major successes in How to Get Away with Murder (which, alongside Grey's Anatomy and Scandal , became one of the centerpieces of a new Thursday drama lineup, "TGIT", composed of dramas executive produced by Shonda Rhimes ). New hits came in with fellow new comedy Fresh Off the Boat , a new drama Secrets and Lies and a low rated but critically acclaimed show American Crime , all of which were renewed. However, that season saw cancellations of Resurrection and Revenge .
By November 2015, ABC was creating a digital slate called internal ABC3 for its WatchABC video streaming app. [184] The ABC3 slate of 7 comedy and lifestyle short series debuted under the ABCd banner along with 38 older series under a revamped and renamed ABC app on July 13, 2016. [185]
The 2015–16 season saw breakout hits such as Quantico .

Programming
The ABC television network provides 89 hours of regularly scheduled network programming each week. The network provides 22 hours of prime time programming to affiliated stations from 8:00–11:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday (all times Eastern and Pacific Time) and 7:00–11:00 p.m. on Sundays.
Daytime programming is also provided from 11:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. weekdays (with a one-hour break at 12:00 p.m. Eastern/Pacific for stations to air newscasts, other locally produced programming such as talk shows, or syndicated programs) featuring the talk/lifestyle shows The View and The Chew and the soap opera General Hospital . ABC News programming includes Good Morning America from 7:00 to 9:00 a.m. weekdays (along with one-hour weekend editions); nightly editions of ABC World News Tonight (whose weekend editions are occasionally subject to abbreviation or preemption due to sports telecasts overrunning into the program's timeslot), the Sunday political talk show This Week , early morning news programs World News Now and America This Morning and the late night newsmagazine Nightline . Late nights feature the weeknight talk show Jimmy Kimmel Live! .
The network's three-hour Saturday morning children's programming timeslot is programmed by syndication distributor Litton Entertainment , which produces Litton's Weekend Adventure under an arrangement in which the programming block is syndicated exclusively to ABC owned-and-operated and affiliated stations, rather than being leased out directly by the network to Litton.
Sports programming is also provided on some weekend afternoons at any time from 12:00 to 6:00 p.m. Eastern Time (9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. Pacific) and, during college football season, during prime time on Saturday nights as part of the Saturday Night Football package. Due to the erratic and (outside of college football season) highly inconsistent scheduling of sports programming on weekend afternoons since ESPN took over responsibilities for ABC's sports division in 2006, ABC carries the ESPN Sports Saturday block on Saturday late afternoons (featuring various ESPN-produced documentaries), and on Sundays either encores of primetime reality series, cancelled series being burned off that had no room on the primetime schedule, occasional theatrical films which were acquired by the network in the early to mid-2000s that no longer have a primetime slot to air in or more recently, figure skating and gymnastics specials supplied by Disson Skating, when no sports telecasts are scheduled, usually airing between 4:00 and 6:00 p.m. Eastern and Pacific Time. During the summer, ABC airs ESPN-produced highlight compilation programs for The Open Championship golf and The Wimbledon tennis tournaments to provide some presence for both events on American broadcast television. ABC also carries various X Games weekend events not broadcast by ESPN. ABC airs NBA games on Sundays, normally starting in January as "NBA Sunday Showcase" during the regular season, and shows Christmas Day games, regularly between 2–7 PM ET, and NBA playoff games during the weekends, and exclusive rights to the NBA Finals .

Daytime
ABC's daytime schedule currently features talk shows The View and The Chew , and the soap opera General Hospital , the latter of which is the longest-running entertainment program in the history of the ABC television network, having aired since 1963. ABC also broadcasts the morning news program Good Morning America and has done so since 1975, though that program is not considered to be part of the ABC Daytime block. In addition to the long-running All My Children (1970–2011) and One Life to Live (1968–2012), notable past soap operas seen on the daytime lineup include Ryan's Hope , Dark Shadows , Loving , The City and Port Charles . ABC also aired the last nine years of the Procter & Gamble -produced soap The Edge of Night , following its cancellation by CBS in 1975. ABC Daytime has also aired a number of game shows, including The Dating Game , The Newlywed Game , Let's Make a Deal , Password , Split Second , The $10,000/$20,000 Pyramid , Family Feud , The Better Sex , Trivia Trap , All-Star Blitz and Hot Streak .

Specials
ABC currently holds the broadcast rights to the Academy Awards , Emmy Awards (which are rotated across all four major networks on a year-to-year basis), American Music Awards , Disney Parks Christmas Day Parade , Tournament of Roses Parade , Country Music Association Awards and the CMA Music Festival . Since 2000, ABC has also owned the television rights to most of the Peanuts television specials, having acquired the broadcast rights from CBS, which originated the specials in 1965 with the debut of A Charlie Brown Christmas (other Peanuts specials broadcast annually by ABC, including A Charlie Brown Christmas , include It's the Great Pumpkin, Charlie Brown and A Charlie Brown Thanksgiving ).
Since 1974, ABC has generally aired Dick Clark's New Year's Rockin' Eve on New Year's Eve (hosted first by its creator Dick Clark, and later by his successor Ryan Seacrest ); the only exception was in 1999, when ABC put it on a one-year hiatus to provide coverage of the international millennium festivities , though Clark's traditional countdown from Times Square was still featured within the coverage. ABC has also aired the Miss America pageant from 1954 to 1956, 1997 to 2005 (with the television rights being assumed by cable channel TLC in 2006, when the pageant moved from its longtime homebase in Atlantic City to Las Vegas , before returning to Atlantic City in 2013) and since 2011. Under its current contract with the Miss America Organization , ABC will continue to broadcast the pageant through 2016. [186]
In 2015, ABC began airing the ESPY Awards show, which normally aired on ESPN before 2015. In the ABC debut of the ESPY's, Caitlyn Jenner was awarded the Arthur Ash Award for courage, after she announced in a 20/20 interview, that she was becoming transgender.

Programming library
ABC owns nearly all its in-house television and theatrical productions made from the 1970s onward, with the exception of certain co-productions with producers (for example, The Commish is now owned by the estate of its producer, Stephen Cannell ). Worldwide video rights are currently owned by various companies, for example, MGM Home Entertainment via 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment owns U.S. video rights to many of ABC's feature films.
When the FCC imposed its fin-syn rules in 1970, ABC proactively created two companies: Worldvision Enterprises as a syndication distributor, and ABC Circle Films as a production company. However, between the publication and implementation of these regulations, the separation of the network's catalog was made in 1973. The broadcast rights to pre-1973 productions were transferred to Worldvision, which became independent in the same year. The company has been sold several times since Paramount Television acquired it in 1999, and has most recently been absorbed into CBS Television Distribution , a unit of CBS Corporation . Nonetheless, Worldvision sold portions of its catalog, including the Ruby-Spears and Hanna-Barbera libraries, to Turner Broadcasting System in 1991. With Disney's 1996 purchase of ABC, ABC Circle Films was absorbed into Touchstone Television, a Disney subsidiary which in turn was renamed ABC Studios in 2007. [157]
Also part of the library are most films in the David O. Selznick library, the Cinerama Productions /Palomar theatrical library (with the exception of those films produced in Cinerama which are now under the control of Pacific Theatres and Flicker Alley ), the Selmur Productions catalog that the network acquired some years back, and the in-house productions it continues to produce (such as America's Funniest Home Videos , Grey's Anatomy , General Hospital , and ABC News productions), although Disney–ABC Domestic Television (formerly known as Buena Vista Television) handles domestic television distribution, while Disney–ABC International Television (formerly known as Buena Vista International Television) handles international television distribution.

Stations
Since its inception, ABC has had many affiliated stations, which include WABC-TV and WPVI-TV, the first two stations to carry the network's programming. As of March 2015 [update] , ABC has eight owned-and-operated stations, and current and pending affiliation agreements with 235 additional television stations encompassing 49 states, the District of Columbia, four U.S. possessions, Bermuda and Saba ; [187] [188] this makes ABC the largest U.S. broadcast television network by total number of affiliates. The network has an estimated national reach of 96.26% of all households in the United States (or 300,794,157 Americans with at least one television set).
Currently, New Jersey , Rhode Island and Delaware are the only U.S. states where ABC does not have a locally licensed affiliate (New Jersey is served by New York City O&O WABC-TV and Philadelphia O&O WPVI-TV; Rhode Island is served by New Bedford, Massachusetts -licensed WLNE ; and Delaware is served by WPVI and Salisbury, Maryland affiliate WMDT ). ABC maintains affiliations with low-power stations (broadcasting either in analog or digital) in a few markets, such as Birmingham, Alabama ( WBMA-LD ), Lima, Ohio ( WLQP-LP ) and South Bend, Indiana ( WBND-LD ). In some markets, including the former two mentioned, these stations also maintain digital simulcasts on a subchannel of a co-owned/co-managed full-power television station.
The network has the unusual distinction of having separately owned and operated affiliates which serve the same market in Tampa, Florida (WFTS-TV and WWSB ), Lincoln, Nebraska ( KLKN-TV and KHGI-TV ), and Grand Rapids, Michigan ( WZZM and WOTV ), with an analogous situation arising in Kansas City, Missouri ( KMBC-TV and KQTV ). KQTV is licensed to St. Joseph, Missouri , which is designated by Nielsen as a separate market from Kansas City despite being located within 55 miles (89 km) of one another, while WWSB, KHGI and WOTV serve areas that do not receive an adequate signal from their market's primary ABC affiliate (in the case of WWSB, this dates back to when WTSP was Tampa's primary ABC affiliate prior to 1994, with the former being necessitated to serve the southern part of the Tampa market including the station's city of license , Sarasota , due to WTSP's transmitter being short-spaced to avoid interfering with the analog signal of Miami affiliate WPLG – which like WTSP, broadcast on VHF channel 10).
The Sinclair Broadcast Group is the largest operator of ABC stations by numerical total, owning or providing services to 28 ABC affiliates and two additional subchannel-only affiliates; Sinclair owns the largest ABC subchannel affiliate by market size, WABM-DT2 / WDBB-DT2 in the Birmingham market, which serve as repeaters of WBMA-LD (which itself is also simulcast on a subchannel of former WBMA satellite WGWW , owned by Sinclair partner company Howard Stirk Holdings ). The E. W. Scripps Company is the largest operator of ABC stations in terms of overall market reach, owning 15 ABC-affiliated stations (including affiliates in larger markets such as Cleveland , Phoenix , Detroit and Denver ), and through its ownership of Phoenix affiliate KNXV, Las Vegas affiliate KTNV-TV and Tucson affiliate KGUN-TV , the only provider of ABC programming for the majority of Arizona (outside of the Yuma - El Centro market) and Southern Nevada .

Facilities and studios
All of ABC's owned-and-operated stations and affiliates have had their own facilities and studios, but transverse entities have been created to produce national programming. As a result, television series were produced by ABC Circle Films beginning in 1962 and by Touchstone Television beginning in 1985, before Touchstone was reorganized as ABC Studios in February 2007. Since the 1950s, ABC has had two main production facilities: the ABC Television Center (now The Prospect Studios) on Prospect Avenue in Hollywood, California , shared with the operations of KABC-TV until 1999; and the ABC Television Center, East, a set of studios located throughout the New York City.
ABC owns several facilities in New York grouped mainly on West 66th Street. The main set of facilities is on the corner of Columbus Avenue and West 66th Street. In total, ABC's facilities occupy a combined 9,755 square meters (105,000 sq ft) of the 14,864 square meters (159,990 sq ft) of the blocks they encompass. The aforementioned set includes:
ABC also owns the Times Square Studios at 1500 Broadway on land in Times Square owned by a development fund for the 42nd Street Project; opened in 1999, Good Morning America and Nightline are broadcast from this particular facility. ABC News has premises a little further on West 66th Street, in a six-story building occupying a 196 feet (60 m) × 379 feet (116 m) plot at 121–135 West End Avenue . The block of West 66th street between Central Park West and Columbus Ave which houses the ABC News building was renamed Peter Jennings Way in 2006 in honor of the recently deceased longtime ABC News chief anchor and anchor of World News Tonight . [190]

Related services

Video-on-demand services
ABC maintains several video on demand services for delayed viewing of the network's programming, including a traditional VOD service called ABC on Demand, which is carried on most traditional cable and IPTV providers. The Walt Disney Company is also a part-owner of Hulu (as part of a consortium that includes, among other parties, the respective parent companies of NBC and Fox, NBCUniversal and 21st Century Fox ), and has offered full-length episodes of most of ABC's programming through the streaming service since July 6, 2009 (which are available for viewing on Hulu's website and mobile app , and since July 2016, through Yahoo! View as part of Hulu's spin-off of their free service to Yahoo), [191] as part of an agreement reached in April that year that also allowed Disney to acquire a 27% ownership stake in Hulu.
In May 2013, ABC launched "WATCH ABC", a revamp of its traditional multi-platform streaming services encompassing the network's existing streaming portal at ABC.com and a mobile app for smartphones and tablet computers ; in addition to providing full-length episodes of ABC programs, the service allows live programming streams of local ABC affiliates in select markets (the first such offering by a U.S. broadcast network). Similar to sister network ESPN's WatchESPN service (which originated the "WATCH" brand used by the streaming services of Disney's television networks), live streams of ABC stations are only available to authenticated subscribers of participating pay television providers in certain markets. New York City O&O WABC-TV and Philadelphia O&O WPVI-TV were the first stations to offer streams of their programming on the service (with a free preview for non-subscribers through June 2013), with the six remaining ABC O&Os offering streams by the start of the 2013–14 season. Hearst Television also reached a deal to offer streams of its ABC affiliates (including stations in Boston , Kansas City , Milwaukee and West Palm Beach ) on the service, though as of 2016 these stations are only available for live-streaming for DirecTV subscribers. [192] [193]
The most recent episodes of the network's shows are usually made available on WATCH ABC, Hulu and ABC on Demand the day after their original broadcast. In addition, ABC on Demand (like the video-on-demand television services provided by the other U.S. broadcast networks) disallows fast forwarding of accessed content. Restrictions implemented by Disney–ABC Television Group on January 7, 2014 restrict streaming of the most recent episode of any ABC program on Hulu and WATCH ABC until eight days after their initial broadcast, in order to encourage live or same-week (via both DVR and cable on demand) viewing, with day-after-air streaming on either service limited to subscribers of participating pay television providers (such as Comcast , Verizon FiOS and Time Warner Cable ) using an ISP account via an authenticated user login.

ABC HD
ABC's master feed is transmitted in 720p high definition , the native resolution format for The Walt Disney Company's U.S. television properties. However, most of Hearst Television's 16 ABC-affiliated stations transmit the network's programming in 1080i HD, while 11 other affiliates owned by various companies carry the network feed in 480i standard definition [187] either due to technical considerations for affiliates of other major networks that carry ABC programming on a digital subchannel or because a primary feed ABC affiliate has not yet upgraded their transmission equipment to allow content to be presented in HD.
ABC began its conversion to high definition with the launch of its simulcast feed, ABC HD, on September 16, 2001 at the start of the 2001–02 season , with its scripted prime time series becoming the first shows to upgrade to the format. The network's slate of freshmen scripted series were broadcast in HD from their debuts, while all scripted series held over from the 2000–01 season were converted from standard-definition to high definition beginning that season.
With the 2011 cancellation of Supernanny , Extreme Makeover: Home Edition became the only remaining program on the network's schedule that was broadcast in 4:3 standard definition. All of the network's programming has been presented in HD since January 2012 (with the exception of certain holiday specials produced prior to 2005 – such as the Peanuts specials and Rudolph's Shiny New Year – which continue to be presented in 4:3 SD), when Extreme Makeover: Home Edition ended its run as a regular series and One Life to Live (which had been presented in 16:9 standard definition since 2010) also ended its ABC run. The affiliate-syndicated Saturday morning E/I block Litton's Weekend Aventure is also broadcast in HD, and was the first children's program block on any U.S. broadcast network to feature programs available in the format upon its September 2011 debut.
On September 1, 2016, ABC began to use 16:9 framing for all of most graphical imaging (primarily the network's logo bug, in-program promotions and generic closing credit sequences as well as sports telecasts, where the BottomLine and scoreboard elements now extend outside the 4:3 frame), requiring its stations and pay television providers to display its programming in a compulsory widescreen format, either in high definition or standard definition; with the change, some programs (such as Grey's Anatomy , The Goldbergs and Quantico ) also began positioning their main on-screen credits outside of the 4:3 aspect ratio. This leaves CBS and The CW as the last two major networks to continue to prefer 4:3 framing for graphics.

Analysis
Since its inception, the American Broadcasting Company has evolved with the development of various assets, many of which have been sold. The company originates from a radio network that went on the air in 1927, was forced by law to separate from its original parent company, and then became an independent company. The new company diversified rapidly in the emerging medium of television.
The company diversified again through its mergers with United Paramount Theatres in 1950 and later with Capital Cities in 1985. Under UPT, ABC was a sister company to a large theater chain, while under Capital Cities, it was a sister company to various publications. However, ABC was separated from its theaters by the time of the Capital Cities merger, and from its sister newspapers during Disney's purchase of the network in 1996.
A 1993 annual corporate report indicated that 70% of Capital Cities/ABC's revenue came from the sale of advertising space, and for the rest, the two main positions were subscriptions to pay television channels and direct sales of books and journals. [141]

Visual identity
The ABC logo has evolved many times since the network's creation in 1943. The network's first logo, introduced in 1946, consisted of a television screen containing the letters "T" and "V", with a vertical ABC microphone in the center, [194] referencing the network's roots in radio. When the ABC-UPT merger was finalized in 1953, the network introduced a new logo based on the seal of the Federal Communications Commission, with the letters "ABC" enclosed in a circular shield surmounted by the bald eagle . [194] In 1957, just before the television network began its first color broadcasts, the ABC logo consisted of a tiny lowercase "abc" in the center of a large lowercase letter a , a design known as the "ABC Circle A". [194]
In 1962, graphic designer Paul Rand redesigned the ABC logo into its best-known (and current) form, with the lowercase letters "abc" enclosed in a single black circle. The new logo debuted on-air for ABC's promos at the start of the 1963–64 season. The letters are strongly reminiscent of the Bauhaus typeface designed by Herbert Bayer in the 1920s, [195] but also share similarities with several other fonts, such as ITC Avant Garde and Horatio, and most closely resembling Chalet. The logo's simplicity made it easier to redesign and duplicate, which conferred a benefit for ABC (mostly before the advent of computer graphics ).
The 1970s and 1980s saw the emergence of many graphical imaging packages for the network which based the logo's setting mainly on special lighting effects then under development including white, blue, pink, rainbow neon and glittering dotted lines. Among the "ABC Circle" logo's many variants was a 1977 ID sequence that featured a bubble on a black background representing the circle with glossy gold letters, and as such, was the first ABC identification card to have a three-dimensional appearance. [194]
In 1983, for the 40th anniversary of the network's founding, ID sequences had the logo appear in a gold CGI design on a blue background, accompanied by the slogan "That Special Feeling" in a script font. [194] Ten years later, in 1993, the "ABC Circle" logo reverted to its classic white-on-black color scheme, but with gloss effects on both the circle and the letters, and a bronze border surrounding the circle. [194] The ABC logo first appeared as a on-screen bug in the 1993–94 season , appearing initially only for 60 seconds at the beginning of an act or segment, before appearing throughout programs (except during commercial breaks) beginning in the 1995–96 season ; the respective iterations of the translucent logo bug were also incorporated within program promotions until the 2011–12 season.
In 1998, the network began using a minimalist graphical identity, designed by Pittard Sullivan, featuring a small black-and-white "ABC Circle" logo on a yellow background (promotions during this time also featured a sequence of still photos of the stars of its programs during the timeslot card as well as the schedule sequence that began each night's prime time lineup). [194] A new four-note theme tune was introduced alongside the package, based around the network's "We Love TV" image campaign introduced that year, creating an audio signature on par with the NBC chimes , CBS' various three-note soundmarks (including the current version used since 1992) and the Fox Fanfare . The four-note signature has been updated with every television season thereafter (though variants of it used since the 1998–99 season remain in use during the production company vanity cards shown following the closing credits of most programs). In the fall of 2015, ABC stopped with its 1998–2002 four-note jingles for the production company vanity cards following the closing credits of most of its programs over seventeen years, now it has a different and adventure-type music (which is a modified version of "You Lift Me Up" by Mikey Wax ), including the drums or the chorus of the network's four-note signature. Also, a new music is also currently heard on the network's tonight lineup and the intros for each ABC show.
In 2000, ABC launched a web-based promotional campaign focused around its circle logo, also called "the dot", in which comic book character Little Dot prompted visitors to "download the dot", a program which would cause the ABC logo to fly around the screen and settle in the bottom-right corner. [196] The network hired the Troika Design Group to design and produce its 2001–02 identity, which continued using the black-and-yellow coloring of the logo and featured dots and stripes in various promotional and identification spots. [197]
On June 16, 2007, ABC began to phase in a new imaging campaign for the upcoming 2007–08 season, "Start Here". Also developed by Troika, the on-air design was intended to emphasize the availability of ABC content across multiple platforms (in particular, using a system of icons representing different devices, such as television, computers and mobile devices), and "simplify and bring a lot more consistency and continuity to the visual representation of ABC". The ABC logo was also significantly redesigned as part of the transition, with a glossy "ball" effect that was specifically designed for HD. On-air, the logo was accompanied by animated water and ribbon effects. Red ribbons were used to represent the entertainment division, while blue ribbons were used for ABC News. [158] [198]
A revised version of the ABC logo was introduced for promotions for the 2013–14 season during the network's upfront presentation on May 14, 2013, and officially introduced on-air on May 30 (although some affiliates implemented the new design prior to then), as part of an overhaul of ABC's identity by design agency LoyalKaspar. The updated logo carries a simpler gloss design than the previous version, and contains lettering more closely resembling Paul Rand's original version of the circle logo. The logo is displayed on-air, online and in print advertising in four variants shading the respective color used with the circle design's native black coloring: a gold version is primarily used on entertainment-oriented outlets (such as ABC.com, WATCH ABC, and by ABC Studios) and the on-screen bug; steel blue and dark grey versions are used primarily by ABC News; a red version is used for ESPN on ABC , while all four variants are used selectively in advertising and by affiliates. A new custom typeface , "ABC Modern" (which was inspired by the logotype), was also created for use in advertising and other promotional materials. [199]

International development
The first attempts to internationalize the ABC television network date back to the 1950s, after Leonard Goldenson, following the United Paramount Theatres model, tried to use on ABC the same strategies he had made in expanding UPT's theater operation to the international market. [200] Leonard Goldenson said that ABC's first international activity was broadcasting the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in June 1953; CBS and NBC were unable to cover the coronation live due to respective issues with technical problems and flight delays. [201] NBC's plane landed in Latin America [ where? ] , leading ABC to learn of subsidiaries in that region. [201] Goldenson tried international investing, having ABC invest in the Latin American market, acquiring a 51% interest in a network covering Central America . [202] Goldenson also cited interest in Japan in the early 1950s, [203] acquiring a 5% stake in two new domestic networks, the Mainichi Broadcasting System in 1951 and Nihon Educational Television in 1957. [203] Goldenson also invested in broadcasting properties in Beirut in the mid-1960s. [204]
The idea was to create a network of wholly and partially owned channels, and affiliates to rebroadcast the network's programs. In 1959, this rerun activity was completed with program syndication, with ABC Films selling programs to networks not owned by ABC. [205] The arrival of satellite television ended the need for ABC to hold interests in other countries; [110] many governments also wanted to increase their independence and strengthen legislation to limit foreign ownership of broadcasting properties. As a result, ABC was forced to sell all of its interests in international networks, mainly in Japan and Latin America, in the 1970s. [70]
A second period of international expansion is linked to that of the ESPN network in the 1990s, and policies enacted in the 2000s by Disney Media Networks (which included the expansion of several of the company's U.S.-based cable networks including Disney Channel and its spinoffs Toon Disney, Playhouse Disney and Jetix ; although Disney also sold its 33% stake in European sports channel Eurosport for $155 million in June 2000 [206] ). In contrast to Disney's other channels, ABC is broadcast in the United States, although the network's programming is syndicated in many countries. The policy regarding wholly owned international networks was revived in 2004 when on September 27 of that year, ABC announced the launch of ABC1 , a free-to-air channel in the United Kingdom owned by the ABC Group. [207] However, on September 8, 2007, Disney announced that it would discontinue ABC1 citing to the channel's inability to attain sustainable viewership. [208] With ABC1's shutdown that October, the company's attempt to develop ABC International were discontinued. [208]
Prior to the ABC1 closure, on October 10, 2006, Disney–ABC Television Group entered into an agreement with satellite provider Dish TV to carry its ABC News Now channel in India . [209]

Movies produced by ABC or its divisions

See also
WebPage index: 00121
MarketWatch
MarketWatch operates a financial information website that provides business news, analysis, and stock market data. It is a subsidiary of Dow Jones & Company , a property of News Corp . MarketWatch is part of Dow Jones' Consumer Media Group, along with The Wall Street Journal , Barron's , the WSJ.com and affiliated internet properties.
In 2012, the publication reported, it had 17 million unique users in recent years and had been honored several times as a top large business-focused website by Editor & Publisher , Media Week , the Society of American Business Editors and Writers , and other publications and organizations. [4]
The company operates BigCharts.com and the stock market simulation site VirtualStockExchange.com . MarketWatch provides radio updates every 30 minutes on the MarketWatch.com Radio Network. It also offers subscription products for individual investors, including the Hulbert Financial Digest suite of products, Retirement Weekly and ETF Trader. The publication's OCLC number is 56914924. [5]

History
MarketWatch used to operate in partnership with CBS News . The Financial Times was an original financial partner and investor in MarketWatch. Dow Jones acquired it in January 2005 for $530 million.
MarketWatch was founded by Larry Kramer and others, including Bill Bishop in business development and Thom Calandra, formerly of Bloomberg London, in editorial, in 1997. MarketWatch was incubated at Data Broadcasting Corp., a San Mateo, California , company that owned distribution rights for financial information. Calandra recommended that Kramer hire David Callaway a former colleague of Calandra, as the site’s managing editor from Bloomberg two years later. In 2013, Glenn Hall, former editor in chief of TheStreet, became the editor of MarketWatch. [6] In 2014, Jeremy Olshan, a veteran of the New York Post, took over as editor. [1]

See also
WebPage index: 00122
Wikipedia logo
The logo of Wikipedia , an Internet -based free multilingual encyclopedia , is an unfinished globe constructed from jigsaw pieces—some pieces are missing at the top—inscribed with glyphs from many different writing systems . As displayed on the web pages of the English-language version of Wikipedia, there is a wordmark "Wikipedia" under the globe, and below that the text "The Free Encyclopedia" in the free open-source Linux Libertine font. [1] [2]

Design
Each piece bears a glyph (a letter or other character ), or glyphs, symbolizing the multilingualism of Wikipedia. As with the Latin letter “W”, these glyphs are in most cases the first glyph or glyphs of the name “Wikipedia” rendered in that language. They are as follows: [3]
The empty space at the top represents the incomplete nature of the project, the articles and languages yet to be added. [ citation needed ]

History
An initial design of the logo was created by Paul Stansifer, a then 17-year-old Wikipedia user, whose entry won a design competition run by the site in 2003. Another Wikipedia user, David Friedland, subsequently improved the logo by changing the styling of the jigsaw pieces so that their boundaries seemed indented and simplified their contents to be a single glyph per piece, rather than a jumble of nonsense multilingual text. [5] In the process, some errors were introduced. [5] In particular, one piece of Devanagari script and one piece of Japanese katakana were incorrectly rendered. [6]

Current logo
In 2007, a modified 3D model was developed by Wikimedia Taiwan for Wikimania , when they distributed a 3-inch diameter spherical puzzle based on the logo, that attendees could piece together. It did not add other letters on the parts that cannot be seen on the 2D logo, but used that space to include small logos of the sister projects and information about Wikimania. A variant of that model was used to build a person-sized Wikiball that spun on a stand, featured during the event. [7] This led to a renewed interest in getting a proper 3D model for the logo.
By 2007, users on listservs discovered that the logo had some minor errors. The errors were not immediately fixed, because, according to Friedland, he could not locate the original project file. Friedland added that "I have tried to reconstruct it, but it never looks right" and that the logo "should be redrawn by a professional illustrator." [5] Kizu Naoko ( 木津 尚子 ? ) , a Wikipedian, said that most Japanese users supported correcting the errors. In an e-mail to Noam Cohen of The New York Times , Kizu said that "It could be an option to leave them as they are. Most people don't take it serious [ sic ] and think the graphical logo is a sort of pot-au-feu of various letters without meaning." [5]
In late 2009, the Wikimedia Foundation undertook to fix the errors and generally update the puzzle globe logo. Among other concerns, the original logo did not scale well and some letters appeared distorted. [8] For the new logo, the Wikimedia Foundation defined which characters appear on the "hidden" puzzle pieces, and had a three-dimensional computer model of the globe created to allow the generation of other views. [9] A partial 3D globe was commissioned for the Wikimedia office. [10]
The new logo was rolled out on the projects in May 2010. It features the new 3D rendering of the puzzle globe, with corrected characters (and the Klingon character replaced by a Ge'ez character). The wordmark has been modified from the Hoefler Text font to the open-source Linux Libertine font, and the subtitle is no longer italicized. The "W" character, which was used in various other places in Wikipedia (such as the favicon ) and was a "distinctive part of the Wikipedia brand", was stylized as crossed V's in the original logo, ⟨W⟩ , while the W in Linux Libertine is rendered with a single line. To provide the traditional appearance of the Wikipedia "W", a "crossed" W was added as an OpenType variant to the Linux Libertine font. [1]
On October 24, 2014, the Wikimedia Foundation released the logo, along with all other logos belonging to the Foundation, under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 license. [11]

Trademark
The (former) logo was registered as a European Community Trade Mark by Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. The trade mark bears a filing date of 31 January 2008 and a registration date of 20 January 2009. [12]

Logos

External links

See also
WebPage index: 00123
PubMed Central
PubMed Central ( PMC ) is a free digital repository that archives publicly accessible full-text scholarly articles that have been published within the biomedical and life sciences journal literature. As one of the major research databases within the suite of resources that have been developed by the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), PubMed Central is much more than just a document repository. Submissions into PMC undergo an indexing and formatting procedure which results in enhanced metadata, medical ontology , and unique identifiers which all enrich the XML structured data for each article on deposit. [1] Content within PMC can easily be interlinked to many other NCBI databases and accessed via Entrez search and retrieval systems, further enhancing the public's ability to freely discover, read and build upon this portfolio of biomedical knowledge. [2]
PubMed Central should not be confused with PubMed . These are two very different services at their core. [3] While PubMed is a searchable database of biomedical citations and abstracts, the full-text article referenced in the PubMed record will physically reside elsewhere. (Sometimes in print, sometimes online, sometimes free, sometimes behind a toll-wall accessible only to paying subscribers). PubMed Central is a free digital archive of articles, accessible to anyone from anywhere via a basic web browser. The full text of all PubMed Central articles is free to read, with varying provisions for reuse.
As of February 2014 [update] , the PMC archive contained over 2.9 million articles, with contributions coming directly from publishers or authors depositing their own manuscripts into the repository per the NIH Public Access Policy . Recent data shows that in the past year (Jan 2013 – Jan 2014) author-initiated deposits exceeded 103,000 papers during just this 12-month period. [4] PMC also identifies about 4,000 journals which now participate in some capacity to automatically deposit their published content into the PMC repository. [5] Some participating publishers will delay the release of their articles on PubMed Central for a set time after publication, this is often referred to as an "embargo period", and can range from a few months to a few years depending on the journal. (Embargoes of six to twelve months are the most common).

Adoption
Launched in February 2000, the repository has grown rapidly as the NIH Public Access Policy is designed to make all research funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) freely accessible to anyone, and, in addition, many publishers are working cooperatively with the NIH to provide free access to their works. In late 2007, the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2008 (H.R. 2764) was signed into law and included a provision requiring the NIH to modify its policies and require inclusion into PubMed Central complete electronic copies of their peer-reviewed research and findings from NIH-funded research. These articles are required to be included within 12 months of publication. This is the first time the US government has required an agency to provide open access to research and is an evolution from the 2005 policy, in which the NIH asked researchers to voluntarily add their research to PubMed Central. [6]
A UK version of the PubMed Central system, UK PubMed Central (UKPMC) , has been developed by the Wellcome Trust and the British Library as part of a nine-strong group of UK research funders. This system went live in January 2007. On 1 November 2012, it became Europe PubMed Central . The Canadian member of the PubMed Central International network, PubMed Central Canada , was launched in October 2009.
The National Library of Medicine "NLM Journal Publishing Tag Set" journal article markup language is freely available. [7] The Association of Learned and Professional Society Publishers comments that "it is likely to become the standard for preparing scholarly content for both books and journals". [8] A related DTD is available for books. [9] The Library of Congress and the British Library have announced support for the NLM DTD. [10] It has also been popular with journal service providers. [11]
With the release of public access plans for many agencies beyond NIH, PMC is in the process of becoming the repository for a wider variety of articles. [12] This includes NASA content, with the interface branded as "PubSpace". [13] [14]

Technology
Articles are sent to PubMed Central by publishers in XML or SGML , using a variety of article DTDs . Older and larger publishers may have their own established in-house DTDs, but many publishers use the NLM Journal Publishing DTD (see above).
Received articles are converted via XSLT to the very similar NLM Archiving and Interchange DTD. This process may reveal errors that are reported back to the publisher for correction. Graphics are also converted to standard formats and sizes. The original and converted forms are archived. The converted form is moved into a relational database, along with associated files for graphics, multimedia, or other associated data. Many publishers also provide PDF of their articles, and these are made available without change. [15]
Bibliographic citations are parsed and automatically linked to the relevant abstracts in PubMed, articles in PubMed Central, and resources on publishers' Web sites. PubMed links also lead to PubMed Central. Unresolvable references, such as to journals or particular articles not yet available at one of these sources, are tracked in the database and automatically come "live" when the resources become available.
An in-house indexing system provides search capability, and is aware of biological and medical terminology , such as generic vs. proprietary drug names, and alternate names for organisms, diseases and anatomical parts.
When a user accesses a journal issue, a table of contents is automatically generated by retrieving all articles, letters, editorials, etc. for that issue. When an actual item such as an article is reached, PubMed Central converts the NLM markup to HTML for delivery, and provides links to related data objects. This is feasible because the variety of incoming data has first been converted to standard DTDs and graphic formats.
In a separate submission stream, NIH-funded authors may deposit articles into PubMed Central using the NIH Manuscript Submission (NIHMS). Articles thus submitted typically go through XML markup in order to be converted to NLM DTD.

Reception
Reactions to PubMed Central among the scholarly publishing community range between a genuine enthusiasm by some, [16] to cautious concern by others. [17] While PMC is a welcome partner to open access publishers in its ability to augment the discovery and dissemination of biomedical knowledge, that same truth causes others to worry about traffic being diverted from the published version-of-record, the economic consequences of less readership, as well as the effect on maintaining a community of scholars within learned societies. [18] Libraries, universities, open access supporters, consumer health advocacy groups, and patient rights organizations have applauded PubMed Central, and hope to see similar public access repositories developed by other federal funding agencies so to freely share any research publications that were the result of taxpayer support. [19]
The Antelman study of open access publishing found that in philosophy, political science, electrical and electronic engineering and mathematics, open access papers had a greater research impact. [20] A randomised trial found an increase in content downloads of open access papers, with no citation advantage over subscription access one year after publication. [21]
The change in procedure has received criticism. [22] The American Physiological Society has expressed reservations about the implementation of the policy. [23]

PMCID
The PMCID (PubMed Central identifier), also known as the PMC reference number, is a bibliographic identifier for the PubMed Central database, much like the PMID is the bibliographic identifier for the PubMed database. The two identifiers are distinct however. It consists of "PMC" followed by a string of 7 numbers. The format is [24]
Authors applying for NIH awards must include the PMCID in their application.

See also

Notes

External links
WebPage index: 00124
How Wikipedia Works
How Wikipedia Works is a 2009 book by Phoebe Ayers, Charles Matthews, and Ben Yates. It is a how-to reference for using and contributing to the Wikipedia encyclopedia, targeted at "students, professors, and everyday experts and fans". It offers specific sections for teachers, users, and researchers. [1]
How Wikipedia Works (And How You Can Be a Part of It) is published by No Starch Press , part of their series of technical how-to books. The Register (UK) called it "a great one-stop source for information of the world’s go-to source for information." [2] The book was originally published under the GNU Free Documentation License . At the time of publication, Wikipedia was also released under the GFDL. The book has since been relicensed under the CC BY-SA , which Wikipedia now uses. [3] It was designed as a reference work and has detailed bibliographies for each section.

See also
WebPage index: 00125
Stanford University Press
The Stanford University Press ( SUP ) is the publishing house of Stanford University . In 1892, an independent publishing company was established at the university. The first use of the name "Stanford University Press" in a book's imprinting occurred in 1895. In 1917, the university bought the press, making it a division of Stanford.
In 1999, the press became a division of the Stanford University Libraries . It was located on Page Mill Road in the Stanford Research Park to the southeast of the Stanford campus before moving to its current location, Redwood City, in 2012-2013. [1] It publishes about 130 books per year. Stanford relies on the University of Chicago Press to perform the actual distribution of titles. [2]

Major awards

Books published by Stanford University Press

1933 murder trial
In 1933, David Lamson, a sales manager at SUP, was accused of murdering his wife, Allene, at their home on the Stanford campus. Janet Lewis , wife of Stanford poet Yvor Winters , campaigning for Lamson's acquittal, wrote a pamphlet emphasizing the dangers of using circumstantial evidence. Lamson was ultimately released after being tried four times. [3]
WebPage index: 00126
Amazon Standard Identification Number
The Amazon Standard Identification Number ( ASIN ) is a 10-character alphanumeric unique identifier assigned by Amazon.com and its partners for product identification within the Amazon organization. [1]

Usage and structure
Although ASINs used to be unique worldwide, global expansion has changed things so that ASINs are only guaranteed unique within a marketplace. [ citation needed ] The same product may be referred to by several ASINs though, and different national sites may use a different ASIN for the same product. [ citation needed ] In general, ASINs are likely to be different between the country sites unless they are for a class of product where the ASIN is based on an externally defined and internationally consistent identifier, such as ISBN for books. [ citation needed ]
Each product sold on Amazon.com is given a unique ASIN. For books with 10-digit International Standard Book Number (ISBN), the ASIN and the ISBN are the same. [2] The Kindle edition of a book will not use its ISBN as the ASIN, although the electronic version of a book may have its own ISBN. In most cases, it is possible to convert an ASIN to obtain a corresponding EAN code. [ citation needed ]
ASINs are also used for other items used by Amazon.com (and subsidiaries), such as businesses in the yellow pages (on A9.com ) and OpenSearch feeds. [ citation needed ]
WebPage index: 00127
Pacific Standard
Pacific Standard , formerly Miller-McCune , is an American magazine , published bimonthly in print and continuously online by the nonprofit Miller-McCune Center for Research, Media and Public Policy, headquartered in Santa Barbara, California .

Background: Miller-McCune years
Miller-McCune magazine was launched in 2008 by Sara Miller McCune , the founder and head of Sage Publications . It was named one of the year's "hottest launches" by MIN magazine [2] and received the same honor from Library Journal the following year. It also received the 2008-2009 Society of Environmental Journalists Award for Outstanding Explanatory Journalism and the Utne Reader Independent Press Award 2009 for science/technology coverage. In 2010, Miller McCune was named by Folio magazine to the FOLIO: 40 list of publishing innovators: "At a time when print is becoming a secondary product for many publishers (in mindset if not revenue), Miller-McCune is succeeding with long-form journalism." [3]
In 2010, the magazine launched Miller-McCune LIVE , a special events program to bring articles to life through comprehensive debate featuring industry leaders. The first debate, on lobbying, took place in September in Washington, D.C. The second debate was held in New York City in November with panelists Sree Sreenivasan and Rachel Sklar , who dug into the effects of social media on "real life" and ways to humanize the Internet.
In-depth pieces include stories such as "Native Environmentalism and the Alberta Oil Boom", " Global Warming : the Archaeological Frontier", "When Facebook Is Your Medical Record", as well as "Art and Alzheimer's : Another Way of Remembering", the story of Hilda Goldblatt Gorenstein (Hilgos) and the documentary " I Remember Better When I Paint ". [4]

Transition to 
In April 2011, editor John Mecklin announced his resignation, citing "creative differences" among other reasons. [5] On May 17, the organization announced that Maria Streshinsky, former managing editor of The Atlantic magazine, would become the editor-in-chief of the magazine. [6]
On February 17, 2012, Miller-McCune announced that the magazine's name would be changed to Pacific Standard as of the May–June 2012 edition. [7] In a May 2012 interview, Streshinsky said that the publication's new name reflected its taking a "western" perspective: "We want to tell the nationally important stories that are coming out of this side of the country, and from the edges of the Pacific.... So many of the nation's biggest shifts have come from the West, and we want to showcase that." [8]
As of January 2014, the magazine enjoyed its largest website traffic month ever. It continues to get most of its funding from Sage Publications, with much smaller amounts from subscription, newsstand, and website revenue. [9] In 2014, Pacific Standard was nominated for its first-ever National Magazine Award , presented by the American Society of Magazine Editors , in the category of General Excellence for Literature, Science and Politics Magazines. [10]
In 2015, digital director Nicholas Jackson was appointed editor-in-chief, and senior editor Ryan Jacobs was appointed deputy editor. [11] They quickly brought on creative director Taylor Le [12] and executive editor Jennifer Sahn. [13] Jackson repositioned the magazine to tell "stories that matter," focusing most heavily on social and environmental justice. [14] In 2017, the magazine was honored with its second National Magazine Award. [15]

Readership and topics covered
The magazine was created for opinion leaders, policymakers, and concerned citizens who are interested in developing solutions to some of the world’s toughest social and environmental problems. Its target readers are "influentials" who read The Economist , The Atlantic , Mother Jones , and Wired , but former editor-in-chief Streshinsky differentiated Pacific Standard by focusing on the behavioral and social sciences. [16]
In an interview, Streshinsky said:
WebPage index: 00128
List of films about Wikipedia
The following is a list of films about Wikipedia .

Films

See also

External links
WebPage index: 00129
Magazine
A magazine is a publication , usually a periodical publication , which is printed or electronically published (sometimes referred to as an online magazine ). Magazines are generally published on a regular schedule and contain a variety of content . They are generally financed by advertising , by a purchase price , by prepaid subscriptions , or a combination of the three. At its root, the word "magazine" refers to a collection or storage location. In the case of written publication, it is a collection of written articles. This explains why magazine publications share the word root with gunpowder magazines , artillery magazines , firearms magazines , and, in French, retail stores such as department stores .

Definition
By definition, a magazine paginates with each issue starting at page three, with the standard sizing being 8 3/8 × 10 7/8 inches. [ citation needed ] However, in the technical sense a journal has continuous pagination throughout a volume. Thus Business Week , which starts each issue anew with page one, is a magazine, but the Journal of Business Communication , which starts each volume with the winter issue and continues the same sequence of pagination throughout the coterminous year, is a journal. Some professional or trade publications are also peer-reviewed, an example being the Journal of Accountancy . Academic or professional publications that are not peer-reviewed are generally professional magazines . That a publication calls itself a journal does not make it a journal in the technical sense; The Wall Street Journal is actually a newspaper .

Distribution
Magazines can be distributed through the mail , through sales by newsstands , bookstores , or other vendors, or through free distribution at selected pick-up locations. The subscription business models for distribution fall into three main categories.

Paid circulation
In this model, the magazine is sold to readers for a price, either on a per-issue basis or by subscription, where an annual fee or monthly price is paid and issues are sent by post to readers. Paid circulation allows for defined readership statistics.

Non-paid circulation
This means that there is no cover price and issues are given away, for example in street dispensers, airline, or included with other products or publications. Because this model involves giving issues away to unspecific populations, the statistics only entail the number of issues distributed, and not who reads them.

Controlled circulation
This is the model used by many trade magazines (industry-based periodicals) distributed only to qualifying readers, often for free and determined by some form of survey. Because of costs (e.g., printing and postage) associated with the medium of print, publishers may not distribute free copies to everyone who requests one (unqualified leads); instead, they operate under controlled circulation, deciding who may receive free subscriptions based on each person's qualification as a member of the trade (and likelihood of buying, for example, likelihood of having corporate purchasing authority, as determined from job title). This allows a high level of certainty that advertisements will be received by the advertiser's target audience, [1] and it avoids wasted printing and distribution expenses. This latter model was widely used before the rise of the World Wide Web and is still employed by some titles. For example, in the United Kingdom, a number of computer-industry magazines use this model, including Computer Weekly and Computing , and in finance, Waters Magazine . For the global media industry, an example would be VideoAge International .

History
The earliest example of magazines was Erbauliche Monaths Unterredungen , a literary and philosophy magazine, which was launched in 1663 in Germany. [2] The Gentleman's Magazine , first published in 1731, in London was the first general-interest magazine. [3] Edward Cave , who edited The Gentleman's Magazine under the pen name " Sylvanus Urban ", was the first to use the term "magazine," on the analogy of a military storehouse. [4] Founded by Herbert Ingram in 1842, The Illustrated London News was the first illustrated magazine. [3]

Britain
The oldest consumer magazine still in print is The Scots Magazine , which was first published in 1739, though multiple changes in ownership and gaps in publication totalling over 90 years weaken that claim. Lloyd's List was founded in Edward Lloyd's England coffee shop in 1734; it is still published as a daily business newspaper. Despite being among the first mass media outlets to venture from the bible, periodicals still remained rooted in the naturalized class and gender system held by European and American society. [5]
Manufacturing of the early magazines were done via an archaic form of the printing press, using large hand engraved wood blocks for printing. [6] When production of magazines increased, entire production lines were created to manufacture these wooden blocks. [6]

France
Under the ancien regime, the most prominent magazines were Mercure de France , Journal des sçavans , founded in 1665 for scientists, and Gazette de France , founded in 1631. Jean Loret was one of France's first journalists. He disseminated the weekly news of music, dance and Parisian society from 1650 until 1665 in verse, in what he called a gazette burlesque , assembled in three volumes of La Muse historique (1650, 1660, 1665). The French press lagged a generation behind the British, for they catered to the needs the aristocracy, while the newer British counterparts were oriented toward the middle and working classes. [7]
Periodicals were censored by the central government in Paris. They were not totally quiescent politically—often they criticized Church abuses and bureaucratic ineptitude. They supported the monarchy and they played at most a small role in stimulating the revolution. [8] During the Revolution, new periodicals played central roles as propaganda organs for various factions. Jean-Paul Marat (1743–1793) was the most prominent editor. His L'Ami du peuple advocated vigorously for the rights of the lower classes against the enemies of the people Marat hated; it closed when he was assassinated. After 1800 Napoleon reimposed strict censorship. [9]
Magazines flourished after Napoleon left in 1815. Most were based in Paris and most emphasized literature, poetry and stories. They served religious, cultural and political communities. In times of political crisis they expressed and helped shape the views of their readership and thereby were major elements in the changing political culture. [10] For example, there were eight Catholic periodicals in 1830 in Paris. None were officially owned or sponsored by the Church and they reflected a range of opinion among educated Catholics about current issues, such as the 1830 July Revolution that overthrew the Bourbon monarchy. Several were strong supporters of the Bourbon kings, but all eight ultimately urged support for the new government, putting their appeals in terms of preserving civil order. They often discussed the relationship between church and state. Generally, they urged priests to focus on spiritual matters and not engage in politics. Historian M. Patricia Dougherty says this process created a distance between the Church and the new monarch and enabled Catholics to develop a new understanding of church-state relationships and the source of political authority. [11]

United States

Late 19th century
In the mid-1800s, monthly magazines gained popularity. They were general interest to begin, containing some news, vignettes, poems, history, political events, and social discussion. [12] Unlike newspapers, they were more of a monthly record of current events along with entertaining stories, poems, and pictures. The first periodicals to branch out from news were Harper's and The Atlantic , which focused on fostering the arts. [13] Both Harper's and The Atlantic persist to this day, with Harper's being a cultural magazine and The Atlantic focusing mainly on world events. Early publications of Harper's even held famous works such as early publications of Moby Dick or famous events such as the laying of the world's first transatlantic telegraph cable however the majority of early content was trickle down from British events. [14]
The development of the magazines stimulated an increase in literary criticism and political debate, moving towards more opinionated pieces from the objective newspapers. [13] The increased time between prints and the greater amount of space to write provided a forum for public arguments by scholars and critical observers. [15]
The early periodical predecessors to magazines started to evolve to modern definition in the late 1800s. [15] Works slowly became more specialized and the general discussion or cultural periodicals were forced to adapt to a consumer market which yearned for more localization of issues and events. [13]

Progressive Era: 1890s-1920s
Mass circulation magazines became much more common after 1900, some with circulations in the hundreds of thousands of subscribers. Some passed the million-mark in the 1920s. It was an age of Mass media . Thanks to the rapid expansion of national advertising, the cover price fell sharply to about 10 cents. [16] One cause was the heavy coverage of corruption in politics, local government and big business, especially by Muckrakers. They were journalists who wrote for popular magazines to expose social and political sins and shortcomings. They relied on their own investigative journalism reporting; muckrakers often worked to expose social ills and corporate and political corruption . Muckraking magazines–notably McClure's –took on corporate monopolies and crooked political machines while raising public awareness of chronic urban poverty, unsafe working conditions, and social issues like child labor . [17]
The journalists who specialized in exposing waste, corruption, and scandal operated at the state and local level, like Ray Stannard Baker , George Creel , and Brand Whitlock . Other like Lincoln Steffens exposed political corruption in many large cities; Ida Tarbell went after John D. Rockefeller 's Standard Oil Company . Samuel Hopkins Adams in 1905 showed the fraud involved in many patent medicines, Upton Sinclair 's 1906 novel The Jungle gave a horrid portrayal of how meat was packed, and, also in 1906, David Graham Phillips unleashed a blistering indictment of the U.S. Senate. Roosevelt gave these journalists their nickname when he complained they were not being helpful by raking up all the muck. [18] [19]

21st century
In 2011, 152 magazines ceased operations and in 2012, 82 magazines were closed down. [20] Between the years of 2008 to 2015, Oxbridge communications announced that 227 magazines launched and 82 magazines closed in 2012 in North America. [21] Furthermore, according to MediaFinder.com, 93 new magazines launched between the first six months of 2014 and just 30 closed. The category that produced new publications was "Regional interest", six new magazines were launched, including 12th & Broad and Craft Beer & Brewing. [22] However, two magazines had to change their print schedules. Johnson Publishing's Jet stopped printing regular issues making the transition to digital format, however still print an annual print edition. [23] Ladies Home Journal, stopped their monthly schedule and home delivery for subscribers to become a quarterly newsstand-only special interest publication. [24]
According to statistics from the end of 2013, subscription levels for 22 of the top 25 magazines declined from 2012 to 2013, with just Time , Glamour and ESPN The Magazine gaining numbers. [25]

Women's magazines

Fashion
Immortalized in movies and magazines, young women's fashions of the 1920s set both a trend and social statement, a breaking-off from the rigid Victorian way of life. Their glamorous life style was celebrated in the feature pages and in the advertisements, where they learned the brands that best exemplified the look they sought. These young, rebellious, middle-class women, labeled " flappers " by older generations, did away with the corset and donned slinky knee-length dresses, which exposed their legs and arms. The hairstyle of the decade was a chin-length bob, which had several popular variations. Cosmetics , which until the 1920s were not typically accepted in American society because of their association with prostitution, became, for the first time, extremely popular. [26]
In the 1920s new magazines appealed to young German women with a sensuous image and advertisements for the appropriate clothes and accessories they would want to purchase. The glossy pages of Die Dame and Das Blatt der Hausfrau displayed the "Neue Frauen," "New Girl" - what Americans called the flapper. She was young and fashionable, financially independent, and was an eager consumer of the latest fashions. The magazines kept her up to date on fashion, arts, sports, and modern technology such as automobiles and telephones. [27]

See also

Lists

Categories
WebPage index: 00130
The New York Times
The New York Times (sometimes abbreviated NYT and The Times ) is an American daily newspaper , founded and continuously published in New York City since September 18, 1851, by The New York Times Company . The New York Times has won 122 Pulitzer Prizes , more than any other newspaper. [5] [6] [7] [8]
The paper's print version in 2013 had the second-largest circulation, behind The Wall Street Journal , and the largest circulation among the metropolitan newspapers in the United States. The New York Times is ranked 18th in the world by circulation . Following industry trends, its weekday circulation had fallen in 2009 to fewer than one million. [9]
Nicknamed " The Gray Lady ", [10] The New York Times has long been regarded within the industry as a national " newspaper of record ". [11] It has been owned by the Ochs-Sulzberger family since 1896; Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr. , the publisher of the Times and the chairman of the New York Times Company, is the fourth generation of the family to helm the paper. [12] The New York Times international version, formerly the International Herald Tribune , is now called the New York Times International Edition . [13]
The paper's motto, "All the News That's Fit to Print", appears in the upper left-hand corner of the front page. Since the mid-1970s, The New York Times has greatly expanded its layout and organization, adding special weekly sections on various topics supplementing the regular news, editorials, sports, and features. Since 2008, [14] The New York Times has been organized into the following sections: News, Editorials/Opinions-Columns/Op-Ed, New York (metropolitan), Business, Sports of The Times, Arts, Science, Styles, Home, Travel, and other features. [15]
On Sunday, The New York Times is supplemented by the Sunday Review (formerly the Week in Review ), [16] The New York Times Book Review , [17] The New York Times Magazine [18] and T: The New York Times Style Magazine (T is published 13 times a year). [19] The New York Times stayed with the broadsheet full page set-up (as some others have changed into a tabloid lay-out) and an eight-column format for several years, after most papers switched to six, [20] and was one of the last newspapers to adopt color photography , especially on the front page. [21]

History

Newspaper history
The New York Times was founded as the New-York Daily Times on September 18, 1851, [a] published by Raymond, Jones & Company (raising about $70,000); [23] by journalist and politician Henry Jarvis Raymond (1820–69), then a Whig Party member and later second chairman of the newly organized Republican Party National Committee , and former banker George Jones . Some other early investors of the company were Edwin B. Morgan [24] and Edward B. Wesley. [25] Sold for a penny (equivalent to 29 cents today), the inaugural edition attempted to address various speculations on its purpose and positions that preceded its release: [26]
In 1852, the newspaper started a western division, The Times of California that arrived whenever a mail boat got to California. However, when local California newspapers came into prominence, the effort failed. [27]
The newspaper shortened its name to The New-York Times in 1857. It dropped the hyphen in the city name in the 1890s. [28] On April 21, 1861, The New York Times departed from its original Monday–Saturday publishing schedule and joined other major dailies in adding a Sunday edition to offer daily coverage of the Civil War . One of the earliest public controversies it was involved with was the Mortara Affair , the subject of twenty editorials it published alone. [29]
The main office of The New York Times was attacked during the New York Draft Riots sparked by the beginning of military conscription for the Northern Union Army now instituted in the midst of the Civil War on July 13, 1863. At "Newspaper Row", across from City Hall , Henry Raymond , owner and editor of The New York Times , averted the rioters with " Gatling " (early machine, rapid-firing) guns, one of which he manned himself. The mob now diverted, instead attacked the headquarters of abolitionist publisher Horace Greeley 's New York Tribune until forced to flee by the Brooklyn City Police , who had crossed the East River to help the Manhattan authorities. [30]
In 1869, Raymond died, and George Jones took over as publisher. [31]
The newspaper's influence grew during 1870–1 when it published a series of exposés on William Magear ("Boss") Tweed , leader of the city's Democratic Party—popularly known as " Tammany Hall " (from its early 19th Century meeting headquarters)—that led to the end of the "Tweed Ring's" domination of New York's City Hall. [32] Tweed offered The New York Times five million dollars (equivalent to more than 100 million dollars today) to not publish the story. [24] In the 1880s, The New York Times transitioned gradually from editorially supporting Republican Party candidates to becoming more politically independent and analytical. [33] In 1884, the paper supported Democrat Grover Cleveland (former Mayor of Buffalo and Governor of New York State ) in his first presidential campaign . [34] While this move cost The New York Times ' readership among its more progressive and Republican readers (the revenue went down from $188,000 to $56,000 from 1883-4- however some part of this was due to the price going down to two cents, in order to compete with the World and Sun ) , the paper eventually regained most of its lost ground within a few years. [35] After George Jones died in 1891, Charles Ransom Miller raised $1 million dollars to buy the Times, along with other fellow editors at the newspaper, printing it under the New York Times Publishing Company. [36] [37] However, the newspaper was financially crippled by the Panic of 1893 . [35] By 1896, The New York Times had a circulation of less than 9,000, and was losing $1,000 a day when controlling interest in it was gained by Adolph Ochs , publisher of the Chattanooga Times for $75,000. [38]
Shortly after assuming control of the paper, Ochs coined the paper's slogan, "All The News That's Fit To Print". The slogan has appeared in the paper since September 1896, [39] and has been printed in a box in the upper left hand corner of the front page since early 1897. [34] This was a jab at competing papers such as Joseph Pulitzer 's New York World and William Randolph Hearst 's New York Journal which were now being known for a lurid, sensationalist and often inaccurate reporting of facts and opinions known by the end of the century as " yellow journalism ". [40] Under Ochs' guidance, continuing and expanding upon the Henry Raymond tradition, (which were from the era of James Gordon Bennett of the New York Herald which predated Pulitzer and Hearst's arrival in New York), The New York Times achieved international scope, circulation, and reputation (the Sunday circulation went from 9,000 in 1896 to 780,000 in 1934). [38] In 1904, The New York Times , along with The Times received the first on-the-spot wireless telegraph transmission from a naval battle, a report of the destruction of the Imperial Russian Navy 's Baltic Fleet at the Battle of Port Arthur in the Straits of Tsushima off the eastern coast of Korea in the Yellow Sea in the western Pacific Ocean after just sailing across the globe from Europe from the press-boat Haimun during the Russo-Japanese War . [41] In 1910, the first air delivery of The New York Times to Philadelphia began. [34] The New York Times ' first trans-Atlantic delivery by air to London occurred in 1919 by dirigible. In 1920, a "4 A.M. Airplane Edition" was sent by plane to Chicago so it could be in the hands of Republican convention delegates by evening. [42]
In the 1940s, the paper extended its breadth and reach. The crossword began appearing regularly in 1942, and the fashion section in 1946. The New York Times began an international edition in 1946. The international edition stopped publishing in 1967, when The New York Times joined the owners of the New York Herald Tribune and The Washington Post to publish the International Herald Tribune in Paris. The paper bought AM radio station WQXR (1560 kHz) in 1944. [43] Its "sister" FM station, WQXQ, would become WQXR-FM (96.3 MHz). Branded as "The Radio Stations of The New York Times ", its classical music radio format was simulcast on both the AM & FM frequencies until December 1992, when the big-band and pop standards music format of station WNEW (1130 kHz – now WBBR /"Bloomberg Radio") was transferred to and adopted by WQXR; in recognition of the format change, WQXR changed its call letters to WQEW (a "hybrid" combination of " WQ XR" and "WN EW "). [44] By 1999, The New York Times was leasing WQEW to ABC Radio for its " Radio Disney " format. [45] In 2007, WQEW was finally purchased by Disney ; in late 2014, it was sold to Family Radio (a religious radio network) and became WFME . [46] On July 14, 2009, it was announced that WQXR-FM would be sold to the WNYC radio group who, on October 8, 2009, moved the station from 96.3 to 105.9 MHz (swapping frequencies with Spanish-language station WXNY-FM , which wanted the more powerful transmitter to increase its coverage) and began operating it as a non-commercial, public radio station. [47] After the purchase, WQXR-FM retained the classical music format, whereas WNYC-FM (93.9 MHz) abandoned it, switching to a talk radio format.
On September 14, 1987, the Times printed the heaviest ever newspaper, at over 12 pounds (5.4 kg) and 1,612 pages. [48]
In 2009, the newspaper began production of local inserts in regions outside of the New York area. Beginning October 16, 2009, a two-page "Bay Area" insert was added to copies of the Northern California edition on Fridays and Sundays. The newspaper commenced production of a similar Friday and Sunday insert to the Chicago edition on November 20, 2009. The inserts consist of local news, policy, sports, and culture pieces, usually supported by local advertisements.
In addition to its New York City headquarters, the newspaper has ten news bureaus in the New York region, eleven national news bureaus and 26 foreign news bureaus. [49] The New York Times reduced its page width to 12 inches (300 mm) from 13.5 inches (340 mm) on August 6, 2007, adopting the width that has become the U.S. newspaper industry standard. [50]
Because of its steadily declining sales attributed to the rise of online alternative media and social media , the newspaper has been going through a downsizing for several years, offering buyouts to workers and cutting expenses, [51] in common with a general trend among print news media. [52]
In 2016, reporters for the newspaper were reportedly the target of cyber security breaches. The Federal Bureau of Investigation was reportedly investigating the attacks. The cyber security breaches have been described as possibly being related to cyberattacks that targeted other institutions, such as the Democratic National Committee . [53]

Headquarters building
The newspaper's first building was located at 113 Nassau Street in New York City. In 1854, it moved to 138 Nassau Street, and in 1858 to 41 Park Row , making it the first newspaper in New York City housed in a building built specifically for its use. [54]
The newspaper moved its headquarters to the Times Tower, located at 1475 Broadway in 1904, [55] in an area called Longacre Square, that was later renamed Times Square in honor of the newspaper. [56] The top of the building –  now known as One Times Square –  is the site of the New Year's Eve tradition of lowering a lighted ball , which was started by the paper. [57] The building is also notable for its electronic news ticker –  popularly known as "The Zipper" –  where headlines crawl around the outside of the building. [58] It is still in use, but has been operated by Dow Jones & Company since 1995. [59] After nine years in its Times Square tower the newspaper had an annex built at 229 West 43rd Street . [60] After several expansions, the 43rd Street building became the newspaper's main headquarters in 1960 and the Times Tower on Broadway was sold the following year. [61] It served as the newspaper's main printing plant until 1997, when the newspaper opened a state-of-the-art printing plant in the College Point section of the borough of Queens . [62]
A decade later, The New York Times moved its newsroom and businesses headquarters from West 43rd Street to a new tower at 620 Eighth Avenue between West 40th and 41st Streets, in Manhattan –  directly across Eighth Avenue from the Port Authority Bus Terminal . The new headquarters for the newspaper, known officially as The New York Times Building but unofficially called the new "Times Tower" by many New Yorkers, is a skyscraper designed by Renzo Piano . [63] [64]

New York Times v. Sullivan
The paper's involvement in a 1964 libel case helped bring one of the key United States Supreme Court decisions supporting freedom of the press , New York Times Co. v. Sullivan . In it, the United States Supreme Court established the " actual malice " standard for press reports about public officials or public figures to be considered defamatory or libelous . The malice standard requires the plaintiff in a defamation or libel case prove the publisher of the statement knew the statement was false or acted in reckless disregard of its truth or falsity. Because of the high burden of proof on the plaintiff, and difficulty in proving malicious intent, such cases by public figures rarely succeed. [65]

The 
In 1971, the Pentagon Papers , a secret United States Department of Defense history of the United States' political and military involvement in the Vietnam War from 1945 to 1967, were given ("leaked") to Neil Sheehan of The New York Times by former State Department official Daniel Ellsberg , with his friend Anthony Russo assisting in copying them. The New York Times began publishing excerpts as a series of articles on June 13. Controversy and lawsuits followed. The papers revealed, among other things, that the government had deliberately expanded its role in the war by conducting air strikes over Laos , raids along the coast of North Vietnam , and offensive actions taken by U.S. Marines well before the public was told about the actions, all while President Lyndon B. Johnson had been promising not to expand the war. The document increased the credibility gap for the U.S. government, and hurt efforts by the Nixon administration to fight the ongoing war. [66]
When The New York Times began publishing its series, President Richard Nixon became incensed. His words to National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger included "People have gotta be put to the torch for this sort of thing..." and "Let's get the son-of-a-bitch in jail." [67] After failing to get The New York Times to stop publishing, Attorney General John Mitchell and President Nixon obtained a federal court injunction that The New York Times cease publication of excerpts. The newspaper appealed and the case began working through the court system. On June 18, 1971, The Washington Post began publishing its own series. Ben Bagdikian , a Post editor, had obtained portions of the papers from Ellsberg. That day the Post received a call from the Assistant Attorney General, William Rehnquist , asking them to stop publishing. When the Post refused, the U.S. Justice Department sought another injunction. The U.S. District court judge refused, and the government appealed. On June 26, 1971, the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to take both cases, merging them into New York Times Co. v. United States 403 US 713. On June 30, 1971, the Supreme Court held in a 6–3 decision that the injunctions were unconstitutional prior restraints and that the government had not met the burden of proof required. The justices wrote nine separate opinions, disagreeing on significant substantive issues. While it was generally seen as a victory for those who claim the First Amendment enshrines an absolute right to free speech , many felt it a lukewarm victory, offering little protection for future publishers when claims of national security were at stake. [66]

Discrimination in employment
Discriminatory practices restricting women in editorial positions were previously used by the paper. The newspaper's first general woman reporter was Jane Grant , who described her experience afterwards. She wrote, "In the beginning I was charged not to reveal the fact that a female had been hired". Other reporters nicknamed her Fluff and she was subjected to considerable hazing . Because of her gender , promotions were out of the question, according to the then-managing editor. She was there for fifteen years, interrupted by World War I. [68]
In 1935, Anne McCormick wrote to Arthur Hays Sulzberger , "I hope you won't expect me to revert to 'woman's-point-of-view' stuff." [69] Later, she interviewed major political leaders and appears to have had easier access than her colleagues did. Even those who witnessed her in action were unable to explain how she got the interviews she did. [70] Clifton Daniel said, "[After World War II,] I'm sure Adenauer called her up and invited her to lunch. She never had to grovel for an appointment." [71] Covering world leaders' speeches after World War II at the National Press Club was limited to men by a Club rule. When women were eventually allowed in to hear the speeches, they still were not allowed to ask the speakers questions, although men were allowed and did ask, even though some of the women had won Pulitzer Prizes for prior work. [72] Times reporter Maggie Hunter refused to return to the Club after covering one speech on assignment. [73] Nan Robertson 's article on the Union Stock Yards , Chicago , was read aloud as anonymous by a professor, who then said, "'It will come as a surprise to you, perhaps, that the reporter is a girl,' he began... [G]asps; amazement in the ranks. 'She had used all her senses, not just her eyes, to convey the smell and feel of the stockyards. She chose a difficult subject, an offensive subject. Her imagery was strong enough to revolt you.'" [74] The New York Times hired Kathleen McLaughlin after ten years at the Chicago Tribune , where "[s]he did a series on maids, going out herself to apply for housekeeping jobs." [75]

Snow Fall
The New York Times published on December 20, 2012, an interactive storytelling in longform multimedia, Snow Fall : The Avalanche at Tunnel Creek by reporter John Branch about the 2012 Tunnel Creek avalanche . The six-part story, which integrated video, photos, and graphics, was hailed as a watershed moment for the journalism industry. [76] [77] The feature was awarded a Peabody Award , which called the piece a "spectacular example of the potential of digital-age storytelling" which "combines thorough traditional reporting of a deadly avalanche with stunning topographic video." [78] Snow Fall inspired the Times to appoint Sam Sifton "Snowfaller in Chief," expanding multimedia narratives in the newsroom in the tradition of Snow Fall. [79]

Recent history
In February 2013, the paper stopped offering lifelong positions for its journalists and editors. [80] [ relevant? – discuss ]

Ownership
In 1896, Adolph Ochs bought The New York Times , a money-losing newspaper, and formed the New York Times Company. The Ochs-Sulzberger family, one of the United States' newspaper dynasties, has owned The New York Times ever since. [34] The publisher went public on January 14, 1969, trading at $42 a share on the American Stock Exchange . [81] After this, the family continued to exert control through its ownership of the vast majority of Class B voting shares . Class A shareholders are permitted restrictive voting rights while Class B shareholders are allowed open voting rights.
The Ochs-Sulzberger family trust controls roughly 88 percent of the company's class B shares. Any alteration to the dual-class structure must be ratified by six of eight directors who sit on the board of the Ochs-Sulzberger family trust. The Trust board members are Daniel H. Cohen, James M. Cohen, Lynn G. Dolnick, Susan W. Dryfoos, Michael Golden, Eric M. A. Lax, Arthur O. Sulzberger, Jr. and Cathy J. Sulzberger. [82]
Turner Catledge , the top editor at The New York Times from 1952 to 1968, wanted to hide the ownership influence. Arthur Sulzberger routinely wrote memos to his editor, each containing suggestions, instructions, complaints, and orders. When Catledge would receive these memos he would erase the publisher's identity before passing them to his subordinates. Catledge thought that if he removed the publisher's name from the memos it would protect reporters from feeling pressured by the owner. [83]

Carlos Slim loan and investment
On January 20, 2009, The New York Times reported that its parent company, The New York Times Company, had reached an agreement to borrow $250 million from Carlos Slim , a Mexican businessman and the world's second richest person, [84] "to help the newspaper company finance its businesses". [85] The New York Times Company later repaid that loan ahead of schedule. [86] Since then, Slim has bought large quantities of the company's Class A shares, which are available for purchase by the public and offer less control over the company than Class B shares, which are privately held. [86] Slim's investments in the company included large purchases of Class A shares in 2011, when he increased his stake in the company to 8.1% of Class A shares, [87] and again in 2015, when he exercised stock options—acquired as part of a repayment plan on the 2009 loan—to purchase 15.9 million Class A shares. [86] As of March 7, 2016, Slim owned 17.4% of the company's Class A shares, according to annual filings submitted by the company. [88] [89]
Although Slim is the largest shareholder in the company, his investment does not give him the ability to control the newspaper, as his stake allows him to vote only for Class A directors, who compose just a third of the company's board. [86] According to the company's 2016 annual filings, Slim did not own any of the company's Class B shares. [88]

Dual-class shares
Dual-class structures caught on in the mid-20th century as families such as the Grahams of The Washington Post Company sought to gain access to public capital without losing control. Dow Jones & Co. , publisher of The Wall Street Journal , had a similar structure and was controlled by the Bancroft family but was later bought by News Corporation in 2007, which itself is controlled by Rupert Murdoch and his family through a similar dual-class structure. [90]

Content

Sections
The newspaper is organized in three sections, including the magazine.
Some sections, such as Metro, are only found in the editions of the paper distributed in the New York–New Jersey–Connecticut Tri-State Area and not in the national or Washington, D.C. editions. [91] Aside from a weekly roundup of reprints of editorial cartoons from other newspapers, The New York Times does not have its own staff editorial cartoonist , nor does it feature a comics page or Sunday comics section. [92] In September 2008, The New York Times announced that it would be combining certain sections effective October 6, 2008, in editions printed in the New York metropolitan area. The changes folded the Metro Section into the main International / National news section and combined Sports and Business (except Saturday through Monday, when Sports is still printed as a standalone section). This change also included having the name of the Metro section be called New York outside of the Tri-State Area. The presses used by The New York Times allow four sections to be printed simultaneously; as the paper had included more than four sections all days except Saturday, the sections had to be printed separately in an early press run and collated together. The changes will allow The New York Times to print in four sections Monday through Wednesday, in addition to Saturday. The New York Times ' announcement stated that the number of news pages and employee positions will remain unchanged, with the paper realizing cost savings by cutting overtime expenses. [14] According to Russ Stanton, editor of the Los Angeles Times , a competitor, the newsroom of The New York Times is twice the size of the Los Angeles Times , which has a newsroom of 600. [93] In March 2014, Vanessa Friedman was named the "fashion director and chief fashion critic" of The New York Times . [94]

Style
When referring to people, The New York Times generally uses honorifics , rather than unadorned last names (except in the sports pages, Book Review and Magazine). [95] It stayed with an eight-column format until September 7, 1976, years after other papers had switched to six, [20] and it was one of the last newspapers to adopt color photography, with the first color photograph on the front page appearing on October 16, 1997. [21] In the absence of a major headline, the day's most important story generally appears in the top-right column, on the main page. The typefaces used for the headlines are custom variations of Cheltenham . The running text is set at 8.7 point Imperial . [96] [97]
Joining a roster of other major American newspapers in the last ten years, including USA Today , The Wall Street Journal and The Washington Post , The New York Times announced on July 18, 2006, that it would be narrowing the width of its paper by six inches. In an era of dwindling circulation and significant advertising revenue losses for most print versions of American newspapers, the move, which would result in a five percent reduction in news coverage, would have a target savings of $12 million a year for the paper. [98] The change from the traditional 54 inches (1.4 m) broadsheet style to a more compact 48-inch web width (12-inch page width) was addressed by both Executive Editor Bill Keller and The New York Times President Scott Heekin-Canedy in memos to the staff. Keller defended the "more reader-friendly" move indicating that in cutting out the "flabby or redundant prose in longer pieces" the reduction would make for a better paper. Similarly, Keller confronted the challenges of covering news with "less room" by proposing more "rigorous editing" and promised an ongoing commitment to "hard-hitting, ground-breaking journalism". [99] The official change went into effect on August 6, 2007. [100]
The New York Times printed a display advertisement on its first page on January 6, 2009, breaking tradition at the paper. [101] The advertisement, for CBS, was in color and ran the entire width of the page. [102] The newspaper promised it would place first-page advertisements on only the lower half of the page. [101]
In August 2014, The Times decided to use the word " torture " to describe incidents in which interrogators "inflicted pain on a prisoner in an effort to get information." This was a shift from the paper's previous practice of describe such practices as "harsh" or "brutal" interrogations. [103]
The paper maintains a strict profanity policy. A 2007 review of a concert by punk band Fucked Up , for example, completely avoided mention of the group's name. [104] However, the Times has on occasion published unfiltered video content that includes profanity and slurs where it has determined that such video has news value. [105] During the 2016 U.S. presidential election campaign, the Times did print the words "fuck" and "pussy," among others, when reporting on the vulgar statements made by Donald Trump in a 2005 recording . Times politics editor Carolyn Ryan said: "It's a rare thing for us to use this language in our stories, even in quotes, and we discussed it at length," ultimately deciding to publish it because of its news value and because "[t]o leave it out or simply describe it seemed awkward and less than forthright to us, especially given that we would be running a video that showed our readers exactly what was said." [106]

Awards
The New York Times has won 122 Pulitzer Prizes , more than any other newspaper. The prize is awarded for excellence in journalism in a range of categories. [5]
It has also won three Peabody Awards (and jointly received two). A Peabody award was given in 2003 for the documentary Frontline: A Dangerous Business, a joint investigation by the New York Times , the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation , and WGBH 's Frontline about the conditions faced by workers at McWayne Inc. [107] The newspaper won another Peabody award (in 1951) for the New York Times Youth Forum (which featured "unrehearsed discussion by students selected from private, public and parochial schools, on topics ranging from the political, educational and scientific to the international and the United Nations.") [108] Again in 2008, the newspaper won another reward for "Aggressively and creatively adding sound and moving images to its traditional package of news and features, The New York Times has stepped forward as an innovator in online journalism. Its website exemplifies a new age for the press, expanding its role in ways unimaginable only a few years ago." [109] In 2013, the Times, along with The National Film Board of Canada won a Peabody Award for the documentary "A Short History of the Highrise". [110] A personal award was also given to then chief media critic Jack Gould in 1956. [111]

Web presence
The New York Times began publishing daily on the World Wide Web on January 22, 1996, "offering readers around the world immediate access to most of the daily newspaper's contents." [112] Since its online launch, the newspaper has consistently been ranked one of the top websites. Accessing some articles requires registration, though this could be bypassed in some cases through Times RSS feeds. [113] The website had 555 million pageviews in March 2005. [114] The domain nytimes.com attracted at least 146 million visitors annually by 2008 according to a Compete.com study. The New York Times Web site ranks 59th by number of unique visitors, with over 20 million unique visitors in March 2009 making it the most visited newspaper site with more than twice the number of unique visitors as the next most popular site. [115] as of May 2009 [update] , nytimes.com produced 22 of the 50 most popular newspaper blogs. [116] NYTimes.com is ranked 129 in the world, and 27 in the U.S. by Alexa (as of March 12, 2017). [117]
In September 2005, the paper decided to begin subscription-based service for daily columns in a program known as TimesSelect , which encompassed many previously free columns. Until being discontinued two years later, TimesSelect cost $7.95 per month or $49.95 per year, [118] though it was free for print copy subscribers and university students and faculty. [119] [120] To avoid this charge, bloggers often reposted TimesSelect material, [121] and at least one site once compiled links of reprinted material. [122] On September 17, 2007, The New York Times announced that it would stop charging for access to parts of its Web site, effective at midnight the following day, reflecting a growing view in the industry that subscription fees cannot outweigh the potential ad revenue from increased traffic on a free site. [123] In addition to opening almost the entire site to all readers, The New York Times news archives from 1987 to the present are available at no charge, as well as those from 1851 to 1922, which are in the public domain. [124] [125] Access to the Premium Crosswords section continues to require either home delivery or a subscription for $6.95 per month or $39.95 per year. Times columnists including Nicholas Kristof and Thomas Friedman had criticized TimesSelect , [126] [127] with Friedman going so far as to say "I hate it. It pains me enormously because it's cut me off from a lot, a lot of people, especially because I have a lot of people reading me overseas, like in India ... I feel totally cut off from my audience." [128]
The New York Times was made available on the iPhone and iPod Touch in 2008, [129] and on the iPad mobile devices in 2010. [130] It was also the first newspaper to offer a video game as part of its editorial content, Food Import Folly by Persuasive Games . [131] In 2010, The New York Times editors collaborated with students and faculty from New York University 's Studio 20 Journalism Masters program to launch and produce "The Local East Village", a hyperlocal blog designed to offer news "by, for and about the residents of the East Village". [132] That same year, reCAPTCHA helped to digitize old editions of The New York Times . [133]
In 2012, The New York Times introduced a Chinese-language news site, cn.nytimes.com, with content created by staff based in Shanghai , Beijing and Hong Kong , though the server was placed outside of China to avoid censorship issues. [134] In March 2013, The New York Times and National Film Board of Canada announced a partnership entitled A Short History of the Highrise , which will create four short documentaries for the Internet about life in highrise buildings as part of the NFB's Highrise project, utilizing images from the newspaper's photo archives for the first three films, and user-submitted images for the final film. [135] The third project in the series, "A Short History of the Highrise", won a Peabody Award in 2013. [136]
Falling print advertising revenue and projections of continued decline resulted in a paywall being instituted in 2011, regarded as modestly successful after garnering several hundred thousand subscriptions and about $100 million in revenue as of March 2012 [update] . [137] The paywall was announced on March 17, 2011, that starting on March 28, 2011 (March 17, 2011, for Canada), it would charge frequent readers for access to its online content. [138] Readers would be able to access up to 20 articles each month without charge. (Although beginning in April 2012, the number of free-access articles was halved to just ten articles per month.) Any reader who wanted to access more would have to pay for a digital subscription. This plan would allow free access for occasional readers, but produce revenue from "heavy" readers. Digital subscriptions rates for four weeks range from $15 to $35 depending on the package selected, with periodic new subscriber promotions offering four-week all-digital access for as low as 99¢. Subscribers to the paper's print edition get full access without any additional fee. Some content, such as the front page and section fronts will remain free, as well as the Top News page on mobile apps. [139] In January 2013, The New York Times ' Public Editor Margaret M. Sullivan announced that for the first time in many decades, the paper generated more revenue through subscriptions than through advertising. [140]
The newspaper's website was hacked on August 29, 2013, by the Syrian Electronic Army , a hacking group that supports the government of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad . The SEA managed to penetrate the paper's domain name registrar , Melbourne IT , and alter DNS records for The New York Times , putting some of its websites out of service for hours. [141]
The food section is supplemented on the web by properties for home cooks and for out-of-home dining. New York Times Cooking (cooking.nytimes.com; also available via iOS app) provides access to more than 17,000 recipes on file as of November 2016, [142] and availability of saving recipes from other sites around the web. The newspaper's restaurant search (nytimes.com/reviews/dining) allows online readers to search NYC area restaurants by cuisine, neighborhood, price, and reviewer rating. The New York Times has also published several cookbooks, including The Essential New York Times Cookbook: Classic Recipes for a New Century , published in late 2010.

Mobile presence
The Times Reader is a digital version of The New York Times . It was created via a collaboration between the newspaper and Microsoft . Times Reader takes the principles of print journalism and applies them to the technique of online reporting. Times Reader uses a series of technologies developed by Microsoft and their Windows Presentation Foundation team. It was announced in Seattle in April 2006, by Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr. , Bill Gates , and Tom Bodkin . [143] In 2009, the Times Reader 2.0 was rewritten in Adobe AIR . [144] In December 2013, the newspaper announced that the Times Reader app would be discontinued on January 6, 2014, urging readers of the app to instead begin using the subscription-only "Today's Paper" app. [145]
In 2008, The New York Times created an app for the iPhone and iPod Touch which allowed users to download articles to their mobile device enabling them to read the paper even when they were unable to receive a signal. [146] In April 2010, The New York Times announced it would begin publishing daily content through an iPad app. [147] As of October 2010 [update] , The New York Times iPad app is ad-supported and available for free without a paid subscription, but translated into a subscription-based model in 2011. [130]
In 2010, the newspaper also launched an app for Android smartphones, followed later by an app for Windows Phones . [148]

Podcasts
The New York Times began producing podcasts in 2006. Among the early podcasts were Inside The Times and Inside The New York Times Book Review . Several of the Times podcasts were cancelled in 2012. [149] [150] The Times returned to launching new podcasts in 2016, including Modern Love with WBUR . [151] On January 30, 2017, The New York Times launched a new podcast The Daily . [152] [153]

Chinese-language version
In June 2012, The New York Times launched its first official foreign-language variant, cn.nytimes.com, in Chinese , [154] viewable in both traditional and simplified Chinese characters . The project was led by Craig S. Smith on the business side and Philip P. Pan on the editorial side.
The site's initial success was interrupted in October that year following the publication of an investigative article [b] by David Barboza about the finances of Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao 's family. [155] In retaliation for the article, the Chinese government blocked access to both nytimes.com and cn.nytimes.com inside the People's Republic of China (PRC).
Despite Chinese government interference, however, the Chinese-language operations have continued to develop, adding a second site, cn.nytstyle.com, iOS and Android apps and newsletters, all of which are accessible inside the PRC. The China operations also produce three print publications in Chinese. Traffic to cn.nytimes.com, meanwhile, has risen due to the widespread use of VPN technology in the PRC and to a growing Chinese audience outside mainland China. [156] New York Times articles are also available to users in China via the use of mirror websites , apps, domestic newspapers, and social media . [156] [157] The Chinese platforms now represent one of The New York Times ' top five digital markets globally. The editor-in-chief of the Chinese platforms is Ching-Ching Ni . [158]

Reporter resources
The website's "Newsroom Navigator" collects online resources for use by reporters and editors. It is maintained by Rich Meislin. [159] [160] [161] Further specific collections are available to cover the subjects of business, politics and health. [159] [162] [163] In 1998, Meislin was editor-in-chief of electronic media at the newspaper. [164]

Interruptions
Because of holidays, no editions were printed on November 23, 1851; January 2, 1852; July 4, 1852; January 2, 1853; and January 1, 1854. [165]
Because of strikes , the regular edition of The New York Times was not printed during the following periods: [166]

Editorial stance
The New York Times editorial page is often regarded as liberal. [169] [170] In mid-2004, the newspaper's then public editor ( ombudsman ), Daniel Okrent , wrote that "the Op-Ed page editors do an evenhanded job of representing a range of views in the essays from outsiders they publish – but you need an awfully heavy counterweight to balance a page that also bears the work of seven opinionated columnists, only two of whom could be classified as conservative (and, even then, of the conservative subspecies that supports legalization of gay unions and, in the case of William Safire , opposes some central provisions of the Patriot Act." [171]
The New York Times has not endorsed a Republican for president since Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1956; since 1960, it has endorsed the Democratic nominee in every presidential election (see New York Times presidential endorsements ). [172] However, the Times did endorse incumbent Republican Mayors of New York City Rudy Giuliani in 1997 [173] and Michael Bloomberg in 2005 [174] and 2009. [175] The Times also endorsed Republican Governor George Pataki in 2002. [176]

Coverage issues

Iraq War
The New York Times supported the 2003 invasion of Iraq . [177] On May 26, 2004, a year after the war started, the newspaper asserted that some of its articles had not been as rigorous as they should have been, and were insufficiently qualified, frequently overly dependent upon information from Iraqi exiles desiring regime change. [178] Reporter Judith Miller retired after criticisms that her reporting of the lead-up to the Iraq War was factually inaccurate and overly favorable to the Bush administration's position, for which The New York Times later apologized. [179] [180] One of Miller's prime sources was Ahmed Chalabi , an Iraqi expatriate who returned to Iraq after the U.S. invasion and held a number of governmental positions culminating in acting oil minister and deputy prime minister from May 2005 until May 2006. [181] [182]

Iran
A 2015 study found that The New York Times fed into an overarching tendency towards national bias. During the Iranian nuclear crisis the newspaper minimized the "negative processes" of the United States while overemphasizing similar processes of Iran. This tendency was shared by other papers such as The Guardian , Tehran Times , and the Fars News Agency , while Xinhua News Agency was found to be more neutral while at the same time mimicking the foreign policy of the Peoples' Republic of China . [183]

Israeli–Palestinian conflict
A 2003 study in The Harvard International Journal of Press/Politics concluded that The New York Times reporting was more favorable to Israelis than to Palestinians. [184] A 2002 study published in the journal Journalism examined Middle East coverage of the Second Intifada over a one-month period in the Times , Washington Post and Chicago Tribune . The study authors said that the Times was "the most slanted in a pro-Israeli direction" with a bias "reflected ... in its use of headlines, photographs, graphics, sourcing practices and lead paragraphs." [185]
For its coverage of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict , some (such as Ed Koch ) have claimed that the paper is pro-Palestinian, while others (such as As`ad AbuKhalil ) have insisted that it is pro-Israel. [186] [187] The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy , by political science professors John Mearsheimer and Stephen Walt , alleges that The New York Times sometimes criticizes Israeli policies but is not even-handed and is generally pro-Israel. [188] On the other hand, the Simon Wiesenthal Center has criticized The New York Times for printing cartoons regarding the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that were claimed to be anti-Semitic . [189]
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu rejected a proposal to write an article for the paper on grounds of lack of objectivity. A piece in which Thomas Friedman commented that praise awarded to Netanyahu during a speech at congress was "paid for by the Israel lobby" elicited an apology and clarification from its writer. [190]
The New York Times ' public editor Clark Hoyt concluded in his January 10, 2009, column, "Though the most vociferous supporters of Israel and the Palestinians do not agree, I think The New York Times , largely barred from the battlefield and reporting amid the chaos of war, has tried its best to do a fair, balanced and complete job — and has largely succeeded." [191]

World War II
On November 14, 2001, in The New York Times ' 150th anniversary issue, former executive editor Max Frankel wrote that before and during World War II, the NY Times had maintained a consistent policy to minimize reports on the Holocaust in their news pages. [192] Laurel Leff , associate professor of journalism at Northeastern University , concluded that the newspaper had downplayed the Third Reich targeting of Jews for genocide . Her 2005 book Buried by the Times documents the paper's tendency before, during and after World War II to place deep inside its daily editions the news stories about the ongoing persecution and extermination of Jews, while obscuring in those stories the special impact of the Nazis' crimes on Jews in particular. Leff attributes this dearth in part to the complex personal and political views of the newspaper's Jewish publisher, Arthur Hays Sulzberger , concerning Jewishness , antisemitism , and Zionism . [193]
During the war, The New York Times journalist William L. Laurence was "on the payroll of the War Department ". [194] [195]

Criticism and controversies

Failure to report famine in Ukraine
The New York Times was criticized for the work of reporter Walter Duranty , who served as its Moscow bureau chief from 1922 through 1936. Duranty wrote a series of stories in 1931 on the Soviet Union and won a Pulitzer Prize for his work at that time; however, he has been criticized for his denial of widespread famine, most particularly the Ukrainian famine in the 1930s. [196] [197] [198] [199] In 2003, after the Pulitzer Board began a renewed inquiry, the Times hired Mark von Hagen , professor of Russian history at Columbia University , to review Duranty's work. Von Hagen found Duranty's reports to be unbalanced and uncritical, and that they far too often gave voice to Stalinist propaganda . In comments to the press he stated, "For the sake of The New York Times' honor, they should take the prize away." [200]

Fashion news articles promoting advertisers
In the mid to late 1950s, "fashion writer[s]... were required to come up every month with articles whose total column-inches reflected the relative advertising strength of every ["department" or "specialty"] store ["assigned" to a writer]... The monitor of all this was... the advertising director [of the NYT ]... " However, within this requirement, story ideas may have been the reporters' and editors' own. [201]

Jayson Blair plagiarism
In May 2003, The New York Times reporter Jayson Blair was forced to resign from the newspaper after he was caught plagiarizing and fabricating elements of his stories. Some critics contended that African-American Blair's race was a major factor in his hiring and in The New York Times ' initial reluctance to fire him. [202]

Duke University lacrosse case
The newspaper was criticized for largely reporting the prosecutors' version of events in the 2006 Duke lacrosse case . [203] [204] Suzanne Smalley of Newsweek criticized the newspaper for its "credulous" [205] coverage of the charges of rape against Duke University lacrosse players. Stuart Taylor, Jr. and KC Johnson , in their book Until Proven Innocent: Political Correctness and the Shameful Injustices of the Duke Lacrosse Rape Case , write: "at the head of the guilt-presuming pack, The New York Times vied in a race to the journalistic bottom with trash-TV talk shows." [204]

M.I.A. quotes out of context
In February 2009, a Village Voice music blogger accused the newspaper of using "chintzy, ad-hominem allegations" in an article on British Tamil music artist M.I.A. concerning her activism against the Sinhala-Tamil conflict in Sri Lanka. [206] [207] M.I.A. criticized the paper in January 2010 after a travel piece rated post-conflict Sri Lanka the "#1 place to go in 2010". [208] [209] In June 2010, The New York Times Magazine published a correction on its cover article of M.I.A., acknowledging that the interview conducted by current W editor and then- Times Magazine contributor Lynn Hirschberg contained a recontextualization of two quotes. [210] [211] In response to the piece, M.I.A. broadcast Hirschberg's phone number and secret audio recordings from the interview via her Twitter and website. [212] [213]

Delayed publication of 2005 NSA warrantless surveillance story
The New York Times was criticized for the 13-month delay of the December 2005 story revealing the U.S. National Security Agency warrantless surveillance program . [214] Ex-NSA officials blew the whistle on the program to journalists James Risen and Eric Lichtblau , who presented an investigative article to the newspaper in November 2004, weeks before America's presidential election . Contact with former agency officials began the previous summer. [215]
Former The New York Times executive editor Bill Keller decided not to report the piece after being pressured by the Bush administration and being advised not to do so by New York Times Washington bureau chief Philip Taubman . Keller explained the silence's rationale in an interview with the newspaper in 2013, stating "Three years after 9/11, we, as a country, were still under the influence of that trauma, and we, as a newspaper, were not immune". [216]
In 2014, PBS Frontline interviewed Risen and Lichtblau, who said that the newspaper's plan was to not publish the story at all. "The editors were furious at me", Risen said to the program. "They thought I was being insubordinate." Risen wrote a book about the mass surveillance revelations after The New York Times declined the piece's publication, and only released it after Risen told them that he would publish the book. Another reporter told NPR that the newspaper "avoided disaster" by ultimately publishing the story. [217]

India's Mars Orbiter Mission cartoon controversy
In September 2014, around the time when India's Mars Orbiter Mission probe was to go into Mars orbit , the International New York Times published an editorial cartoon by Singapore cartoonist Heng Kim Song depicting a turban-wearing man with a cow knocking at the door of the "Elite Space Club" with members inside reading a newspaper with a headline about India's Mars mission. [218] [219]
The cartoon drew criticism, with critics saying that the cartoon was racist. [220] [221] [222] Times editorial page editor Andrew Rosenthal , apologized, writing in a Facebook post: "A large number of readers have complained about a recent editorial cartoon in The International New York Times, about India's foray into space exploration. The intent of the cartoonist ... was to highlight how space exploration is no longer the exclusive domain of rich, Western countries. Mr. Heng, who is based in Singapore, uses images and text – often in a provocative way – to make observations about international affairs. We apologize to readers who were offended by the choice of images in this cartoon. Mr. Heng was in no way trying to impugn India, its government or its citizens." [223] [219]

Irish student controversy
On June 16, 2015, The New York Times published an article reporting the deaths of six Irish students staying in Berkeley , California when the balcony they were standing on collapsed, the paper's story insinuating that they were to blame for the collapse. The paper stated that the behavior of Irish students coming to the US on J1 visas was an "embarrassment to Ireland". [224] The Irish Taoiseach and former President of Ireland criticized the newspaper for "being insensitive and inaccurate" in its handling of the story. [225]

Nail salon series
In May 2015, a New York Times exposé by Sarah Maslin Nir on the working conditions of manicurists in New York City and elsewhere [226] and the health hazards to which they are exposed [227] attracted wide attention, resulting in emergency workplace enforcement actions by New York governor Andrew M. Cuomo . [228] In July 2015, the story's claims of widespread illegally low wages were challenged by former New York Times reporter Richard Bernstein , in the New York Review of Books . Bernstein, whose wife owns two nail salons, asserted that such illegally low wages were inconsistent with his personal experience, and were not evidenced by ads in the Chinese-language papers cited by the story. [229] The New York Times editorial staff subsequently answered Bernstein's criticisms with examples of several published ads and stating that his response was industry advocacy. [230] The independent NYT Public Editor also reported that she had previously corresponded with Bernstein and looked into his complaints, and expressed her belief that the story's reporting was sound. [231]
In September and October 2015, nail salon owners and workers protested at The New York Times offices several times, in response to the story and the ensuing New York State crackdown. [232] [233] In October 2015, Reason magazine published a three part re-reporting of the story by Jim Epstein, charging that the series was filled with misquotes and factual errors respecting both its claims of illegally low wages and health hazards. Epstein additionally argued that The New York Times had mistranslated the ads cited in its answer to Bernstein, and that those ads actually validated Bernstein's argument. [234] [235] [236] In November 2015, The New York Times ' public editor concluded that the exposé's "findings, and the language used to express them, should have been dialed back — in some instances substantially" and recommended that "The Times write further follow-up stories, including some that re-examine its original findings and that take on the criticism from salon owners and others — not defensively but with an open mind." [237]

Hiring practices
In April 2016, two black female employees in their sixties filed a federal class action lawsuit against The New York Times Company CEO Mark Thompson and chief revenue officer Meredith Levien, claiming age , gender , and racial discrimination . The plaintiffs claim that the Times advertising department favored younger white employees over older black employees in making firing and promotion decisions. [238] [239] The Times said that the suit was "entirely without merit" and was "a series of recycled, scurrilous and unjustified attacks." [239]

Accusations of bias
New York Times public editor ( ombudsman ) Liz Spayd wrote in 2016 that "Conservatives and even many moderates, see in The Times a blue-state worldview" and accuse it of harboring a liberal bias. Spayd did not analyze the substance of the claim, but did opine that the Times is "part of a fracturing media environment that reflects a fractured country. That in turn leads liberals and conservatives toward separate news sources." [240] Times executive editor Dean Baquet stated that he does not believe coverage has a liberal bias, but that: "We have to be really careful that people feel like they can see themselves in The New York Times . I want us to be perceived as fair and honest to the world, not just a segment of it. It's a really difficult goal. Do we pull it off all the time? No." [240]
Times public editor Arthur Brisbane wrote in 2012: "When The Times covers a national presidential campaign, I have found that the lead editors and reporters are disciplined about enforcing fairness and balance, and usually succeed in doing so. Across the paper's many departments, though, so many share a kind of political and cultural progressivism — for lack of a better term — that this worldview virtually bleeds through the fabric of The Times ." [241]
In mid-2004, the newspaper's then public editor Daniel Okrent , wrote an opinion piece in which he said that The New York Times did have a liberal bias in news coverage of certain social issues such as abortion and same-sex marriage . He stated that this bias reflected the paper's cosmopolitanism , which arose naturally from its roots as a hometown paper of New York City. [171] He wrote, "if you're examining the paper's coverage of these subjects from a perspective that is neither urban nor Northeastern nor culturally seen-it-all; if you are among the groups The Times treats as strange objects to be examined on a laboratory slide (devout Catholics, gun owners, Orthodox Jews, Texans); if your value system wouldn't wear well on a composite New York Times journalist, then a walk through this paper can make you feel you're traveling in a strange and forbidding world." [171] Okrent wrote that the Time ' s Arts & Leisure, Sunday Times Magazine , and Culture coverage trend to the left. [242]
In December 2004, a University of California, Los Angeles study by former fellows of a conservative think tank gave The New York Times a score of 73.7 on a 100-point scale, with 0 being most conservative and 100 being most liberal, making it the second-most liberal major newspaper in the study after The Wall Street Journal (85.1). [243] The validity of the study has been questioned, however. The liberal watchdog group Media Matters for America pointed out potential conflicts of interest with the author's funding, and political scientists, such as Brendan Nyhan , cited flaws in the study's methodology. [244] [245]
Donald Trump has frequently criticized the New York Times on his Twitter account before and during his presidency; since November 2015, Trump has referred to the Times as "the failing New York Times " in a series of tweets. [246] Despite Trump's criticism, New York Times editor Mark Thompson noted that the paper had enjoyed soaring digital readership, with the fourth quarter of 2016 seeing the highest number of new digital subscribers to the newspaper since 2011. [247] [248] [249]
Critic Matt Taibbi accused The New York Times of favoring Hillary Clinton over Bernie Sanders in the paper's news coverage of the 2016 Democratic presidential primaries . [250] Responding to the complaints of many readers, New York Times public editor Margaret Sullivan wrote that, " The Times has not ignored Mr. Sanders's campaign, but it hasn't always taken it very seriously. The tone of some stories is regrettably dismissive, even mocking at times. Some of that is focused on the candidate's age, appearance and style, rather than what he has to say." [251] Times senior editor Carolyn Ryan defended both the volume of New York Times coverage (noting that Sanders had received about the same amount of article coverage as Jeb Bush and Marco Rubio ) and its tone. [252]

Reputation
The Times has developed a national and international "reputation for thoroughness" over time. [253] Among journalists, the paper is held in high regard; a 1999 survey of newspaper editors conducted by the Columbia Journalism Review found that the Times was the "best" American paper, ahead of the Washington Post , Wall Street Journal , and Los Angeles Times . [254] The Times also was ranked #1 in a 2011 "quality" ranking of U.S. newspapers by Daniel de Vise of the Washington Post ; the objective ranking took into account the number of recent Pulitzer Prizes won, circulation, and perceived Web site quality. [254] A 2012 report in WNYC called the Times "the most respected newspaper in the world." [255]
Nevertheless, like many other U.S. media sources, the Times had suffered from a decline in public perceptions of credibility in the U.S. from 2004 to 2012. [256] A Pew Research Center survey in 2012 asked respondents about their views on credibility of various news organizations. Among respondents who gave a rating, 49% said that the believed "all or most" of the Times ' s reporting, while 50% disagreed. A large percentage (19%) of respondents were unable to rate believability. The Times ' s score was comparable to that of USA Today . [256] Media analyst Brooke Gladstone of WNYC's On the Media writing for the New York Times says that the decline in U.S. public trust of the mass media can be explained (1) by the rise of the polarized Internet-driven news; (2) by a decline in trust in U.S. institutions more generally; and (3) by the fact that "Americans say they want accuracy and impartiality, but the polls suggest that, actually, most of us are seeking affirmation." [257]

TimesMachine
The TimesMachine is a web-based archive of scanned issues of The New York Times from 1851 through 2002. [258]
Unlike The New York Times online archive, the TimesMachine presents scanned images of the actual newspaper. All non-advertising content can be displayed on a per-story basis in a separate PDF display page and saved for future reference. [259]

Availability
The archive is available to New York Times subscribers, home delivery and/or digital. [258]

Public editors
They "investigate matters of journalistic integrity" and serve a two-year term. [260]

See also
WebPage index: 00131
Wikipedian in residence
A Wikipedian in residence or Wikimedian in residence ( WiR ) is a Wikipedia editor, a Wikipedian (or Wikimedian), who accepts a placement with an institution, typically an art gallery, library, archive or museum ( GLAM ), or institute of higher education (such as a university) to facilitate Wikipedia entries related to that institution's mission, encourage and assist it to release material under open licences, and to develop the relationship between the institution and the Wikimedia community. A Wikipedian in residence generally helps to coordinate Wikipedia-related outreach events between the GLAM and the general public.
Institutions that have hosted a Wikipedian in residence include large institutions like the British Museum , the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health , the British Library , the National Library of Norway , and the Federal Archives of Switzerland and smaller venues like the Derby Museum and Art Gallery and The New Art Gallery Walsall in the UK; the Palace of Versailles in France; the Museu Picasso in Spain; and in the US, the Smithsonian Institution , the Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library , and the National Archives and Records Administration .

Developing interest
In 2010, Australian Liam Wyatt became the first Wikipedian in residence when he volunteered at the British Museum for a period of five weeks. [1] [2] He noted the need for Wikipedia to strengthen partnerships with museums to create the most up-to-date and accurate information, [3] saying "we are doing the same thing for the same reason, for the same people, in the same medium. Let's do it together." The Children's Museum of Indianapolis became involved with the program after Wikipedian Lori Phillips volunteered for a GLAM event in 2010, [3] becoming the second Wikipedian in residence. The third, Benoît Evellin, spent six months at the Palace of Versailles . [4] The Museu Picasso in Barcelona, Spain, and the Derby Museum and Art Gallery in the United Kingdom were also early adopters of the idea. [5] [6]
In 2010, the Smithsonian Institution expressed interest in the idea, which led to the hiring of Sarah Stierch in July as Wikipedian in Residence. [7] [8] [9] [10] The following year, the National Archives and Records Administration followed suit and hired Dominic McDevitt-Parks, a student from Simmons College , who was pursuing a master's degree in history and archives management, to work at its Archives II location. [11] [12] McDevitt-Parks had been editing Wikipedia since 2004 and was hired for this position by David Ferriero . [12] [13]
In July 2011 Wikimedia UK engaged Andy Mabbett, an editor since 2003, as an "Outreach Ambassador" in-residence at the Bristol-based wildlife charity Wildscreen , working on the ARKive project . [14] Since then Mabbett has been a Wikipedian in residence at other organisations such as the New Art Gallery Walsall . [15]
In January 2013, the Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library became the first Presidential library to hire a Wikipedian in residence, when they hired Michael Barera, a master's student at the University of Michigan . [16]
In September 2013, the National Archives and Records Administration became the first organisation to employ a permanent full-time Wikipedian in residence when it hired Dominic McDevitt-Parks to join its Office of Innovation in that capacity. [17]
In March 2014, Harvard University posted a job listing seeking applicants to be their Wikipedian in residence at the Houghton Library . [18]
In October 2014, the University of Victoria Libraries announced that in collaboration with The Electronic Textual Cultures Lab (ETCL) and the Federation for the Humanities and Social Sciences that Christian Vandendorpe had been named Honorary Resident Wikipedian-in-Residence for the 2014/2015 academic year. [19]
By 2016, more than 100 Wikipedians had taken part in the role, [18] most of whom were paid by either the institution where they work or a Wikimedia-related organization.

Role and duties
The primary role of the Wikipedian-in-Residence is to serve as a liaison between the host institution and the Wikimedia community by assisting with events and training that support the missions of both organisations. Typical duties include arranging and/or leading training events and editathons; [20] [21] providing explanations to other staff and members of the public about policies and practice, such as policies about conflict-of-interest; as well as making contributions to articles relevant to the institution's materials and mission, such as articles about significant cultural objects in an organisation's collection. [22]

Compensation
While Wikipedia discourages direct paid compensation for article editing and prohibits undisclosed advocacy, Wikipedians in residence are permitted to be compensated for work on-wiki , either by offering credit, stipend or salary, through their sponsoring institutions provided that they adhere to strict guidelines against engaging in public relations or marketing for their institution.

Reception
One such advertised post has been reported positively by others as being a "unique opportunity to help enrich Wikipedia and its sister projects and share with the world the resources and knowledge." [22] Conversely, another advertised post was less favourably received by Andrew Orlowski who described it as "throwing taxpayers' money away on fashionable gimmicks", and proposing a stereotypical perceived person specification including having a "desire to argue the toss online for 23 hours a day." [20] In 2013, a part-time temporary position was advertised by National Library of Scotland and was noted as being "the first large-scale partnership" between a Scottish institution and Wikimedia UK . [21] This initiative was followed by University of Edinburgh where a Wikimedian in residence was appointed in December 2015. [23]
WebPage index: 00132
List of Wikipedia controversies
Since the launch of Wikipedia in January 2001, a number of controversies have occurred. Wikipedia's open nature, in which anyone can edit most articles, has led to various concerns, such as the quality of writing, the amount of vandalism , and the accuracy of information on the project. The media have covered a number of controversial events and scandals related to Wikipedia and its parent organization, the Wikimedia Foundation (WMF). Common subjects of coverage include articles containing false information, public figures and corporations editing articles for which they have a serious conflict of interest , paid Wikipedia editing and hostile interactions between Wikipedia editors and public figures.
The Seigenthaler biography incident [2] led to media criticism of the reliability of Wikipedia. This incident began in May 2005 with the anonymous posting of a hoax Wikipedia article with false, negative allegations about John Seigenthaler , a well-known American journalist. In March 2007, Wikipedia was again the subject of media attention with the Essjay controversy , which involved a prominent English Wikipedia editor and administrator who claimed he was a "tenured professor of religion at a private university" with a "Ph.D. in theology and a degree in canon law" when in fact he was a 24-year-old who held no advanced degrees. [3] [4]
The 2012 scandals involving paid consultancy for the government of Gibraltar by Roger Bamkin, a Wikimedia UK board member, [5] [6] and potential conflicts of interest have highlighted Wikipedia's vulnerabilities. [5] The presence of inaccurate and false information, as well as the perceived hostile editing climate, have been linked to a decline in editor participation. [7] Another controversy arose in 2013 after an investigation by Wikipedians found that the Wiki-PR company had edited Wikipedia for paying clients, using "an army" of sockpuppet accounts that purportedly included 45 Wikipedia editors and administrators. [8] [9] In 2015, the Orangemoody investigation showed that businesses and minor celebrities had been blackmailed over their Wikipedia articles by a coordinated group of fraudsters, again using hundreds of sockpuppets. Controversies within and concerning Wikipedia and the WMF have been the subject of several scholarly papers . [10] [11] This list is a collection of the more notable instances.

Overview
The nature of Wikipedia controversies has been analyzed by many scholars. For example, sociologist Howard Rheingold says that "Wikipedia controversies have revealed the evolution of social mechanisms in the Wikipedia community"; [10] a study of the politicization of socio-technical spaces remarked that Wikipedia "controversies... become fully fledged when they are advertised outside the page being debated"; [11] and even one college discusses Wikipedia as a curricular tool, in that "recent controversies involving Wikipedia [are used] as a basis for discussion of ethics and bias." [12]

Editing restrictions
Despite being promoted as an encyclopedia "anyone can edit", the ability to edit controversial pages is sometimes restricted due to "edit wars" or vandalism. [13] To address criticism about restricting access while still minimizing malicious editing of those pages, Wikipedia has also trialed measures such as "pending changes" that would open contentious articles up for more people to edit, then subject their contributions to approval from more established members of the site. [14] [15]

2002

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

See also
WebPage index: 00133
Italian Wikipedia
The Italian Wikipedia ( Italian : Wikipedia in italiano ) is the Italian-language edition of Wikipedia . This edition was created on May 11, 2001 [1] and first edited on June 11, 2001. As of 26 May 2017 it has 1,359,154 articles and more than 1,511,739 registered accounts. [2] It is the 8th-largest Wikipedia by the number of articles (after the English , Swedish , German , Dutch , French , Cebuano , and Russian editions). [3]

History
As early as March 2001, Jimmy Wales , the creator and co-founder of the original English language Wikipedia , had proposed the creation of parallel Wikipedia projects in other languages. [4] The Italian language version was among the first ones to be created, in May 2001. The original URL was italian.wikipedia.com , while the standardized ISO 639 address it.wikipedia.com became active a few days later. [5] Afterwards, Wikipedia sites switched their domains from wikipedia.com to wikipedia.org . The very first pages (circa five hundred) were simply untranslated copies from the English-language Wikipedia; the first edits were made from 11 June 2001 onwards.
One of the earlier edits was an appeal to help Nupedia ; the first entries on the Italian Wikipedia were the pages on Dante Alighieri , Petrarch , Manzoni , and other Italian writers. The edits were not numerous, and the priority was initially given to helping Nupedia; the lemmas were just twenty or thirty, and there were about ten users. With the end of the Nupedia project, the situation began to improve for the Italian Wikipedia: users started to sign in, and the functions of administrators and semi-protection were implemented. This happened by 2004; the number of articles was now 56,000.
In August 2005 the Italian Wikipedia overtook the Spanish and Portuguese language editions, becoming the 8th largest edition by article count. The primary reason for the rapid leap from 56,000 to 64,000 articles was an automated bot which created stub articles on more than 8,000 municipalities of Spain in an operation dubbed " Comuni spagnoli ". [6] [7]
On September 8, 2005, the Italian Wikipedia overtook the Dutch Wikipedia and one day later, on September 9, it passed 100,000 articles. On September 11, it overtook the Swedish Wikipedia , becoming the fifth-largest language edition. Again, automated scripts contributed heavily to the growth. For instance, a bot created more than 35,000 articles on municipalities of France . [8] However, it was overtaken by the Polish edition on September 23, 2005.
In June 2006, Italian Wikipedia users independently created the Template:Bio (with "Bio" being a diminutive of biografia , " biography "). On 23 October, the Polish version surpassed the Italian Wikipedia by number of articles. As of 16 October 2006, the registered number of users was 100,000 (90 of which were administrators).
In 2007, the Italian Wikipedia adopted an Exemption Doctrin Policy , shared with other Wikipedias. In the same year, on 21 May, there were more than 300,000 entries. On 22 January 2008, the entries were 400,000; on 3 October, they were 500,000. The number of users had reached 250,000.
In 2009 the Italian Wikipedia was awarded the Premiolino , the oldest and most prestigious Italian journalism prize, in the new media category.
On June 22, 2010, it passed 700,000 articles ( Robie House – 700,000th article). On September 28, 2010, the Italian Wikipedia overtook the Polish Wikipedia, becoming the 4th largest edition, though in October 2010 the numbers on both Wikipedias were very close, and as of 2011 the Polish Wikipedia is in the lead again. [9] On May 12, 2011, it passed 800,000 articles. On the same day, it overtook the Polish Wikipedia. On March 12, 2012, it passed 900,000 articles. On January 22, 2013, it passed 1,000,000 articles.
In April 2016, the project had 2233 active editors who made at least five edits in that month.

2011 mass blanking protest
From October 4 to October 6, 2011, following a decision adopted by volunteers of the Italian Wikipedia community, a knowledge blackout was in place. During this time, all of the site's articles were hidden and the website was blocked by its administrators, as a protest against the DDL intercettazioni (Wiretapping Bill) [10] which was being debated at the time in the Chamber of Deputies of the Italian parliament . [11]
The controversy largely centered on paragraph 29 of the proposed bill. [12] According to a public statement by editors of the Italian Wikipedia: [12]
The bill allowed for a fine of between €9,500 and €12,000. [13]
This was the first time that a Wikipedia had blanked all its content to protest. [14] [15] [16] The Wikimedia Foundation officially supported the decision of the Italian Wikipedia by a statement released the same day. [11] As of 5 October 2011 [update] the manifesto, which replaced the Italian Wikipedia, had been viewed approximately 8 million times. [17] On October 6, 2011, the website content was restored, with a banner across the top of each page explaining the reason for the protest. [18]
On 18 January 2012, the English Wikipedia was shut down for 24 hours, following a decision by contributors to protest against two bills being examined by the Congress of the United States : the Stop Online Piracy Act and the Protect Intellectual Property Act . On that day, the Italian Wikipedia redirected users from its own main page to a black page expressing a message of support to the decision of the English encyclopedia. Users could then click to access the Italian encyclopedia's content normally.
On 10 July 2012, when the Russian Wikipedia was closed to protest State Duma ’s debating of amendments to the law "On information" ( Law Project No. 89417-6 ), the Italian Wikipedia displayed a site-wide banner supporting the protest. [19]
In November 2012, messages appeared on the Italian Wikipedia protesting the Italian Senate 's Bill #3491 , 3204 , 3.400 and especially 3.207 . [20]

Features
WebPage index: 00134
Art+Feminism
Art and Feminism (stylized as Art+Feminism ) is an annual worldwide edit-a-thon to add content to Wikipedia about female artists. The project, founded by Siân Evans, Jacqueline Mabey, Michael Mandiberg , and Laurel Ptak, [1] has been described as "a massive multinational effort to correct a persistent bias in Wikipedia, which is disproportionately written by and about men". [2]
In 2014, Art+Feminism's inaugural campaign attracted 600 volunteers at 30 separate events. [1] [2] The following year, 1,300 volunteers attended 70 events in 17 countries, on four continents. [1]

Establishment
Art+Feminism started when Artstor librarian Siân Evans was designing a project for women and art at for the Art Libraries Society of North America . [3] Evans talked with fellow curator Jacqueline Mabey, who had been impressed by Wikipedia contributors' organization of edit-a-thon events to commemorate Ada Lovelace . [3] Mabey spoke with Michael Mandiberg , a professor at the City University of New York who had been incorporating Wikipedia into classroom learning. Mandiberg in turn talked with Laurel Ptak, a fellow at the art and technology non-profit Eyebeam , who agreed to help plan the event. [3] The team then recruited local Wikipedians Dorothy Howard, then Wikipedian in residence at Metropolitan New York Library Council ; and Richard Knipel, then representing the local chapter of Wikipedia contributors through Wikimedia New York City. [3]
One reason for establishing the Art+Feminism project included responding to negative media coverage about Wikipedia's cataloging system. [4] The project continues to fill content gaps in Wikipedia and increase the number of female contributors. [5] [6] Only about 17 percent of notable person profiles on Wikipedia are about women and only about 15 percent of editors on Wikipedia are female. [7]

Events
Outside the United States, the 2015 event received media coverage at locations including Australia, [8] Canada, [9] Cambodia, [10] India, [11] New Zealand, [12] and Scotland. [13] Inside the United States the event received media coverage at the flagship location in New York, [14] and also in California, [15] [16] Kansas, [17] Pennsylvania, [18] Texas, [19] and West Virginia. [20]

Reception
Content contributed by participants in the editing events is tracked in a coordinating forum on Wikipedia. [21]
In November 2014 Foreign Policy magazine named Evans, Mabey, Michael, Richard Knipel, Dorothy Howard, and Ptak as "global thinkers" for addressing gender bias on Wikipedia . [22]
WebPage index: 00135
Wiki-Watch
Wiki-Watch , formally known as Arbeitsstelle Wiki-Watch im „Studien- und Forschungsschwerpunkt Medienrecht“ der Juristischen Fakultät der Europa-Universität Viadrina [1] ( English : Wiki-Watch Project at the "Study and Research Centre on Media Law" from the Faculty of Law at Viadrina European University ) is a German university project for transparency of Wikipedia and Wikipedia articles, aimed especially at media professionals.
Wiki-Watch conducted and published a survey of administrators of German Wikipedia and blogs regularly about German Wikipedia problems. Wiki-Watch's site wiki-watch.org provides statistical insights on Wikipedia. [2] [3] [4] [5] [6]
Part of Wiki-Watch.org is a free software application for page analysis. This tool automatically assesses the formal reliability of Wikipedia articles in English and German. It produces a five-level evaluation score corresponding to its assessment of reliability. [7] Second, its “Exclusive Insight” shows what is occurring in Wikipedia in nearly realtime. [8] The Wiki-Watch blog spots current trends in Wikipedia and is a source of news coverage about the Wikipedia project. [9] [10]
Wiki-Watch was developed at the Viadrina European University in Frankfurt an der Oder, Germany. The development team included professors Wolfgang Stock and Johannes Weberling . [7] [11] [12]

Wiki-Watch's formal page analysis
Wiki-Watch's formal analysis relies on tracking each entry made in a Wikipedia article. It checks the number of sources, the number of editors and the number of links to the article. Within the additional implemented WikiTrust each editor is also given a "quality score" that assesses the reliability of their edits. [11]
Hundreds of thousands of editors have contributed Wikipedia entries [13] and the reliability of the information within Wikipedia has been the subject of debate among experts. [14] Since 2009, the Wikimedia Foundation had been considering marking text that had not been reviewed or edited by multiple editors as "untested". This form of reliability checking could enhance acceptance of scholarly Wikipedia content within educational establishments.
Text tracking has incorporated into the WikiTrust system, in ongoing development at the University of California Santa Cruz [11] [15] and implemented in Wiki-Watch. Specific text fragments that have not been edited by multiple authors with a good score are flagged as potentially unreliable [16] or unsafe. [17] The reliability and reputation scoring system uses a color code scheme to evaluate pieces of text, based on the edit history and number of revisions by users, thereby signaling what may be unreliable changes within an article. The reliability of each editor is assessed by reviewing the changes they have made to various articles, and tracking their contributions to see how well the contributions survive after edits by other editors. [18]
The page analysis is comparable to WikiBu with some differences. WikiTrust is more detailed than WikiBu. Wiki-Watch stresses more the quality of sources, while WikiBu stresses more the quantity of views over sources. Wiki-Watch is aimed at media professionals, while WikiBu is aimed on pupils and teachers.

“Exclusive Insight”
In “Exclusive Insight” Wiki-Watch shows a compact overview of current Wikipedia developments (What and Who). Users can choose views between one hour and one month. A logged-in user can see more detailed statistics: most read pages, new pages, most edited pages, and so on. Additionally, graphs are supplied for the most read pages, displaying each day's views so that the reader sees if interest in an article is rising or ceasing. [19] The “Exclusive Insight” displays edit wars and deletions, as well as the activities of administrators and power editors. [19] [20]

Criticism of co-founder
In July 2011 the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung newspaper published articles describing an alleged conflict of interest between co-founder Wolfgang Stock 's work for Wiki-Watch and his work for a pharmaceutical company that was a client of his agency Convincet. [21] [22] [23] Stock had last made edits to Wikipedia articles in the area of pharmaceuticals and health issues in spring 2009, which was one year before founding Wiki-Watch (late 2010) and two years before the accusation (July 2011).
In a formal reply in Der Spiegel , Stock refuted the allegations, calling them "wrong" and "false". [24] Stock claimed that he had made his edits of entries related to a pharmaceutical company "before my consulting work for the pharmaceutical company." [24] By his own admission, Stock's edits derived from personal interest and concern and were not paid by anybody. Only later, from summer 2009 on, he had worked as a communications consultant for the pharmaceutical company. [25] [26] [27] "Given the ongoing legal dispute" on the accusation, Stock gave up his leadership position of Wiki-Watch [24] and his access rights to its Internet platform, [28] but remained a team-member in September 2011. [24]
The Viadrina European University called the allegations "demonstrably false". [28]

See also

Sources

External links
WebPage index: 00136
Kiwix
Kiwix is a free and open-source offline web browser created by Emmanuel Engelhart and Renaud Gaudin in 2007. [3] It was first launched to allow offline access to Wikipedia , but has since expanded to include other projects from the Wikimedia foundation as well as public domain texts from the Project Gutenberg . Available in more than 100 languages, Kiwix has been included in several high-profile projects, from smuggling operations in North Korea [4] to Google Impact Challenge's recipient Bibliothèques Sans Frontières . [5]

History
After becoming a Wikipedia editor in 2004, Emmanuel Engelhart became interested in developing offline versions of Wikipedia. A project to make a Wikipedia CD , initiated in 2003, was a trigger for the project. [3]
In 2012 Kiwix won a grant from Wikimedia France to build kiwix-plug [ citation needed ] , which was deployed in universities in eleven countries in the Afripedia Project . [6] [7]
In February 2013 Kiwix won SourceForge 's Project of the Month award. [8]
Kiwix won a CH Open Source Award in 2015. [9]

Description
The software is designed as an offline reader for web content. It is used on computers without an internet connection, computers with a slow or expensive connection, and to avoid censorship. It can also be used while travelling (e.g. on a plane or train).
Users first download Kiwix, then download content for offline viewing with Kiwix (see picture). Compression saves disk space and bandwidth. All of English-language Wikipedia, with pictures, fits on a USB stick (54 GB as of May 2016, or 16 GB with no pictures). [8] [10]
All content files are compressed in ZIM format , which makes them smaller, but leaves them easy to index, search, and selectively decompress.
The ZIM files are then opened with Kiwix, which looks and behaves like a web browser. Kiwix offers full text search, tabbed navigation and the option to export articles to PDF and HTML. [1]
There is an HTTP server version called kiwix-serve ; this allows a computer to host Kiwix content, and make it available to other computers on a network. [11] The other computers see an ordinary website. kiwix-plug is a version for plug computers [8] which is often used to provide a wifi server . [12]
Kiwix uses the deprecated Mozilla framework localised on Translatewiki.net , [13] but plans to replace it. [14]

Available content
A list of content available on Kiwix exists; sublists for content in specific languages also exist. Content can be loaded through Kiwix itself (see screenshot).
Since 2014, most Wikipedia versions are available for download in various different languages. [10] The servers are updated every two to six months, depending on the size of the file. For English Wikipedia, a full version containing pictures as well as alternative version containing text only can be downloaded from the archive. This allows users to save disk space and bandwidth while downloading.
Besides Wikipedia, content from the Wikimedia foundation such as Wikisource , Wikiquote , Wikivoyage , Wikibooks and Wikiversity are available for offline viewing in various different languages. [16]
In November 2014 a ZIM version of all open texts forming part of Project Gutenberg was made available. [17] [18]
Besides public domain content, works licensed under a Creative Commons license are available for download. For example, offline versions of the Ubuntu wiki containing user documentation for the Ubuntu operating system, [19] ZIM editions of TED conference talks [20] and videos from Crash Course are available in the Kiwix archive as ZIM file formats. [21]

Deployments
As a software development project, Kiwix itself is not directly involved in deployment projects. However, Wikimedia or third party organisations use the software as a component of their own projects. Examples include:

Stand-alone
Kiwix can be installed on a desktop computer as a stand-alone program through the Kiwix webpage.

Package managers and app stores
Kiwix was formerly available in the native package managers of some Linux distributions. However, Kiwix is currently not available in most package databases, due to XULRunner , a program on which Kiwix depends, being deprecated by Mozilla and removed from the package databases. [34] Kiwix is available in the Sugar and ArchLinux Linux distributions . It is also available on Android.
The Kiwix Linux Packaging Project aims to get Kiwix into Linux package databases; it is currently seeking 10 000 Swiss francs and an SSL security certificate . [14]
Kiwix is available on GooglePlay [35] and iTunes. [36]

Motivation
Founder Emmanuel Engelhart sees Wikipedia as a common good , saying “The contents of Wikipedia should be available for everyone! Even without Internet access. This is why I have launched the Kiwix project. Our users are all over the world: sailors on the oceans, poor students thirsty for knowledge, globetrotters almost living in planes, world’s citizens suffering from censorship or free minded prisoners. For all these people, Kiwix provides a simple and practical solution to ponder about the world.” [3]
WebPage index: 00137
Wikimedia movement
The Wikimedia movement is the global community of contributors to Wikimedia projects . The movement was created around Wikipedia, and has since expanded to many other projects, including the Wikipedia community with around 70,000 volunteers [1] for other Wikimedia projects such as Wikidata and Wikimedia Commons , and volunteer software developers contributing to MediaWiki . These volunteers are supported by numerous organizations around the world, including the Wikimedia Foundation , related chapters, thematic organizations, and user groups.

Community
The Wikipedia community is the community of contributors of the online encyclopedia Wikipedia. It consists of editors (or contributors ) and Administrators, known as Admins .

Projects
Wikimedia projects include:

Organizations

Wikimedia Foundation
The Wikimedia Foundation (WMF) is an American non-profit and charitable organization headquartered in San Francisco , California . It owns the domain names and operates most of the movement's websites, like Wikipedia, the Internet encyclopedia , as well as Wikimedia Commons .
The WMF was founded in 2003 by Jimmy Wales as a way to fund Wikipedia and its sister projects through non-profit means. Its purpose is "... to empower and engage people around the world to collect and develop educational content under a free license or in the public domain, and to disseminate it effectively and globally." [2] [3] [4]
According to the WMF's 2015 financial statements, in 2015 the WMF had a budget of $72 million USD, spending $52 million USD on its operation, and increasing its reserves to $82 million USD. [5]

Chapters
Chapters are organizations that support Wikimedia projects in specified geographical regions, mostly countries. There are 41 chapters.
Wikimedia Deutschland (WMDE) is the largest chapter, with a total budget of €20 million. WMDE allocates approximately €1 million to support the corporation responsible for distributing donations, and €4 million for transfer to the WMF. [6] [7]
To have the same procedure, every chapter follows the same process and requests its yearly budget at the funds dissemination committee. The foundation as internet domain owner of the project pages requests a share of the donations via the website in a country (e.g., for Germany, Switzerland), or pays a chapter the agreed amount (other chapters). A total of under 4 Mio USD is distributed via this way to chapters and thematic organizations. [8] The legal base is a "Chapters Agreement" with the foundation. [9]

Thematic organizations
Thematic organizations are founded to support Wikimedia projects in a focal area. There is one such organization. [8] [10]

User groups
User groups have less formal requirements than chapters and thematic organizations. They support and promote the Wikimedia projects locally or on a specific theme, topic, subject, or issue. At the beginning of 2016, there were 55 user groups. [11] Once they are recognized by the Affiliations Committee, they enter into a "User Groups Agreement and Code of Conduct" with the foundation. They have a program to encourage female editors.
WebPage index: 00138
Wiki hosting service
A wiki hosting service or wiki farm is a server or an array of servers that offer users tools to simplify the creation and development of individual, independent wikis . Wiki farms are not to be confused with wiki "families", a more generic term for any group of wikis located on the same server. [1]
Prior to wiki farms, someone who wanted to operate a wiki had to install the software and manage the server(s) themselves. With a wiki farm, the farm's administration installs the core wiki code once on its own servers, centrally maintains the servers, and establishes unique space on the servers for the content of each individual wiki with the shared core code executing the functions of each wiki.
Both non-commercial and commercial wiki farms are available for users and online communities. While most of the wiki farms allow anyone to open their own wiki, some impose restrictions. Many wiki farm companies generate revenue through the insertion of advertisements, but often allow payment of a monthly fee as an alternative to accepting ads.
Many of the currently most notable wiki farms got their start in the mid-2000s, including Wikia (2004), PBworks (2005), Wetpaint (2005), Wikispaces (2005), and Wikidot (2006).

See also
WebPage index: 00139
Creole (markup)
Creole is a lightweight markup language , aimed at being a common markup language for wikis , enabling and simplifying the transfer of content between different wiki engines .

History
The idea was conceived during a workshop at the 2007 International Symposium on Wikis . [1] [2] An EBNF grammar and XML interchange format for Creole have also been published. [3] [4] Creole was designed by comparing major wiki engines and using the most common markup for a particular wikitext element. If no commonality was found, the wikitext of the dominant wiki engine MediaWiki was usually chosen.
On July 4, 2007, the version 1.0 (final) [5] of Creole was released, and a two-year development freeze was implemented to allow time for authors of wiki engines to adopt the new markup. Although development to the standard itself is frozen, discussion in the developer community regarding good practices in wiki markup design and about possible additions and changes for future Creole versions continues.
As of 2012, adoption of Creole is limited. Many wiki systems offer it as an option, but few use it by default and few wiki websites enable this optional feature.

Creole syntax examples
Emphasized text:
Lists:
Links:
Headings: (closing equals signs are optional)
Linebreaks:
Horizontal Line:
Images:
Tables:
No markup:

Support in engines
As of early 2011, wiki engines that have implemented full or partial support for Creole include Liferay, Djiki, DokuWiki , Ikiwiki , MoinMoin , Oddmuse, PhpWiki , PmWiki , TiddlyWiki , and XWiki . [6] However, Creole is not necessarily the default syntax in these wiki engines.
Creole 1.0 is the default syntax in Bitbucket wikis, which also support some Creole 1.0 additions. [7]
WebPage index: 00140
Hampton Catlin
Hampton Catlin (born 1982) [1] is an American computer programmer , programming language inventor, gay rights advocate, and author best known as the creator of the Sass and Haml markup languages. Catlin now sits as the Co-Founder and CEO of Team RareBit. [2]

Creations

Haml
He created a lightweight markup language called Haml which he intended to be a radically different design for inline page templating systems like eRuby in Ruby. [3] Since its initial release in 2006, Haml has been in constant development and has been ported to over 10 other languages. [4] It's the second most popular templating language for the Ruby on Rails framework [5] and has inspired many other templating languages.

Sass
In 2007, Catlin created a style sheet language to expand on Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), used to describe presentation semantics of web pages. Catlin continued to work on Sass with co-designer Natalie Weizenbaum through 2008. [6] [7] Sass is now bundled as part of Rails. [8]
In 2011, he co-wrote with his husband the book "Pragmatic Guide to Sass", published through The Pragmatic Bookshelf . [9] [10]

Wikipedia Mobile
Catlin wrote several applications for iOS and other mobile platforms, including Dictionary! , a popular dictionary application, [11] and a Wikipedia browsing client which was later purchased by the Wikimedia Foundation . [12] He was subsequently hired by Wikimedia [13] and given the role as mobile development lead for the Foundation, launching the official mobile website in June 2009. The backend for the site was developed using Ruby and the Merb framework. [14] [2] [13]

Personal life
Catlin was born in 1982 in Jacksonville , Florida [1] and currently resides in San Francisco [15] with his husband and collaborator, Michael Catlin. [16]
The couple made headlines in late March, 2014, for removing a simple puzzle game they had built together from the Mozilla Marketplace after Brendan Eich was appointed CEO of Mozilla. [17] Brendan Eich had previously been the center of controversy surrounding his support for Proposition 8 , a ballot initiative that banned marriage equality in California, which was re-ignited by his promotion to CEO. [18] [19] After a large public outcry and several Mozilla employees publicly calling for him to either apologize or step down, Eich declined and voluntarily stepped down only a week after taking his new position. [20] When asked if he'd donate again, Eich responded "I don't want to answer hypotheticals." [21] In a follow up blog post, Catlin explained meeting Eich to find middle ground and expressing dismay at the response, calling the outcome a "sad victory". [22]
WebPage index: 00141
Mike Godwin
Michael Wayne Godwin (born October 26, 1956) is an American attorney and author. He was the first staff counsel of the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), and he created the Internet adage Godwin's law and the notion of Internet meme , as reported in the magazine Wired of October 1994. [1] From July 2007 to October 2010, he was general counsel for the Wikimedia Foundation . In March 2011 he was elected to the Open Source Initiative board. [2] Godwin has served as a contributing editor of Reason magazine since 1994. [3] He is currently general counsel and director of innovation policy at the R Street Institute . [4] [5]

Early life and education
Godwin was educated at Lamar High School in Houston, [6] [7] before graduating in 1980 from the University of Texas at Austin with a Bachelor of Arts degree in the Plan II Honors program. Godwin later attended the University of Texas School of Law , graduating with a Juris Doctor degree in 1990. While in law school, Godwin was the editor of The Daily Texan , the student newspaper, from 1988 to 1989. [8]
In his last semester of law school, early in 1990, Godwin, who knew Steve Jackson through the Austin bulletin board system community, helped publicize the Secret Service raid on Steve Jackson Games . His involvement is later documented in the non-fiction book The Hacker Crackdown : Law and Disorder on the Electronic Frontier (1992) by Bruce Sterling . [9]

Career

Internet law
Godwin's early involvement in the Steve Jackson Games affair led to his being hired by the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) in November 1990, when the organization was new. Shortly afterwards, as the first EFF in-house lawyer, he supervised its sponsorship of the Steve Jackson Games, Inc. v. United States Secret Service case. Steve Jackson Games won the case in 1993. [10]
As a lawyer for EFF, Godwin was one of the counsel of record for the plaintiffs in the case challenging the Communications Decency Act in 1996. The Supreme Court decided the case for the plaintiffs on First Amendment grounds in 1997 in Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union . Godwin's work on this and other First Amendment cases in the 1990s is documented in his book Cyber Rights: Defending Free Speech in the Digital Age (1998), which was reissued in a revised, expanded edition by MIT Press in 2003.
Godwin has also served as a staff attorney and policy fellow for the Center for Democracy and Technology , as Chief Correspondent at IP Worldwide , a publication of American Lawyer Media , and as a columnist for The American Lawyer magazine. He is a Contributing Editor at Reason magazine, [11] where he has published interviews of several science-fiction writers. [12]
From 2003 to 2005, Godwin was staff attorney and later legal director of Public Knowledge , a non-governmental organization based in Washington, D.C., concerned with intellectual property law . In recent years, Godwin has worked on copyright and technology policy, including the relationship between digital rights management and American copyright law. While at Public Knowledge, he supervised litigation that successfully challenged the Federal Communications Commission 's broadcast flag regulation that would have imposed DRM restrictions on television. From October 2005 to April 2007, Godwin was a research fellow at Yale University , holding dual positions in the Information Society Project (ISP) at Yale Law School , [13] [14] and at the Yale Computer Science Department's Privacy, Obligations and Rights in Technologies of Information Assessment (PORTIA) project. [15]
Godwin was general counsel for the Wikimedia Foundation from July 3, 2007, [16] [17] until October 22, 2010. [18] [19] Commenting on the self-correcting nature of Wikipedia in an interview with The New York Times in which he said that he had corrected his own Wikipedia article, Godwin said, "The best answer for bad speech is more speech." [20] When the Federal Bureau of Investigation demanded in July 2010 that its seal be removed from Wikipedia, Godwin sent a "whimsically written letter" [21] in response, denying the demand and describing the FBI's interpretation of the law as "idiosyncratic ... and, more importantly, incorrect." [22] [23]
The character "Michael Godwin" in The Difference Engine by Bruce Sterling and William Gibson was named after Godwin as thanks for his technical assistance in linking their computers to allow them to collaborate between Austin and Vancouver. [9]
Godwin was named a member of the Student Press Law Center Board of Directors in January 2009 [24] and of the Open Source Initiative Board of Directors in March 2011. [25]

Godwin's law
Godwin originated Godwin's law in 1990, [1] stating:
Godwin believes the ubiquity of such comparisons trivializes the Holocaust . [26] [27]

Bibliography
WebPage index: 00142
Knowledge Engine (Wikimedia Foundation)
Knowledge Engine ( KE ) is a search engine project initiated in 2015 by the Wikimedia Foundation (WMF) to locate and display verifiable and trustworthy information on the Internet. [2] [3] The goal of the KE is to be less reliant on traditional search engines. [4] The KE aims to change the behavior of readers to stay on Wikipedia.org and other Wikipedia-related projects rather than return to their favorite search engines to find additional information. [4] According to the WMF, the KE will protect user privacy, be open and transparent about how a piece of information originates, and allow access to metadata . [5] WMF's application for a $250,000 grant from the Knight Foundation describes KE as an alternative to for-profit Internet access to information: "Commercial search engines dominate search-engine use of the Internet, and they're employing proprietary technologies to consolidate channels of access to the Internet’s knowledge and information." [6] The project comprises four stages, each scheduled to take about 18 months. [7] The project's cost could run into the tens of millions. [1]
KE will draw information from Wikipedia-related projects and may eventually search other sources of public information such as the U.S. Census Bureau . [6] Leaked internal WMF documents stated the "Knowledge Engine By Wikipedia will democratize the discovery of media, news and information—it will make the Internet's most relevant information more accessible and openly curated, and it will create an open data engine that's completely free of commercial interests. Our new site will be the Internet’s first transparent search engine, and the first one that carries the reputation of Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation." [2] KE is not intended to compete with Google Search as a universal search engine, says WMF. [6] Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales allowed that the KE might in time also include academic and open access sources in its search results . [8] Matt Southern in Search Engine Journal attributed media confusion about KE's scope to the fact that this was "quite a contrast to the original grant application documents". [9] As of mid-February 2016, the WMF is developing an internal search engine for Wikipedia-related projects. [1]
Generally, large-scale WMF projects such as KE are discussed publicly with the Wikipedia community , but this did not happen with the KE project. [10] The Wikipedia community volunteers stated the secrecy around the KE project was at odds with WMF's transparency values. [2] The KE project was not published in the WMF's publicly available annual plan. [11] In a text posted on the English Wikipedia 's community newsletter, The Signpost , James Heilman , who was dismissed from the WMF's Board of Trustees in December 2015, said he had insisted multiple times that the Knight Foundation grant documentation be made public, without success, [12] and suggested that his push for transparency concerning the grant had been a factor in his dismissal—a suggestion rejected by Jimmy Wales. [2] Critics say the project's roll out illustrates a disconnect and lack of understanding between a foundation that's increasingly run by people connected with Silicon Valley , and the volunteer community of editors who worry that KE may reflect a change in the WMF's focus from user-generated content to one led by automated data results. [2]
An initial blogpost published by the WMF Executive Director Lila Tretikov and the WMF regarding the KE project still did not adequately explain why the original grant application documents appeared so much larger than merely developing an internal search engine. [13] Tretikov’s employees said the WMF was still not being straightforward with the Wikipedia community. [14] Ariel Glenn, WMF's "tech gnome", said it’s "not just about an [Executive Director]." [15] Caitlyn Virtue, WMF’s Director of Development, said "This is bad, and not just bad for our relationship with Knight. It’s clear that leadership did not follow our own movements’ best practices." [15] WMF Executive Director Tretikov resigned on February 25, 2016, as a result of the controversy. [13] [16] Former Deputy Director of the WMF Erik Möller described the recent events as "a crisis." [1]

Reason for being
The Knowledge Engine (KE) project is being developed to help send traffic to Wikipedia . [14] "Traffic to Wikipedia coming from Google has fallen as Google has begun incorporating fast facts from Wikipedia articles onto the front page of Google," according to Motherboard. [2] Since that information originated from Wikipedia, it can be considered as part of Wikipedia's aim to expand public knowledge; however, users being able to access Wikipedia data without actually visiting Wikipedia may be seen as a threat to donations that come from readers who visit the site. [2] Although the Wikimedia Foundation (WMF) may not be attempting to create a general web search engine or another Google Search , the goal of KE is to be less reliant on traditional search engines. [4] The KE aims to change the behavior of readers by having them stay on Wikipedia.org and other Wikipedia-related projects rather than return to their favorite search engines to find additional information. [4]
The Knight Foundation grant agreement questions, "Would users go to Wikipedia if it were an open channel beyond an encyclopedia?" [1] According to Search Engine Watch , by making Wikipedia or Wikipedia's KE a leading site for the world’s knowledge, Wikipedia could be able to recoup the traffic it had lost to Google. [1] The KE project could change Wikipedia.org to a site that is more similar to a search engine than an online encyclopedia . [4]
According to Vice , "the Wikimedia Foundation, the nonprofit that finances and founded Wikipedia, is interested in creating a search engine that appears squarely aimed at competing with Google." [2] According to The Guardian , "there was considerable doubt over what the tool was actually intended to be: a search engine aimed at halting a decline in Wikipedia traffic sent by Google, or simply a service for searching within Wikipedia?" [13] According to Search Engine Watch, "Wikimedia is still in a very real battle with Google for the attention and clicks of users who are seeking information online." [1]

Development
Seemingly out of line with WMF's usual "radical transparency", information about the project only became public gradually. [2] As early as May 2015, community members had asked questions about the concentration of staff in a new "Search and Discovery" department, even though public plans made little or no reference to this work. [2] [18] The WMF was awarded a $250,000 grant for the project in September 2015 from the Knight Foundation, which was publicly announced in a January 2016 press release. [4] A budget submitted by the WMF included in the grant press release gave $3,421,672 to cover costs, but the WMF acknowledged it had only received $250,000 in financing as of mid-February 2016. [19]
The WMF initially published only portions of the grant documentation, [20] but eventually made the grant agreement available on February 11, 2016, [12] and further internal documents were leaked shortly after. [2] [10] The project comprises four stages, each scheduled to take about 18 months: Discovery, Advisory, Community and Extension. [7] The initial stage of the project is budgeted to cost $2.5 million, [21] potentially running into the tens of millions. [1] After a year, the WMF will evaluate the development and at the close of the grant, the team will have set the plans for the project to continue to the second stage, according to the grant document. [7] It will take at least six years to complete, says WMF. [2] According to the grant document, the heads of the team were listed as Lila Tretikov , Wes Moran and Tomasz Finc. [22]

Function and purpose
KE will be open and transparent about how a piece of information originates and allow access to metadata , says WMF. [5] It will also have no advertisements, protect user privacy, and emphasize community building and sharing of information. [5] KE will draw information from Wikipedia-related projects and may eventually search other sources of public information such as the U.S. Census Bureau , [6] OpenStreetMap , [23] the Digital Public Library of America , [18] and external sources like Fox News. [1] Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales and the WMF stated that KE will focus on improving search on Wikipedia and related Wikimedia projects. [2]
There was extensive debate in respect to what the KE actually is, due to WMF’s public statements differing from the leaked internal documents. [2] The leaked internal documents contradicted statements by Jimmy Wales and other Board members. [24] Leaked internal WMF documents stated the "Knowledge Engine By Wikipedia will democratize the discovery of media, news and information—it will make the Internet's most relevant information more accessible and openly curated, and it will create an open data engine that's completely free of commercial interests. Our new site will be the Internet’s first transparent search engine, and the first one that carries the reputation of Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation." [2]
KE is not intended to compete with Google Search as a universal search engine, says WMF. [6] Jimmy Wales stated that suggestions that the WMF is creating a rival to Google are "trolling", "completely and utterly false", and "a total lie". [2] [12] The grant application states that it will "create a model for surfacing high quality, public information on the internet." [2] It also advises that "commercial search engines dominate search-engine use of the internet" and states that "Google, Yahoo, or another big commercial search engine could suddenly devote resources to a similar project, which could reduce the success of the project." [2] Wales allowed that the KE might in time also include academic and open access sources in its search results . [8]
In response to media speculation, the WMF published a response clarifying its intentions: "What are we not doing? We're not building a global crawler search engine [...] Despite headlines, we are not trying to compete with other platforms, including Google. As a non-profit we are noncommercial and support open knowledge. Our focus is on the knowledge contributed on the Wikimedia projects. [...] We intend to research how Wikimedia users seek, find, and engage with content. This essential information will allow us to make critical improvements to discovery on the Wikimedia projects." [9] Matt Southern in Search Engine Journal attributed media confusion about the KE's scope to the fact that this was "quite a contrast to the original grant application documents", [9] an assessment echoed by James Vincent in The Verge , [10] Matt McGee in Search Engine Land , [25] and Jason Koebler in Vice . [26] Director of Discovery Tomasz Finc noted that "We should be clear that we are building an internal search engine, and we are not building a broad one. [1]

Controversy
Ruth McCambridge said in Nonprofit Quarterly , "Wikipedia editors have been requesting from December for the grant proposal and grant letter for a project that many surmise is a bid to remain technologically cutting-edge by the Wikimedia Foundation, but which may divert resources and attention from other pressing needs of the community." [27] Generally, large-scale WMF projects such as KE are discussed publicly with the Wikipedia community , but this did not happen with the KE project [10] as Wikipedia community volunteers were initially unaware of the existence of the KE. [2] [28] Many Wikipedians expressed outrage at what they perceived to be the secrecy around the KE project and their lack of ability to give input, according to the English Wikipedia 's community newsletter, The Signpost . [27] The lack of community involvement raised questions about WMF's commitment to transparency with the Wikipedia community. [10] Wikipedia editors noted that the KE project was not published in the WMF's publicly available annual plan. [11]
Commenting on the WMF's Executive Director Lila Tretikov 's reluctance to post the donor documents to the volunteer community, referencing privacy concerns, McCambridge sees "a major difference in culture and values assumptions" compared to previous Wikimedia practice. [27] McCambridge said that "the power of important strategic decisions" now rests "between funders and the top of the organizational hierarchy" and is "not shared with volunteer editors." [27] James Heilman , who was dismissed from the WMF's Board of Trustees in late 2015, said that while on the Board, he had pushed for greater transparency of the Knight Foundation grant documentation and its financing, [29] and suggested that his push for transparency concerning the grant had been a factor in his dismissal – a suggestion Jimmy Wales rejected as "utter fucking bullshit". [2] Tretikov eventually released the Knight Foundation grant in February 2016 which disclosed the first stage of the KE project. [27] Tretikov said that she regretted being so late in informing the Wikipedia editing community about the Knight Foundation grant. [18] In a "Discovery" meeting held on February 16, 2016, regardless of Design Manager Moiz Syed’s concerns in relation to all of the "bad press" with regard to Tretikov’s hazy approach to a foundation based on transparency, Tretikov said that "the press is wrong on issues, not necessarily bad." [15]
Longtime Wikipedia editor and journalist William Beutler told Vice Magazine ' s Jason Koebler, "Leaving aside whether a search engine is a good idea, let alone feasible, the core issue here is about transparency. The irony is that the Wikimedia Foundation failed to observe one of the movement's own core values [...]." [26] A UK Wikipedia editor Ashley van Haeften told Ars Technica via e-mail that "Lila, Jimmy, and the rest chose to keep the project and the Knight Foundation application and grant a secret until the projects were underway for six months, and even then this only came to light because it was leaked." [24] Critics say the project's roll out illustrates a disconnect and lack of understanding between a foundation that's increasingly run by people connected with Silicon Valley , and the volunteer community of editors who worry that KE may reflect a change in the WMF's focus from user-generated content to one led by automated data results. [2]
After the leaked documents, many on the Wikimedia-L mailing list were calling for Tretikov’s resignation. [14] The initial blogpost published by Tretikov and the WMF regarding the KE project still did not adequately explain why the original grant application documents appeared so much larger than merely developing an internal search engine. [13] After that blogpost, calls for Tretikov’s resignation heightened, because her employees said the WMF still was not being straightforward with the Wikipedia community. [14] "My concern is that we still aren’t communicating it clearly enough. This morning’s blog post is the truth, but not all of the truth. Namely that we had big plans in the past. It would have been much easier to say that we did have big plans, but they were ditched … there is clear evidence of something, but we still haven’t acknowledged it. We can’t deny it", Max Semenik, a Discovery team member explained to Tretikov, according to statements posted of an internal meeting on the WMF’s website. [14]
On the Wikimedia-L mailing list to the WMF's Board of Trustees, Ariel Glenn, WMF's "tech gnome", portrayed the current organization situation as "toxic". [15] The post appealed with "the one organization that has the ability to stop it, to step in and do so." [15] Glenn's list of concerns include "bad hirings, decisions in secret, dissembling and coverups about the processes that led to those decisions; refusal or inability to state a clear vision, let alone get buy-in or the involvement of staff/community in shaping that vision; restructuring the organization following these same broken processes," though it’s "not just about an [Executive Director]." [15] Caitlyn Virtue, WMF’s Director of Development, said "This is bad, and not just bad for our relationship with Knight. It’s clear that leadership did not follow our own movements’ best practices, that we don’t seem to know the way that wikimedia works. That’s a really big problem. The ripple effects of this are many and large." [15] Many WMF staff members have departed, as a result of the KE project. [30] Culminating after several weeks of crisis, [29] WMF Executive Director Tretikov resigned on February 25, 2016, as a result of the controversy. [13] [16] Former Deputy Director of the WMF Erik Möller , up to April 2015, portrayed the recent events as "very much out of control" and "a crisis." [1] Wales previously attempted to create a search engine, but Wikia Search failed in 2009. [19]
WebPage index: 00143
Korean Wikipedia
The Korean Wikipedia ( Korean : 한국어 위키백과 , translit. Han-gugeo Wikibaekgwa ) is the Korean language edition of the Wikipedia . It was founded in October 2002 and reached ten thousand articles on 4 June 2005. [1] As of 10 April 2015, it has 310,600 articles and is the 26th largest Wikipedia. [2] In April 2016, the project had 847 active editors who made at least five edits in that month.

History
The Korean Wikipedia initially used an older version of MediaWiki , the software had problems representing Hangul , which limited usage. In August 2002, the software was upgraded and started to support non-English scripts such as hangul . [3] However, Internet Explorer continued to have an encoding problem, which kept contributions to the encyclopedia low. [4] Nevertheless, from October 2002 to July 2003, the number of articles increased from 13 to 159, and in August 2003 it reached 348. Finally, in September 2003 the hangul problem was solved. From September 2003, with no accessing difficulty once the encoding error in IE was solved, the number of contributions and visits increased. Korean Wikipedia's prospects became even more optimistic following the momentum created by substantial coverage in the Korean media.
Korean Wikipedia won the Information Trust Award in the general Internet culture branch in 2005. [ citation needed ] [ importance? ]

Statistics

Hangul and Hanja
The Korean Wikipedia is written almost entirely in hangul. Hanja is only used in order to clarify certain phrases, and is usually parenthesized. There is a group, named Dajimo , that is actively working to introduce a mixed script system to the Korean Wikipedia. A request for a separate Wikipedia in mixed script, however, was rejected. [5]

Dialects
There are two major standards in the Korean language, the South Korea standard, and the North Korea standard. North Koreans are underrepresented on the Korean Wikipedia, due to North Korean censorship of the Internet in North Korea . Therefore, most users of the Korean Wikipedia are South Koreans and most articles are written in the South Korean style. The official name of the Wikipedia is 한국어 위키백과 Hangugeo Wiki-baekgwa . Hangugeo is the name for the Korean language in South Korea, and baekgwa is a clipped form of 백과사전 baekgwasajeon "encyclopedia".

Services derived from Korean Wikipedia
Businesses heavily make use of Korean Wikipedia in various ways, for its license, the Creative Commons Attribution Share-Alike License (CC BY-SA), allows modification and distribution for commercial purpose.
Empas integrated Korean Wikipedia database in its search since 11 August 2005. [6] The feature to search Korean Wikipedia using a mobile phone with a wireless Internet connection through Nate was available to the subscribers of SK Telecom from 6 July 2007. [7] Since 21 August, Daum mirrored Korean Wikipedia and English Wikipedia on its portal, [8] and Naver also started to present the search results from Korean and English Wikipedia prior to others from 11 January 2008. [9]

Pressures from right-wing establishments
The South Korean right-wing youth group story K favors a proactive involvement of right-wing media establishments for the Korean Wikipedia. [10] [11]
Despite the South Korean conservative New Rights establishments pressured the government to approve the term, liberal democracy , to represent South Korea in Korean history textbooks, the head of the National Institute of Korean History , Lee Tae-jin (이태진), proposed to use this political term by citing the Korean version of Wikipedia as a main source. [12]

Gallery

Notes

External links
WebPage index: 00144
Esperanto Wikipedia
The Esperanto Wikipedia ( Esperanto : Vikipedio en Esperanto , IPA: [vikipeˈdio en espeˈɾanto] or Esperanta Vikipedio [espeˈɾanta vikipeˈdio] ) is the Esperanto edition of Wikipedia , which was started on 11 May 2001, [1] [2] [3] alongside the Basque Wikipedia . With over 239,000 articles as of June 2016 [update] , it is the 32nd- largest Wikipedia as measured by the number of articles, [4] and the largest Wikipedia in a constructed language . [5]

Origin and influence of the Esperanto Wikipedia
Chuck Smith , an American Esperantist , is considered to be Esperanto Wikipedia's founder. The encyclopedia started off when he imported the 139 articles of the Enciklopedio Kalblanda by Stefano Kalb, which took him three weeks following November 15, 2001. [6] Later on, he undertook a journey to Europe with the goal of popularizing Wikipedia among the speakers of Esperanto in European countries. [7] For instance, already in November 2002 he gave a talk about Wikipedia at the 10th Conference on the Application of Esperanto in Science and Technology in Dobřichovice ( Czech Republic ).
Esperanto speakers have also been involved in the founding of several other language versions of the Wikipedia ( Czech , Slovak , Ossetian , Swahili ). The introduction of support for the Esperanto alphabet by Brion Vibber , an Esperanto speaker and later Wikimedia Foundation 's first employee, in January 2002 has paved the way for alphabets of languages other than English and initiated the transition of the whole Wikipedia to Unicode . [8] [9]

Quality of the Esperanto Wikipedia
As of August 2014, the Esperanto Wikipedia has 252 articles of feature quality ( Elstaraj artikoloj ) [11] and a further 197 considered worth reading ( Legindaj artikoloj ). [12] Weekly community projects include a Collaboration of the Week ( Kunlaboraĵo de la semajno ) [13] which improves neglected articles and an Article of the Week featuring good-quality articles on the front page. The Esperanto community is a frequent contributor to the Meta project, Translation of the week .
According to the List of Wikipedias by sample of articles at Meta, a list based on List of articles every Wikipedia should have , Esperanto ranks 36th, lacking almost none of the list of vital articles, but having in general relatively short articles.
On 18 November 2008, the Esperanto Wikipedia implemented the Flagged revisions extension.
As of February 2012, The Esperanto Wikipedia has the 5th greatest number of articles per speaker among Wikipedias with over 100,000 articles, and ranks 11th overall. [14] These figures were based on Ethnologue 's estimate of 2,000,000 Esperanto speakers.
Due to the geographical spread of its editors (see the box on the right), the Esperanto Wikipedia may be considered the most international. In this regard it competes only with the Arabic Wikipedia , which, however, has 42.8% of its editors coming from just two countries. [10]
On 13 August 2014 Esperanto Wikipedia reached 200,000 articles.

Notability within the Esperanto community
Along with learners and other Esperantists of all levels, many very experienced Esperantists and native Esperantists have joined the project. At least three editors are members of the Academy of Esperanto , Gerrit Berveling , John C. Wells , and Bertilo Wennergren , a notable Esperanto grammarian [15] and the director of the Academy's section about Esperanto vocabulary .
Vikipedio incorporates, with permission, the content of the 1934 Enciklopedio de Esperanto and also content from several reference books and the monthly periodical Monato .
The Esperanto Wikipedia has been featured in many Esperanto news media, including a radio interview at Radio Polonia , [16] and articles at Esperanto , Kontakto , Libera Folio [17] and Raporto.info . [18] The Esperanto Wikimania , a gathering held in 2011 to celebrate the encyclopedia's 10th anniversary, has been subsidized by the host city of Svitavy ( Czech Republic ) and the Pardubice Region and covered by Czech Television . [19] [20]
Esperanto organisations like Universal Esperanto Association do not contribute to Vikipedio but support it by providing chambers at Esperanto conventions for Vikipedio presentations and trainings. At the World Esperanto Congress in Rotterdam, summer 2008, there were two Wikipedian meetups and a lecture at the Esperantology Conference. In April 2013, ELiSo ( Esperanto and Free Knowledge ) was established as one of the first Wikimedia user groups. [21]

Wikipedia handbook in Esperanto
The Esperanto Wikipedia community has created and published a 40-page "Wikipedia: Practical Handbook" ( Vikipedio: Praktika Manlibro ) which is sold on-line and at conventions. [22] The manual is intended to give new Wikipedians advice and information on how to edit Wikipedia in Esperanto. It is currently in its second printing.

Gallery
WebPage index: 00145
Armenian Wikipedia
The Armenian Wikipedia ( Armenian : Վիքիպեդիա Vīkīpedyā or Վիքիպեդիա Ազատ հանրագիտարան Wīkīpedyā Azat Hanragitaran ) is the Armenian language version of Wikipedia .
It was created in February 2003 [1] as Հայերեն Վիքիփեդիա , but started developing in 2005 [ attribution needed ] . The name was changed to Հայերեն Վիքիպեդիա on 5 April 2012. [2] [3] ։
On 2 December 2013 it had reached 200,000 articles.
It has 219,914 articles. [4] It also has about 60,432 registered contributors, including ten administrators.
With all of its current content, it is listed in List of Wikipedias in the 100,000+ category.

Language
The Armenian language used is mainly the Eastern Armenian dialect. However, the Armenian Wikipedia is inclusive, and also contains articles of interest in the Western Armenian dialect, which is predominantly spoken in the Armenian Diaspora .
Some articles have separate Eastern and Western Armenian versions. In those cases, the articles' secondary dialect is positioned at the top right corner of the article with the primary dialect. Articles in Western Armenian are also distinctly categorized here - Category: Wikipedia Articles in Western Armenian .

History

Name change
The Armenian Wikipedia was originally named Վիքիփեդիա ( Vikʻipʻedia ) but in 2012 it was renamed Վիքիպեդիա ( Vikʻipedia ). The letter պ ( pē ) replaced the letter փ ( pʻiwr ) to reflect the unaspirated pronunciation used in the Eastern Armenian dialect, the official form of the language as used in Armenia; however, the revised spelling is not consistent with the Western Armenian transliteration. The discussion and decision to make the change were done in two phases, [5] [6] and the change was put in effect on 5 April 2012.

"One Armenian, One Article"
On 24 March 2014, both Wikimedia Armenia and the Human Factor ( Armenian : «Մարդկային գործոն» ) launched a promotion called "One Armenian, One Article" ( Armenian : «Մեկ հայ՝ մեկ հոդված» ). This mass-media campaign was promoted on several Armenian television stations.
The plan aimed to increase both the quantity and quality of Armenian Wikipedia articles. In addition to expanding the Armenian language's presence on Wikipedia, it would raise the level of each article to reflect the rich history of the Armenian people as well as their current, flourishing position in the contemporary world.
The project hoped to organize Wiki-meetings of representatives of science , art and other subjects with the aim of familiarizing them with the Wiki-culture and helping them in making their own contributions in the development of the Armenian Wikipedia. The campaign would be conducted with training and incentive programs, as well as joint activities with educational and cultural institutions and organizations.
The "One Armenian, One Article" campaign was shown on the Human Factor TV program that aired on 24 March 2014 on Armenia TV. The campaign was subsequently popularised by many other information agencies. [7] [8]
There was a news conference on the "One Armenian, One Article" All-Armenian project on 27 March 2014. [9]
In July 2014, BBC News reported that as a result of the campaign, the Armenian Wikipedia appeared to be outnumbering its neighboring countries with its more than 125,000 pages, compared to approximately 102,000 pages on the Azerbaijani Wikipedia and almost 84,000 pages on the Georgian Wikipedia .
The campaign was supported by the Armenian government as well. Education Minister Armen Ashotyan publicly stated, "One Armenian, One Article – I will definitely do that and believe you will too." Defense Minister Seyran Ohanyan said that he created a Wikipedia entry on the Armenian army. [10] [11]

Gallery
WebPage index: 00146
Hebrew Wikipedia
The Hebrew Wikipedia ( Hebrew : ויקיפדיה: האנציקלופדיה החופשית ‎‎; Wikipedya: ha-entsiklopedya ha-ḥofshit , IPA: [wikiˈpedja ha(ʔ)entsikloˈpedja haχofˈʃit] ) is the Hebrew language edition of Wikipedia . This edition was started on 11 May 2001 [1] and contains more than 207,000 articles as of May 2017.

About

Timeline history

Features
The Hebrew Wikipedia has several topics on which organized article writing projects were held, among them Wikitort - an academic project to write original articles about tort law , [2] PhysiWiki - a project to write and improve articles about Physics with the cooperation of Weizmann Institute of Science , [3] and ongoing academic projects. [4]
Another major area of work is Jewish history and the History of Israel . Such articles often include original photos taken by the writers. In 2006 the Elef Millim project [5] (English: Thousand Words project) was created; its purpose is to enrich Wikipedia with free images. As a part of this project, groups of Israeli Wikipedians meet for field trips in various places in Israel in order to take pictures and bring members of the Hebrew Wikipedia community together.
Hebrew spelling is a matter of debate. The standards published by the Academy of the Hebrew Language are not meticulously followed in common usage, so the Hebrew Wikipedia community decides on problematic cases of spelling by discussions or polls for the sake of consistency within the project. When technically possible, spelling decisions are periodically enforced using automatic replacement by a bot . [6]

Other information
Over the years, Hebrew Wikipedia has become one of the most popular sources of information for Israelis . In a 2012 qualitative research , 51 Israeli teachers of different grades were asked about their use habits of Wikipedia, and most of them responded that they don't use it as the main source for teaching, and instead search for other reliable websites on Google. Hebrew Wikipedia's requirements for notability standards are relatively very strict.
Hebrew Wikipedia also conducts yearly competitions, sometimes with the assistance of the Wikimedia foundation .
Hebrew Wikipedia users have turned the website into a more socially connected place. Sometimes, users meet up for a picnic , or edit alongside their family members. Currently, 76% of the editors are men, and 23% are women.

2010 Knesset meeting
On the occasion of the 100,000 articles milestone, the Science and Technology Committee of the Knesset (Israeli parliament) invited Wikipedia contributors and users to the 2 February 2010 morning meeting, to join in a debate about Wikipedia and other open-source resources. Some Wikipedia contributors at the meeting criticized "the lack of government cooperation with their efforts to compile a free online Hebrew-language encyclopedia," as well as sharing complaints from Wikipedia editors abroad that since the Israel Defense Forces does not release photos for free redistribution on the Internet, the sole source of available pictures for entries such as the Gaza War and the 2006 Lebanon War are the Palestinians . [7]

Comparisons with other language editions
In July 2006, Hebrew Wikipedia had one of the highest amounts of bytes per article, and the highest of all editions on Wikipedia with over 20,000 articles. [8]
Whereas the English Wikipedia requires a general consensus for deleting articles (hence deletion discussion is not considered to be a voting process), the Hebrew Wikipedia has adopted a policy of deletion upon a 55% majority, with no minimum number of votes. [9] In these votes, only registered users with one month seniority and at least 100 edits in the article, image, category or template namespaces in the past 90 days can vote.

Strict inclusion criteria
Adding on the aforementioned, comparing to English Wikipedia, Hebrew Wikipedia is much more conservative, regarding what types of content may be in it [10] - even when complying with all the basic guidelines for good encyclopedic writing. [11] [12]
The inclusion criteria are detailed under the "principles and guidelines" page. [13] Some examples:
List articles are rare in general in Hebrew Wikipedia. In particular, lists of TV series episodes are not accepted, even as part of the articles on the series.
Other fairly controversial topics are articles of small schools and other minor educational institutions. [19]

See also
WebPage index: 00147
Slovene Wikipedia
The Slovene Wikipedia ( Slovene : Slovenska Wikipedija ) is the Slovene-language edition of the free online encyclopedia Wikipedia . It has been active since 26 February 2002. In July 2007, it has reached 50,000 articles. As of May 2017, it has about 156,000 articles.
Wikipedia is a widely used reference work and one of the most visited social networking services by users from Slovenia , but official internet usage statistics don't distinguish between Wikipedia editions, analyzing only the base domain wikipedia.org. [1] In most cases, the Slovene-language edition gets a passing note of its existence in media reports about Wikipedia in general. [2] [3] However, as a relatively large and freely accessible body of structured knowledge, Slovene Wikipedia has been used, as an example, for building text corpora for the purpose of training linguistic software [4] and analyzing Slovene literary authors' web presence. [5] There are several successful collaboration projects with professors at the University of Ljubljana , using content creation by students as a teaching method. [6]
Active Wikipedians from Slovenia have also been featured in discussions about Wikipedia (both general and Slovene-language specific) in national media. [7] [8]

Milestones
WebPage index: 00148
Latin Wikipedia
The Latin Wikipedia ( Latin : Vicipaedia Latina ) is the Latin language edition of Wikipedia . The number of articles reached 125,669 on 12 December 2016. [1] As of May 2017, it has about 127,000 articles . While all primary content is in Latin, in discussions modern languages such as English , Italian , French , German or Spanish are often used, since many users ( usores ) find this easier.
Professional Latinists have observed a gradual improvement in the encyclopedia: according to Robert Gurval , chairman of the UCLA classics department, [2] "the articles that are good are in fact very good," though some contributors do not write the language perfectly.

Modern vocabulary and coining policies
The Latin Wikipedia began dominated by topics from classical history, but beginning in 2006 a group of new contributors greatly expanded the coverage of 20th-century topics, such as pop culture and technology . [2]
The official policy of Vicipaedia is that neologisms and user coinings aren't allowed ("Noli fingere!" Latin for "Don't coin/make up things"). [3] In order to deal with concepts that did not exist in Classical or Mediaeval Latin , terms from modern Latin sources are used, such as botanical Latin , scientific Latin , 18th- and 19th-century Latin language encyclopedias and books, the official Vatican dictionary of modern Latin, [4] as well as current Latin newspapers and radio shows, such as Ephemeris [5] and Radio Bremen. [6]
As in any language with a broad international character, often more than one correct term exists for a given concept (just as in English a certain car part is called a "bonnet" by British speakers but a "hood" by Americans). In Latin the existence of multiple synonyms is even more prevalent since the language has been in continuous use over a wide geographical area for over 2000 years. Sometimes the same concept is represented by different terms in classical, medieval, scientific and modern Latin. In general Vicipaedia adopts the oldest or classical term for the page name, with redirects from any others; major alternatives are listed in the article with footnote references. There is often lively debate among editors about shades of meaning. The practice of avoiding invented words and giving references for alternative terms agrees well with the general Wikipedia insistence on verifiability and the rule against original research.
Many universities and other institutions [7] have official Latin names. In fields where Latin is the current standard language, Vicipaedia normally adopts official names as pagenames, even if they belong to scientific or technical, rather than to classical Latin. This applies to:
When occasionally a term for a modern concept cannot be found, the customary practice is to do exactly what most other languages do: to borrow an international word (often from a Romance language or English). Such direct borrowing was done for the particle names photon and gluon and for the unit of temperature Kelvin . The word is given a Latin morphology if this can be done easily, or, if not, used unchanged in its foreign form; but many international words already have a Latin or Graeco-Latin appearance, because Greek and Latin have always served as sources of new scientific terminology.

Orthography
Vicipaedia made it policy [8] for all to follow the more widespread contemporary late 20th century orthographical habit of distinguishing u (pronounced as [u]) from v (pronounced as [w] in classical Latin and as [v] in Italianate Latin) but not i (pronounced as [i]) from i-consonant (pronounced as [j] in both classical and Italianate Latin). This orthographical practice was not without detractors who claimed that it is a copy of the Italian spelling reform in which the i/j distinction is lost but the u/v distinction is maintained. [9]
The logo on the Vicipaedia main page reads "VICIPÆDIA", displaying a ligature "æ". However, in accordance with contemporary practice, Vicipaedia does not use ligatures in its articles for the diphthongs written ae (" Æ ", "æ") and oe (" Œ ", "œ"), even though in Latin a diphthong like the ae in aes is pronounced differently from an hiatus like the ae in aer , both in the classical and even more so in the Italianate pronunciation. The ligatures were adopted by the Romans to save space, and æ and œ in particular were later maintained by Latin typographers to distinguish the diphthong from the hiatus. Contemporary editors choose not to make this difference explicit to the reader. If Vicipaedia users prefer, however, they can activate a gadget under user preferences that automatically displays ae and oe as ligatures on the pages, although the gadget converts all cases, independently of whether they are diphthongs or hiatuses.
Vicipaedia, in common with the majority of modern printed Latin, doesn't require the marking of long vowels in words (in Latin textbooks this is usually done by adding a macron over a character, as for example, the e in stēlla .) Thus, both terr a and terr ā are written simply as terra , although the former is in the nominative case, while the latter in the ablative. The context usually makes clear which one is being used.

Gallery

See also
WebPage index: 00149
Thai Wikipedia
The Thai Wikipedia ( Thai : วิกิพีเดียภาษาไทย ) is the edition of Wikipedia in the Thai language started on December 25, 2003. As of July 13, 2012, it has more than 74,561 articles with 145,919 registered users. As of October 2007, Wikipedia (all languages combined) was ranked 26th in Alexa Top Sites Thailand . [1]
On January 31, 2006 Thai Wikipedia was first recognized along with English Wikipedia by a press coverage. In 2007 there is a thesis under the name Thai Wikipedia and Communicating Knowledge to the Public by a graduate student from the Faculty of Fine and Applied Arts, Chulalongkorn University .
Thai Wikipedia was also mentioned during a public forum in 2005-2006 Thai political crisis saying that Thai people should read all facts about Thaksin Shinawatra , the former prime minister. [2]
Thai Wikipedia is the second online encyclopedia in the Thai language after the Thai Junior Encyclopedia Project, which was developed under the patronage of the King of Thailand, Bhumibol Adulyadej .

Timeline

See also
WebPage index: 00150
Macedonian Wikipedia
The Macedonian Wikipedia ( Macedonian : Википедија ) is the Macedonian-language edition of Wikipedia , a free and publicly editable online encyclopedia .

Overview
This edition was started in September 2003 and has more than 84,700 articles, 208 active users, 15 administrators and 4 bureaucrats as of January 13, 2015. [1] It passed the 10,000 article mark in 2007. [2] The Macedonian Wikipedia has been featured in some Macedonian newspapers, such as Nova Makedonija while the project itself has been featured in a number of domestic news agencies .

Macedonian Wikipedia traffic analysis

Notes and references

See also

External links
WebPage index: 00151
Nepal Bhasa Wikipedia
The Nepal Bhasa Wikipedia , is the Newar-language version of Wikipedia , run by the Wikimedia Foundation . Nepal Bhasa Wikipedia has currently 70,000 articles. [1] Nepal bhasa is the mother tongue language of Newars of Nepal. Newars are culturally rich ethnic group in Nepal.
WebPage index: 00152
Albanian Wikipedia
The Albanian Wikipedia ( Albanian : Wikipedia shqip ) is the Albanian language edition of Wikipedia started on October 12, 2003. As of May 25, 2017 the Wikipedia has 65,140 articles [1] and is the 73rd largest Wikipedia. [1]

Article growth
WebPage index: 00153
Cantonese Wikipedia
The Cantonese Wikipedia ( Chinese : 粵文維基百科 ; Jyutping : Jyut6man4wai4gei1baak3fo1 ) is the Cantonese -language edition of Wikipedia , run by the Wikimedia Foundation . It started on 25 March 2006.

History
Cantonese, a major variety of the Chinese language originating in Guangzhou , is the lingua franca in the southern provinces of Guangdong and Guangxi , and is one of the official languages of Hong Kong and Macau . Cantonese has the most well-developed written form of all Chinese varieties apart from the standard-Mandarin variety and Classical Chinese.
With the advent of the computer and standardization of character sets specifically for Cantonese, many printed materials in predominantly Cantonese speaking areas of the world cater to their population using these written Cantonese characters.

Naming
The Cantonese name of Wikipedia was decided in April 2006, following a vote. In a similar manner to the existing Chinese Wikipedia , the name of Cantonese Wikipedia ( simplified Chinese : 维基百科 ; traditional Chinese : 維基百科 ; Jyutping : wai4 gei1 baak3 fo1 ) means "Wiki Encyclopedia". The Chinese transcription of "Wiki" is composed of two characters: 維 / 维 , whose ancient sense refers to "ropes or webs connecting objects", and alludes to the Internet; and 基 , meaning "foundations of a building", or "fundamental aspects of things in general". The name can be interpreted as "the encyclopedia that connects the fundamental knowledge of humanity".
The discussion in 2006 also decided the Cantonese name of the word "Cantonese" in the wiki. The result was " 粵語 ". In a vote from August to September 2013 it was decided that the name be changed to " 粵文 ", which literally means "Cantonese inscription".

ISO code
At the time of establishment, there was no ISO code for Cantonese. Thus, zh-yue was used as the domain. However, some did not like the idea, as Yue is the Mandarin name of Cantonese. The native name is Yuet. Cantonese preserves entering tone while Mandarin does not. Some suggested using Cantonese instead, but zh-yue was chosen as the final domain name.
The ISO code for Cantonese is yue . Using the ISO code instead of current domain has been submitted as a proposal to Wikimedia, but as of yet, no action has been taken to implement this change.

Native name
There are various native names of Cantonese, namely Gwóng jāu wá ( 廣州話 ), Gwóng fú wá ( 廣府話 ), Gwóng dūng wá ( 廣東話 ) and Yuht yúh ( 粵語 ). Cantonese Wikipedians thus use the four names interchangeably, namely 廣州話維基百科 , 廣府話維基百科 , 廣東話維基百科 and 粵語維基百科 . There is no consensus on the native name.

Community
Cantonese flourishes in the southern provinces of Guangdong and Guangxi , as well as in Hong Kong and Macau where it is listed as one of their official languages. Some Cantonese speakers are native to Vietnam , Thailand , Singapore , Malaysia , Indonesia , Australia , Canada , the United States and United Kingdom .
Hong Kong owns the largest written Cantonese assets and does not have tight internet censorship . Fittingly, most editors are Hong Kongers .
Starting from a small community, Cantonese Wikipedians have formed a consensus to follow, by default, the policies, guidelines, and customs of the English Wikipedia , wherever they are applicable. This consensus has provided stability and allows Wikipedians to concentrate on content.
As of 16 May 2017, the Cantonese Wikipedia has over 1,128,662 edits, over 53,946 articles, and more than 136,398 registered users, 10 of whom are administrators.

Script
There are two different scripts of written Cantonese, Traditional Chinese and Simplified Chinese . Cantonese Wikipedia uses Traditional following Hong Kong and Macau in their traditional usage. Some Cantonese-specific characters can only be written in Traditional Chinese. Simplified characters are converted to Traditional ones manually.
For Simplified character users, an online converter to Simplified Chinese is provided for viewing the content.

Other Chinese-language Wikipedias
Cantonese is a member of the group of Chinese varieties . Different Wikipedias have been established for different Chinese varieties (see below). The Cantonese Wikipedia is the third largest in this family.

See also
WebPage index: 00154
List of Wikipedias
This is a list of the different language editions of Wikipedia ; as of 26 May 2017 there are 296 Wikipedias of which 285 are active.

Wikipedia edition codes
Each Wikipedia has a code, which is used as a subdomain below wikipedia.org. Interlanguage links are sorted by that code. The codes represent the language codes defined by ISO 639-1 and ISO 639-3 , and the decision of which language code to use is usually determined by the IETF language tag policy. Wikipedias also vary by how thinly they slice dialects and variants; for example, the English Wikipedia includes most modern varieties of English (American English, Indian English, South African English, etc.), but does not include other related languages such as Scots , or Anglo-Saxon , all of which have separate Wikipedias. The Spanish Wikipedia includes both Peninsular Castilian and Latin American Spanish ; Malay Wikipedia includes a large number of Malay languages; and so on.
Differences between the ISO mappings and Wikipedia codes include:
Additionally, Wikipedias vary in wikt:orthography at times. Chinese Wikipedia automatically translates from modern Mandarin Chinese into four standard forms: Mainland China and Singapore in simplified Chinese characters, and Taiwan and Hong Kong / Macau in traditional Chinese characters. Belarussian , however, has a separate Wikipedia for the 'normative' orthography (be) and Taraškievica (be-tarask).

List
An approximation to the number of active users is given in powers of ten (see common logarithm ): so "5" means at least 10,000, "4" means at least 1000, "3" means at least 100, and so on.

Detailed list

Notes

Grand total

See also
WebPage index: 00155
Scots Wikipedia
The Scots Wikipedia ( Scots : Scots Wikipaedia ) is the Scots language version of Wikipedia , and is run by the Wikimedia Foundation . It was established on 23 June 2005, and first reached 1,000 articles in February 2006, and 5,000 articles in November 2010. As of May 2017, it has about 45,000 articles . [1] The Scots Wikipedia is one of five Wikipedias written in an Anglic language , the others being the English Wikipedia , the Simple English Wikipedia , the Pitkern-Norfuk Wikipedia and the Old English Wikipedia, although the last is largely unintelligible to native English or Scots speakers.

Reception
By February 2008, the site contained 2,200 articles, [2] and had already outpaced other Wikipedias, such as Maori Wikipedia and Kashmiri Wikipedia . Reported reception, however, was mixed, with Scotland on Sunday ' s literary editor describing it as "convoluted at best, and an absolute parody at worst," [3] while Ted Brocklebank , culture spokesman for the Scottish Tories , described it as a "cheap attempt at creating a language." [3] However, Dr Chris Robinson, director of the Dictionary of the Scots Language , spoke more positively of the site, noting: "The fact it is doing well gives a lie to all those people who decry Scots and try to do it down." [3] And Jane C Hu of Slate.com describes how it is regarded as a "joke" by some and goes on to debate whether Scots is really its own language or just a dialect of English, and therefore whether someone who proposed to delete the Wikipedia because it was a "joke project" was right or not. [4]

See also
WebPage index: 00156
Aragonese Wikipedia
The Aragonese Wikipedia (or Biquipedia ) is the Aragonese language edition of the Web -based free-content encyclopedia Wikipedia . The project was started on 21 July 2004. [1] As of 1 April 2015, this edition has over 30,000 articles [2] and is the 91st largest Wikipedia by number of articles. [3] The Aragonese Wikipedia is classified in the 4th place of Wikipedias by articles per population. [4]

History
After its foundation on 21 July 2004, the Aragonese Wikipedia reached 1,000 articles on 30 December 2005 after the creation of an article about Panama City and its community produced a special logo to commemorate the event. [1]
The community of Aragonese-speaking Wikipedians issued a special commemorative logo for their 5,000th article (which was about the Aragonese monastery San Juan de la Peña ) on 29 December 2006. [1] [5]
On 21 August 2008 the Aragonese Wikipedia community celebrated its 10,000th article (which was about the Sant Per de Ciresa monastery in the Aragonese municipality of Valle de Hecho ) [1] [5] by producing a special logo.
The Aragonese Wikipedia reached 20,000 articles on 3 April 2010 after the creation of an article about Mesegar de Tajo . [1]
On 16 March 2011 the Aragonese Wikipedia community celebrated its 25,000th article (which was about the Sibirana castle ) [1] by producing a special logo.
WebPage index: 00157
Bishnupriya Manipuri Wikipedia
The Bishnupriya Manipuri Wikipedia is the Bishnupriya Manipuri language edition of Wikipedia . Launched in November 12, 2006, [1] It currently has 25,071 articles, making it the 102nd largest Wikipedia by article count. It has 16,034 registered users, where 15 are active. [2]
WebPage index: 00158
Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia
The Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia ( Egyptian Arabic : ويكيبيديا مصرى ‎‎ [wikiˈbedjæ ˈmɑsˤɾi, wikiˈpidjæ] , ⟨wykybydya mṣry⟩ ) is the Egyptian Arabic version of Wikipedia , a free, open-content encyclopaedia. This Wikipedia primarily acts as an alternative to the Arabic Wikipedia in favor of speakers of the Egyptian dialect . [2] It was the first Wikipedia written in a dialect of Arabic. [3]
This edition of Wikipedia has 16,696 articles and 86,312 registered users, including 6 administrators.

History
The Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia was proposed on 30 March 2008 and started as a developing project on 2 April 2008 in the Wikimedia Incubator . [3] A Wikipedian with the username Ghaly was the founder of the Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia. [4] Dr. Ivan Panović, the author of "The Beginnings of Wikipedia Masry," described Ghaly as the spiritus movens of the Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia. [5] Florence Devouard , the former president of the Wikimedia Foundation , stated that the foundation wanted Wikipedians to participate in their native languages. [2]
The proposal was accepted in July 2008 , [3] and the announcement was made on the first day of Wikimania 2008 in Alexandria . [2] [6] On 24 November 2008, the Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia was officially launched, [3] and the Incubator articles were transferred to the new domain .
In 2009, the Wikipedia had 4,000 articles, and Wikipedians participating came from within and outside Egypt. [2] By 2010 the Masry Wikipedia had almost 6,000 articles. That year, Panović wrote that "The number of active contributors is still rather small, yet their entries seem to be growing." [3] At the time many of the articles were very short articles, or "stubs". [3] Panović wrote that editors of the Masry Wikipedia had a tendency of creating new articles "just for the sake of increasing their number in hopes of expanding them later." [7]

Origin
The origin of the proposal for the Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia is based on the active interest of some Egyptian Wikipedians in contributing articles, especially on the Arabic Wikipedia , [8] as they constitute large group of the serious contributors in that Wikipedia. [2]
The idea behind the creation of the Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia is to have an encyclopaedia that is written in the language that Egyptians use in their everyday lives. [9] It is hoped this will be much easier for Egyptians to read and encourage more Egyptians to contribute to Wikipedia. [2]
Panović stated that "it is clear that Masry Wikipedians are the proponents of Egyptian territorial nationalism of a kind that sets itself apart from Arab or Islamic nationalisms, seeking to carve out a specifically Egyptian identity" and he argued that therefore there was an "ease" in which the Egyptian Arabic Wikipedians "seem to embrace and promote some radical and even erroneous ideas about language." [10] Ghaly is a Christian , and Panović stated that "judging by their contributions and/or user pages" several of those involved are also Christian; Panović stated that minority groups tend to be more active in identity politics. [5]

Development
The International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO) classification of Egyptian Arabic under the language code arz is one of the arguments used by Egyptian Arabic Wikipedians for considering Masry an independent language. [11] The project uses the Cairene -style Egyptian Arabic. [12]
Ghaly, in the Wikimedia Foundation proposal page for the Egyptian Wikipedia, stated that his view of the Masry Wikipedia was that it would be "written in layperson terms and a mixture between Egyptian slang and simple Arabic", conveying "the information to speakers of Egyptian Arabic in a way similar to what Wikipedia Simple English is doing currently in comparison to Wikipedia English ." [11] In response some Wikipedians criticised the proposal stating that it would be a Simple Arabic Wikipedia. Ghaly responded, arguing that he did not intend to actually start a simple Arabic Wikipedia. [11]
As of October 2013 [update] , the Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia has over 11,000 articles, and continues to grow. In addition there is a project to develop an Egyptian Arabic Wiktionary , which is in the development phase as a project on Wikimedia incubator. [ citation needed ]

Reaction
The Egyptian variant of Wikipedia was controversially received; supporters pointed to the number of Wikipedias written in regional languages and argued that Egyptian Arabic was a widely spoken variant of Arabic, while opponents perceived the creation of the Egyptian language Wikipedia as an attack on the Arabic Wikipedia and argued that Standard Arabic was the standard language for media, and the use of a regional language version was anachronistic. [2] [6] [9] [13]
The Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia has been subject to controversy from the start, causing arguments between supporters and opponents. [14] There have been lengthy discussions before the approval of the proposal. Also, there were discussions on other websites apart from meta.Wikimedia. [15] [16] [17] This was also based on the differences in definition of a language and a dialect. [18] This is a result of diglossia in Egypt, where the written language is a different dialect than the language used daily, [19] which is not frequently written, although a certain amount of literature (particularly plays and poetry) exists written in the Egyptian dialect in Egypt. [20] [21] [22]

Support
The proposal has been supported by many users and gained the approval of the language committee on Wikimedia. The wiki has less than 5 active editors who did lead to an increase in the number of articles. [ citation needed ]
Amira Samir of the Al-Ahram Hebdo reported that some Egyptians on the internet did not have a problem with the project, arguing that the Wikimedia Foundation was an independent body and therefore the Egyptian government could not force the inclusion or exclusion of any particular dialect. [2]

Opposition
Discussions and criticism has occurred in some Facebook groups and several blogs and forums. [5] Samir stated that many online users believed that the Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia was an attack on the Arabic language. [2] The primary criticism of the Wikipedia Masry involves the belied that a "degradation" of Arabic occurred when someone writes in a dialect. Panović argues that the criticism is "grounded in folk belief about language" and therefore it is a "futile task" to examine the arguments from a linguistic point of view. [5] According to Panović, many of the critics took note that many involved with the Egyptian Arabic Wikipedia were Christian and that they perceived the project to be antagonistic against the Arab identity and Islam. [5] Panović wrote that "It almost goes without saying there are also those who see in Wikipedia Masry yet another Jewish plot ." [5] According to Samir, some critics argued that the Egyptian Arabic language has a lack of rules and variations of meanings in words, and so it is an unsuitable language for an encyclopedia. [2]
Opposition to this version of Wikipedia has been strong during the proposal stage; opposition continued after the project officially launched [23] [24] including campaigns on Facebook . [ citation needed ] Some of these campaigns encouraged users to vandalize the Egyptian Wikipedia. The main point which the opposition focuses on is that Egyptian Arabic is not a language, [25] [ citation needed ] suggesting that the effort should be directed to development of Arabic Wikipedia . [26] The effectiveness of these campaigns remains to be seen, as the Wikipedia articles are still being developed and number of users is increasing. [ citation needed ]

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00159
Sanskrit Wikipedia
Sanskrit Wikipedia ( Sanskrit : संस्कृतविकिपीडिया ) (also known as sawiki ) is the Sanskrit edition of Wikipedia , a free , web-based , collaborative , multilingual encyclopedia project supported by the non-profit Wikimedia Foundation . Its five thousand articles have been written collaboratively by volunteers around the world, with major concentration of contributors in India and Nepal .
Founded in December 2003, it reached five thousand articles by August 2011. [1] [2] [3]
The Sanskrit Wikipedia Community also participated in a project named Tell us about your Wikipedia , [4] and Community news from Sanskrit Wikipedia also came on WikiPatrika, a community-written and community-edited newspaper, covering stories, events and reports related to Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation sister projects in India. [1]
As of August 2016, it has 10,177 articles and is the 132th largest version of Wikipedia. [5] The Times of India considered that "Sanskrit was making a comeback, thanks to Wikipedia community" [6] Mother India considered the Sanskrit Wikipedia as a "wonderful learning tool" [7]

Early history
One of the earliest snapshots of the home page, dated 1 June 2004, can be seen at the earlier archives of Sanskrit Wikipedia. [8] The earliest article still available on Sanskrit Wikipedia's site is apparently Damana dīva , dated July 9, 2004, however the first article was made on March 21, 2004. [9] [10]
The number of articles dropped from the 1,000-article mark to only 600 in August 2005 after nearly half were deleted; many of the deletions were due to the articles being in English. [11] The Sanskrit Wikipedia reached 9,405 articles as of December 12, 2013.

Collaboration with Samskrita Bharati
Sanskrit Wikipedia has a collaboration with Samskrita Bharati , a non-profit organisation working to revive Sanskrit. [1] The collaboration efforts started in the Wikipedia Academy organized in Bangalore on Jan 23, 2010. That Wikipedia Academy was also the first in India.
There were 11 Sanskrita Bharathi participants at the Academy. They were introduced to Wikipedia and contributing to Wikipedia content and were helped in this by a team of roughly 3 Wikipedians .
Later the first Sanskrit Wiki workshop was held in Sanskrit Bharati's office at Bangalore for an audience of 20 participants. The presentation was intended to give a basic working knowledge of Wikipedia and its interface. [1]
A second workshop was held at the same location on March 26, 2011 for another 15 participants from software companies and the Om Shantidham Gurukulam . [1]

Other collaborations
Through an initiative by Gujarat University 's Department of Sanskrit, around 150 Sanskrit teachers from different colleges in Gujarat gathered in July 2012 to add materials to the Sanskrit Wikipedia through a two-day-long workshop held titled Sanskrit Wikipedia — Introduction and Expectations . [12]
WebPage index: 00160
Sindhi Wikipedia
Sindhi Wikipedia ( Sindhi : سنڌي وڪيپيڊيا , Urdu سندھی ویکیپیڈیا ) is a free encylclopedia, started in 6th February 2006, is the Sindhi language edition of Wikipedia , a free, open-content encyclopedia. It has 7,836 [1] articles. [2] Since 2014, the encyclopedia has experienced an overall increase in content. [3]

Milestones
WebPage index: 00161
Ripuarian Wikipedia
The Wikipedia of Ripuarian languages ( Colognian : Wikkipedija en Ripoarisch Platt ) is the Ripuarian edition of Wikipedia . It was started July 6, 2005 as WiKoelsch on a private server, and converted to an official Wikipedia during April 2006. With about a million people [1] who would in theory be able to contribute, it is one of the small ones. Since both the use of Ripuarian, and the population capable of using a Ripuarian language, are at a decrease, it is also an endangered language Wikipedia. The total number of edits on this Wikipedia is 1,599,384.

History

Preparation phase
The first discussions about a Wikipedia in Colognian in the first place, or all Ripuarian languages on second thought, started 2004 in the German Wikipedia . [2] [3] Ripuarian languages are spoken mainly in the District Cologne in the South-West of North Rhine-Westphalia in Germany and smaller adjacent areas in Rhineland-Palatinate , Belgium , and the Netherlands .
During the first half of 2005, the idea condensed and a first small group of contributors were willing to try it. One of them installed MediaWiki on his own server and made it available under the domain wikoelsch.dergruenepunk.de for everyone willing to contribute to it at July 6, 2005. After a phase of initial silence, slightly more than 1000 pages were created in the remainder of the year. Roughly half of them were stub pages and disambiguation pages, for instance about abbreviations.
In September 2004 already, a request had been made to create a Wikipedia for Ripuarian languages, [4] which spurred a discussion which finally led to the acceptance of the proposal by the Wikimedia Foundations board of trustees two days before Christmas in the same year. [5] Although the Wikipedia is dedicated to all Ripuarian languages, it was - pars pro toto - to be created with the identifyer ksh for the wiki and interlanguage links to it. That was a SIL code , which was later to become an ISO 639-3 code. It refers solely to the Colognian language, the biggest and best documented [6] Ripuarian variety. The ISO 639 joint advisory committee had refused to add ksh to the ISO 639-2, [7] and to create a code for the Ripuarian group at that time.
On March 24, 2005, the new wiki was set up under the domain ksh.wikipedia.org .

Transition
When the new wiki was created on the server cluster of the Wikimedia Foundation under the domain ksh.wikipedia.org and was going to be used, a series of outages of the test website delayed copying content from there. Also, it was not possible to transfer data directly from one SQL server to the other, thus the newly developed page export and import feature of MediaWiki [8] had to be used. Several bugs and deficiencies [9] were detected during the process and had to be overcome. [10] Since it was not possible to transfer user accounts and passwords, a volunteer developed and hosted a dual login web page allowing to supply two username/password pairs which were automatically verified against either wiki. If successful, a public list of user name pairs was updated, so the user continuity and proper attribution was guaranteed. [11] Towards the end of April, 2006, the Wikipedia became eventually usable with page data and its history, [12] but cleaning up various remains of the problems left behind by the transition took several more months.
The WiKoelsch wiki was kept online for quite a while. It went offline as late as early fall 2007. It is but to some degree available in the Internet Archive . [13]

Wikipedia
Though a Colognian localization of MediaWiki had already been begun during the preparation phase, it was incomplete and had in part become outdated. With the advent of the Wikipedia, a new move was made to continue collaboratively; initially in the German Wikipedia [14] and later, since mid-2006, in the Ripuarian one. [15] [16] Although it had been planned to provide at least two varieties of Ripuarian, that did not work out due to a series of mishaps. In the last days of August, 2006, only one of the localizations went online. [17]
Towards the end of the year 2006, a series of harsh and in part unnecessarily personal arguments were held about the spellings in the Wikipedia of Ripuarian languages. They led to almost two months of edit-warring [18] and an apparently non-serious proposal of a Colognian-only Wikipedia. [19] In early 2007 some regular, producive contributors withdrew. [20]
In January 9, 2009, the ksh Wikipedia was mentioned in an own short article in a local newspaper. [21]

Statistics
There are 2,832 articles on this edition of Wikipedia and a total of 10,252 pages. Among all of the Wikipedias, it has the highest article depth, at 1071, higher than the English Wikipedia 's 974.
WebPage index: 00162
Zulu Wikipedia
The Zulu Wikipedia is the Zulu language edition of Wikipedia , a free, open-content encyclopedia. Started in November 2003, it rose to 186 articles as of May 13, 2009, and to 766 on April 25, 2016, making it the 247th largest Wikipedia language edition (down from 221st in the previous date). [1]
It has 928 articles as of May 2017 and 14 active registered users.

History
Although it was the third African language Wikipedia to reach 100 articles, [2] progress has been slow, and it has been surpassed by numerous other African languages.
As Zulu is mostly mutually intelligible with Xhosa , both of which are Nguni languages , it is possible for articles in the Zulu edition to be easily translated into Xhosa for the Xhosa Wikipedia . Similar trans-wiki efforts have been made for Scandinavian-language editions, such as the Swedish , Norwegian , and Danish through Wikimedia 's Skanwiki collaboration tool.
In January 2012, the Zulu Wikipedia was proposed for closing, a proposal rejected on March 2012. [3]

See also
WebPage index: 00163
Virtual International Authority File
The Virtual International Authority File ( VIAF ) is an international authority file . It is a joint project of several national libraries and operated by the Online Computer Library Center (OCLC). [1] [2]
The project was initiated by the US Library of Congress (LC), the German National Library (DNB) and the OCLC on August 6, 2003. The National Library of France (BnF) joined the project on October 5, 2007. The project transitions to a service of the OCLC on April 4, 2012. [3]
The aim is to link the national authority files (such as the German Name Authority File ) to a single virtual authority file. In this file, identical records from the different data sets are linked together. A VIAF record receives a standard data number, contains the primary "see" and "see also" records from the original records, and refers to the original authority records. The data are made available online and are available for research and data exchange and sharing. Reciprocal updating uses the Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting (OAI-PMH) protocol.
The file numbers are also being added to Wikipedia biographical articles [4] and are incorporated into Wikidata .

VIAF Clusters
VIAF's clustering algorithm is run every month. As more data are added from participating libraries, clusters of authority records may coalesce or split, leading to some fluctuation in the VIAF identifier of certain authority records. [5]

Participating libraries and organizations

Libraries added for testing purposes

See also
WebPage index: 00164
Integrated Authority File
The Integrated Authority File ( German : Gemeinsame Normdatei , also known as: Universal Authority File ) or GND is an international authority file for the organisation of personal names, subject headings and corporate bodies from catalogues . It is used mainly for documentation in libraries and increasingly also by archives and museums . The GND is managed by the German National Library (German: Deutsche Nationalbibliothek ; DNB) in cooperation with various regional library networks in German-speaking Europe and other partners. The GND falls under the Creative Commons Zero (CC0) license. [1]
The GND specification provides a hierarchy of high-level entities and sub-classes, useful in library classification , and an approach to unambiguous identification of single elements. It also comprises an ontology intended for knowledge representation in the semantic web , available in the RDF format. [2]
The Integrated Authority File became operational in April 2012 and integrates the content of the following authority files which have since been discontinued:
At the time of its introduction (" GND-Grundbestand " from 5 April 2012), the GND holds 9,493,860 files, including 2,650,000 personalized names.

Types of GND high-level entities
There are seven main types of GND entities: [3]

See also
WebPage index: 00165
Gratis versus libre
The English adjective free is commonly used in one of two meanings: "for zero price" ( gratis ) and "with little or no restriction" ( libre ). This ambiguity of free can cause issues where the distinction is important, as it often is in dealing with laws concerning the use of information, such as copyright and patents .
The terms gratis and libre may be used to categorise intellectual property , particularly computer programs , according to the licenses and legal restrictions that cover them, in the free software and open source communities , as well as the broader free culture movement . For example, they are used to distinguish freeware ( software gratis ) from free software (software libre ).
Richard Stallman summarised the difference in a slogan: "Think free as in free speech, not free beer." [1]

Gratis
Gratis in English is adopted from the various Romance and Germanic languages , ultimately descending from the plural ablative and dative form of the first- declension noun grātia in Latin . It means "free of charge", "at zero price", "free", in the sense that some good or service is supplied without need for payment, even though it may have value.

Libre
Libre / ˈ l iː b r ə / in English is adopted from the various Romance languages, ultimately descending from the Latin word lībere ; its origin is closely related to liberty . It denotes "the state of being free", as in "liberty" or "having freedom". The Oxford English Dictionary (OED) considers libre to be obsolete, [2] but the word has come back into limited [a] use. Unlike gratis , libre appears in few English dictionaries, [a] although there is no other English single-word adjective signifying "liberty" exclusively, without also meaning "at no monetary cost".

"Free beer" vs "free speech" distinction 
In software development, where the cost of mass production is relatively small, it is common for developers to make software available at no cost. One of the early and basic forms of this model is called freeware . With freeware, software is licensed free of charge for regular use: the developer does not gain any monetary compensation.
With the advent of the free software movement, license schemes were created to give developers more freedom in terms of code sharing, commonly called open source or free and open-source software (called FLOSS, FOSS, or F/OSS). As the English adjective free does not distinguish between "for zero price" and "liberty", the phrases "free as in free beer" ( gratis , freeware) and "free as in free speech" ( libre , free software) were adopted. Many in the free software movement feel strongly about the freedom to use the software, make modifications, etc., whether or not this freely usable software is to be exchanged for money. Therefore, this distinction became important.
These phrases have become common, along with gratis and libre , in the software development and computer law fields for encapsulating this distinction. [b] The distinction is similar to the distinction made in political science between negative liberty and positive liberty . Like "free beer", positive liberty promises equal access by all without cost or regard to income, of a given good (assuming the good exists). Like "free speech", negative liberty safeguards the right to use of something (in this case, speech) without regard to whether in each case there is a cost involved for this use (you still have free speech even though it costs money to acquire a newspaper). [c]

Generalizing the "gratis/libre" distinction to the open-access movement
The original gratis/libre distinction concerns software (i.e., code), with which users can potentially do two [ citation needed ] kinds of things: ( 1 ) access and use it and ( 2 ) modify and re-use it . "Gratis" pertains to being able to access and use the code, without a price-barrier, and "Libre" pertains to being allowed to modify and re-use the code, without a permission barrier. The target content [ citation needed ] of the open access movement, however, is not software but published, peer-reviewed research journal article texts.
1. Source code accessibility and use. For published research articles, the case for making their text accessible free for all online (Gratis) is even stronger than it is for software code, because in the case of software, some developers may wish to give their code away for free, while others may wish to sell it, whereas in the case of published research article texts, all their authors, without exception, give them away for free: None seek or get royalties or fees from their sale. [4] [ dubious – discuss ] On the contrary, any access-denial to potential users means loss of potential research impact ( downloads, citations ) for the author's research—and researcher-authors' employment, salary, promotion and funding depends in part on the uptake and impact of their research.
2. Source code modifiability and re-use. For published research articles, the case for allowing text modification and re-use is much weaker than for software code, because, unlike software, the text of a research article is not intended for modification and re-use. (In contrast, the content of research articles is and always was intended for modification and re-use: that is how research progresses.) There are no copyright barriers to modifying, developing, building upon and re-using an author's ideas and findings, once they have been published, as long as the author and published source are credited—but modifications to the published text are another matter. Apart from verbatim quotation , scholarly/scientific authors are not in general interested in allowing other authors to create " mashups " of their texts. Researcher-authors are all happy to make their texts available for harvesting and indexing for search as well as data-mining , but not for re-use in altered form (without the permission of the author).
The formal analogy , and the generalization of the gratis/libre distinction from open software to open access, have been made. [5]

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00166
Law
Law is a system of rules that are created and enforced through social or governmental institutions to regulate behavior . [2] Law as a system helps regulate and ensure that a community show respect, and equality amongst themselves. State-enforced laws can be made by a collective legislature or by a single legislator, resulting in statutes , by the executive through decrees and regulations , or established by judges through precedent , normally in common law jurisdictions. Private individuals can create legally binding contracts , including arbitration agreements that may elect to accept alternative arbitration to the normal court process. The formation of laws themselves may be influenced by a constitution , written or tacit, and the rights encoded therein. The law shapes politics , economics , history and society in various ways and serves as a mediator of relations between people.
A general distinction can be made between (a) civil law jurisdictions (including Catholic canon law and socialist law ), in which the legislature or other central body codifies and consolidates their laws, and (b) common law systems, where judge-made precedent is accepted as binding law. Historically, religious laws played a significant role even in settling of secular matters, and is still used in some religious communities, particularly Jewish and Islamic. Islamic Sharia law is the world's most widely used religious law, and is used as the primary legal system in some countries, such as Iran and Saudi Arabia . [3]
The adjudication of the law is generally divided into two main areas referred to as (i) Criminal law and (ii) Civil law. Criminal law deals with conduct that is considered harmful to social order and in which the guilty party may be imprisoned or fined. Civil law (not to be confused with civil law jurisdictions above) deals with the resolution of lawsuits (disputes) between individuals or organizations. [4]
Law provides a rich source of scholarly inquiry into legal history , philosophy , economic analysis and sociology . Law also raises important and complex issues concerning equality, fairness, and justice . There is an old saying that ' all are equal before the law ', although Jonathan Swift argued that 'Laws are like cobwebs, which may catch small flies, but let wasps and hornets break through.' In 1894, the author Anatole France said sarcastically, "In its majestic equality, the law forbids rich and poor alike to sleep under bridges, beg in the streets, and steal loaves of bread." [5] Writing in 350 BC, the Greek philosopher Aristotle declared, "The rule of law is better than the rule of any individual ." [6] Mikhail Bakunin said: "All law has for its object to confirm and exalt into a system the exploitation of the workers by a ruling class". [7] Cicero said "more law, less justice". [8] Marxist doctrine asserts that law will not be required once the state has withered away . [9] Regardless of one's view of the law, it remains today a completely central institution.

Definition

Mainstream definitions
Numerous definitions of law have been put forward over the centuries. The Third New International Dictionary from Merriam-Webster [10] defines law as: "Law is a binding custom or practice of a community; a rule or mode of conduct or action that is prescribed or formally recognized as binding by a supreme controlling authority or is made obligatory by a sanction (as an edict, decree, rescript, order, ordinance, statute, resolution, rule, judicial decision, or usage) made, recognized, or enforced by the controlling authority."
The Dictionary of the History of Ideas published by Scribner's in 1973 defined the concept of law accordingly as: "A legal system is the most explicit, institutionalized, and complex mode of regulating human conduct. At the same time, it plays only one part in the congeries of rules which influence behavior, for social and moral rules of a less institutionalized kind are also of great importance." [11]

Whether it is possible or desirable to define law
There have been several attempts to produce "a universally acceptable definition of law". In 1972, one source indicated that no such definition could be produced. [12] McCoubrey and White said that the question "what is law?" has no simple answer. [13] Glanville Williams said that the meaning of the word "law" depends on the context in which that word is used. He said that, for example, " early customary law " and " municipal law " were contexts where the word "law" had two different and irreconcilable meanings. [14] Thurman Arnold said that it is obvious that it is impossible to define the word "law" and that it is also equally obvious that the struggle to define that word should not ever be abandoned. [15] It is possible to take the view that there is no need to define the word "law" (e.g. "let's forget about generalities and get down to cases "). [16]

History
The history of law links closely to the development of civilization . Ancient Egyptian law, dating as far back as 3000 BC, contained a civil code that was probably broken into twelve books. It was based on the concept of Ma'at , characterised by tradition, rhetorical speech, social equality and impartiality. [17] [18] By the 22nd century BC, the ancient Sumerian ruler Ur-Nammu had formulated the first law code , which consisted of casuistic statements ("if … then ..."). Around 1760 BC, King Hammurabi further developed Babylonian law , by codifying and inscribing it in stone. Hammurabi placed several copies of his law code throughout the kingdom of Babylon as stelae , for the entire public to see; this became known as the Codex Hammurabi . The most intact copy of these stelae was discovered in the 19th century by British Assyriologists, and has since been fully transliterated and translated into various languages, including English, Italian, German, and French. [19]
The Old Testament dates back to 1280 BC and takes the form of moral imperatives as recommendations for a good society. The small Greek city-state, ancient Athens , from about the 8th century BC was the first society to be based on broad inclusion of its citizenry, excluding women and the slave class. However, Athens had no legal science or single word for "law", [20] relying instead on the three-way distinction between divine law ( thémis ), human decree ( nomos ) and custom ( díkē ). [21] Yet Ancient Greek law contained major constitutional [ disambiguation needed ] innovations in the development of democracy . [22]
Roman law was heavily influenced by Greek philosophy, but its detailed rules were developed by professional jurists and were highly sophisticated. [23] [24] Over the centuries between the rise and decline of the Roman Empire , law was adapted to cope with the changing social situations and underwent major codification under Theodosius II and Justinian I . [25] Although codes were replaced by custom and case law during the Dark Ages , Roman law was rediscovered around the 11th century when medieval legal scholars began to research Roman codes and adapt their concepts. Latin legal maxims (called brocards ) were compiled for guidance. In medieval England, royal courts developed a body of precedent which later became the common law . A Europe-wide Law Merchant was formed so that merchants could trade with common standards of practice rather than with the many splintered facets of local laws. The Law Merchant, a precursor to modern commercial law, emphasised the freedom to contract and alienability of property. [26] As nationalism grew in the 18th and 19th centuries, the Law Merchant was incorporated into countries' local law under new civil codes. The Napoleonic and German Codes became the most influential. In contrast to English common law, which consists of enormous tomes of case law, codes in small books are easy to export and easy for judges to apply. However, today there are signs that civil and common law are converging. [27] EU law is codified in treaties, but develops through the precedent laid down by the European Court of Justice .
Ancient India and China represent distinct traditions of law, and have historically had independent schools of legal theory and practice. The Arthashastra , probably compiled around 100 AD (although it contains older material), and the Manusmriti (c. 100–300 AD) were foundational treatises in India, and comprise texts considered authoritative legal guidance. [28] Manu's central philosophy was tolerance and pluralism , and was cited across Southeast Asia. [29] This Hindu tradition, along with Islamic law, was supplanted by the common law when India became part of the British Empire . [30] Malaysia, Brunei, Singapore and Hong Kong also adopted the common law. The eastern Asia legal tradition reflects a unique blend of secular and religious influences. [31] Japan was the first country to begin modernising its legal system along western lines, by importing bits of the French , but mostly the German Civil Code. [32] This partly reflected Germany's status as a rising power in the late 19th century. Similarly, traditional Chinese law gave way to westernisation towards the final years of the Qing Dynasty in the form of six private law codes based mainly on the Japanese model of German law. [33] Today Taiwanese law retains the closest affinity to the codifications from that period, because of the split between Chiang Kai-shek 's nationalists, who fled there, and Mao Zedong 's communists who won control of the mainland in 1949. The current legal infrastructure in the People's Republic of China was heavily influenced by Soviet Socialist law , which essentially inflates administrative law at the expense of private law rights. [34] Due to rapid industrialisation, today China is undergoing a process of reform, at least in terms of economic, if not social and political, rights. A new contract code in 1999 represented a move away from administrative domination. [35] Furthermore, after negotiations lasting fifteen years, in 2001 China joined the World Trade Organisation . [36]

Legal theory

Philosophy
The philosophy of law is commonly known as jurisprudence. Normative jurisprudence asks "what should law be?", while analytic jurisprudence asks "what is law?" John Austin 's utilitarian answer was that law is "commands, backed by threat of sanctions, from a sovereign, to whom people have a habit of obedience". [38] Natural lawyers on the other side, such as Jean-Jacques Rousseau , argue that law reflects essentially moral and unchangeable laws of nature. The concept of "natural law" emerged in ancient Greek philosophy concurrently and in connection with the notion of justice, and re-entered the mainstream of Western culture through the writings of Thomas Aquinas , notably his Treatise on Law .
Hugo Grotius , the founder of a purely rationalistic system of natural law, argued that law arises from both a social impulse—as Aristotle had indicated—and reason. [39] Immanuel Kant believed a moral imperative requires laws "be chosen as though they should hold as universal laws of nature". [40] Jeremy Bentham and his student Austin, following David Hume , believed that this conflated the "is" and what "ought to be" problem. Bentham and Austin argued for law's positivism ; that real law is entirely separate from "morality". [41] Kant was also criticised by Friedrich Nietzsche , who rejected the principle of equality, and believed that law emanates from the will to power , and cannot be labelled as "moral" or "immoral". [42] [43] [44]
In 1934, the Austrian philosopher Hans Kelsen continued the positivist tradition in his book the Pure Theory of Law . [45] Kelsen believed that although law is separate from morality, it is endowed with "normativity", meaning we ought to obey it. While laws are positive "is" statements (e.g. the fine for reversing on a highway is €500); law tells us what we "should" do. Thus, each legal system can be hypothesised to have a basic norm ( Grundnorm ) instructing us to obey. Kelsen's major opponent, Carl Schmitt , rejected both positivism and the idea of the rule of law because he did not accept the primacy of abstract normative principles over concrete political positions and decisions. [46] Therefore, Schmitt advocated a jurisprudence of the exception ( state of emergency ), which denied that legal norms could encompass all of political experience. [47]
Later in the 20th century, H. L. A. Hart attacked Austin for his simplifications and Kelsen for his fictions in The Concept of Law . [48] Hart argued law is a system of rules, divided into primary (rules of conduct) and secondary ones (rules addressed to officials to administer primary rules). Secondary rules are further divided into rules of adjudication (to resolve legal disputes), rules of change (allowing laws to be varied) and the rule of recognition (allowing laws to be identified as valid). Two of Hart's students continued the debate: In his book Law's Empire , Ronald Dworkin attacked Hart and the positivists for their refusal to treat law as a moral issue. Dworkin argues that law is an " interpretive concept", [49] that requires judges to find the best fitting and most just solution to a legal dispute, given their constitutional traditions. Joseph Raz , on the other hand, defended the positivist outlook and criticised Hart's "soft social thesis" approach in The Authority of Law . [50] Raz argues that law is authority, identifiable purely through social sources and without reference to moral reasoning. In his view, any categorisation of rules beyond their role as authoritative instruments in mediation are best left to sociology , rather than jurisprudence. [51]

Positive law and non-positive law discussions
One definition is that law is a system of rules and guidelines which are enforced through social institutions to govern behaviour. [2] In The Concept of Law Hart argued law is a "system of rules"; [52] Austin said law was "the command of a sovereign, backed by the threat of a sanction"; [38] Dworkin describes law as an "interpretive concept" to achieve justice in his text titled Law's Empire ; [53] and Raz argues law is an "authority" to mediate people's interests. [50] Holmes said "The prophecies of what the courts will do in fact, and nothing more pretentious, are what I mean by the law." [54] In his Treatise on Law Aquinas argues that law is a rational ordering of things which concern the common good that is promulgated by whoever is charged with the care of the community. [55] This definition has both positivist and naturalist elements. [56]

Economic analysis
In the 18th century Adam Smith presented a philosophical foundation for explaining the relationship between law and economics. [57] The discipline arose partly out of a critique of trade unions and U.S. antitrust law. The most influential proponents, such as Richard Posner and Oliver Williamson and the so-called Chicago School of economists and lawyers including Milton Friedman and Gary Becker , are generally advocates of deregulation and privatisation , and are hostile to state regulation or what they see as restrictions on the operation of free markets . [58]
The most prominent economic analyst of law is 1991 Nobel Prize winner Ronald Coase , whose first major article, The Nature of the Firm (1937), argued that the reason for the existence of firms (companies, partnerships, etc.) is the existence of transaction costs . [60] Rational individuals trade through bilateral contracts on open markets until the costs of transactions mean that using corporations to produce things is more cost-effective. His second major article, The Problem of Social Cost (1960), argued that if we lived in a world without transaction costs, people would bargain with one another to create the same allocation of resources, regardless of the way a court might rule in property disputes. [61] Coase used the example of a nuisance case named Sturges v Bridgman , where a noisy sweetmaker and a quiet doctor were neighbours and went to court to see who should have to move. [62] Coase said that regardless of whether the judge ruled that the sweetmaker had to stop using his machinery, or that the doctor had to put up with it, they could strike a mutually beneficial bargain about who moves that reaches the same outcome of resource distribution. Only the existence of transaction costs may prevent this. [63] So the law ought to pre-empt what would happen, and be guided by the most efficient solution. The idea is that law and regulation are not as important or effective at helping people as lawyers and government planners believe. [64] Coase and others like him wanted a change of approach, to put the burden of proof for positive effects on a government that was intervening in the market, by analysing the costs of action. [65]

Sociology
Sociology of law is a diverse field of study that examines the interaction of law with society and overlaps with jurisprudence, philosophy of law, social theory and more specialised subjects such as criminology . [66] The institutions of social construction , social norms , dispute processing and legal culture are key areas for inquiry in this knowledge field. Sociology of law is sometimes seen as a sub-discipline of sociology, but its ties to the academic discipline of law are equally strong, and it is best seen as a transdisciplinary and multidisciplinary study focused on the theorisation and empirical study of legal practices and experiences as social phenomena. In the United States the field is usually called law and society studies; in Europe it is more often referred to as socio-legal studies. At first, jurists and legal philosophers were suspicious of sociology of law. Kelsen attacked one of its founders, Eugen Ehrlich , who sought to make clear the differences and connections between positive law, which lawyers learn and apply, and other forms of 'law' or social norms that regulate everyday life, generally preventing conflicts from reaching barristers and courts. [67] Contemporary research in sociology of law is much concerned with the way that law is developing outside discrete state jurisdictions, being produced through social interaction in many different kinds of social arenas, and acquiring a diversity of sources of (often competing or conflicting) authority in communal networks existing sometimes within nation states but increasingly also transnationally. [68]
Around 1900 Max Weber defined his "scientific" approach to law, identifying the "legal rational form" as a type of domination, not attributable to personal authority but to the authority of abstract norms. [69] Formal legal rationality was his term for the key characteristic of the kind of coherent and calculable law that was a precondition for modern political developments and the modern bureaucratic state. Weber saw this law as having developed in parallel with the growth of capitalism. [66] Another leading sociologist, Émile Durkheim , wrote in his classic work The Division of Labour in Society that as society becomes more complex, the body of civil law concerned primarily with restitution and compensation grows at the expense of criminal laws and penal sanctions. [70] Other notable early legal sociologists included Hugo Sinzheimer , Theodor Geiger , Georges Gurvitch and Leon Petrażycki in Europe, and William Graham Sumner in the U.S. [71] [72]

Legal systems
In general, legal systems can be split between civil law and common law systems. [73] The term "civil law" referring to a legal system should not be confused with "civil law" as a group of legal subjects distinct from criminal or public law . A third type of legal system—accepted by some countries without separation of church and state —is religious law, based on scriptures . The specific system that a country is ruled by is often determined by its history, connections with other countries, or its adherence to international standards. The sources that jurisdictions adopt as authoritatively binding are the defining features of any legal system. Yet classification is a matter of form rather than substance, since similar rules often prevail.

Civil law
Civil law is the legal system used in most countries around the world today. In civil law the sources recognised as authoritative are, primarily, legislation—especially codifications in constitutions or statutes passed by government—and custom . [74] Codifications date back millennia, with one early example being the Babylonian Codex Hammurabi . Modern civil law systems essentially derive from the legal practice of the 6th-century Eastern Roman Empire whose texts were rediscovered by late medieval Western Europe. Roman law in the days of the Roman Republic and Empire was heavily procedural, and lacked a professional legal class. [75] Instead a lay magistrate , iudex , was chosen to adjudicate. Decisions were not published in any systematic way, so any case law that developed was disguised and almost unrecognised. [76] Each case was to be decided afresh from the laws of the State, which mirrors the (theoretical) unimportance of judges' decisions for future cases in civil law systems today. From 529–534 AD the Byzantine Emperor Justinian I codified and consolidated Roman law up until that point, so that what remained was one-twentieth of the mass of legal texts from before. [77] This became known as the Corpus Juris Civilis . As one legal historian wrote, "Justinian consciously looked back to the golden age of Roman law and aimed to restore it to the peak it had reached three centuries before." [78] The Justinian Code remained in force in the East until the fall of the Byzantine Empire . Western Europe, meanwhile, relied on a mix of the Theodosian Code and Germanic customary law until the Justinian Code was rediscovered in the 11th century, and scholars at the University of Bologna used it to interpret their own laws. [79] Civil law codifications based closely on Roman law, alongside some influences from religious laws such as canon law , continued to spread throughout Europe until the Enlightenment ; then, in the 19th century, both France, with the Code Civil , and Germany, with the Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch , modernised their legal codes. Both these codes influenced heavily not only the law systems of the countries in continental Europe (e.g. Greece), but also the Japanese and Korean legal traditions. [80] [81] Today, countries that have civil law systems range from Russia and China to most of Central and Latin America . [82] With the exception of Louisiana's Civil Code, the United States follows the common law system described below.

Common law and equity
In common law legal systems , decisions by courts are explicitly acknowledged as "law" on equal footing with statutes adopted through the legislative process and with regulations issued by the executive branch . The "doctrine of precedent", or stare decisis (Latin for "to stand by decisions") means that decisions by higher courts bind lower courts, and future decisions of the same court, to assure that similar cases reach similar results. In contrast , in " civil law " systems, legislative statutes are typically more detailed, and judicial decisions are shorter and less detailed, because the judge or barrister is only writing to decide the single case, rather than to set out reasoning that will guide future courts.
Common law originated from England and has been inherited by almost every country once tied to the British Empire (except Malta, Scotland , the U.S. state of Louisiana , and the Canadian province of Quebec ). In medieval England, the Norman conquest the law varied-shire-to-shire, based on disparate tribal customs. The concept of a "common law" developed during the reign of Henry II during the late 12th century, when Henry appointed judges that had authority to create an institutionalized and unified system of law "common" to the country. The next major step in the evolution of the common law came when King John was forced by his barons to sign a document limiting his authority to pass laws. This "great charter" or Magna Carta of 1215 also required that the King's entourage of judges hold their courts and judgments at "a certain place" rather than dispensing autocratic justice in unpredictable places about the country. [83] A concentrated and elite group of judges acquired a dominant role in law-making under this system, and compared to its European counterparts the English judiciary became highly centralized. In 1297, for instance, while the highest court in France had fifty-one judges, the English Court of Common Pleas had five. [84] This powerful and tight-knit judiciary gave rise to a systematized process of developing common law. [85]
However, the system became overly systematized—overly rigid and inflexible. As a result, as time went on, increasing numbers of citizens petitioned the King to override the common law, and on the King's behalf the Lord Chancellor gave judgment to do what was equitable in a case. From the time of Sir Thomas More , the first lawyer to be appointed as Lord Chancellor, a systematic body of equity grew up alongside the rigid common law, and developed its own Court of Chancery . At first, equity was often criticized as erratic, that it varied according to the length of the Chancellor's foot. [86] Over time, courts of equity developed solid principles , especially under Lord Eldon . [87] In the 19th century in England, and in 1937 in the U.S. , the two systems were merged .
In developing the common law, academic writings have always played an important part, both to collect overarching principles from dispersed case law, and to argue for change. William Blackstone , from around 1760, was the first scholar to collect, describe, and teach the common law. [88] But merely in describing, scholars who sought explanations and underlying structures slowly changed the way the law actually worked. [89]

Religious law
[ undue weight? – discuss ]
Religious law is explicitly based on religious precepts. Examples include the Jewish Halakha and Islamic Sharia —both of which translate as the "path to follow"—while Christian canon law also survives in some church communities. Often the implication of religion for law is unalterability, because the word of God cannot be amended or legislated against by judges or governments. [ citation needed ] However a thorough and detailed legal system generally requires human elaboration. For instance, the Quran has some law, and it acts as a source of further law through interpretation, [90] Qiyas (reasoning by analogy), Ijma (consensus) and precedent . This is mainly contained in a body of law and jurisprudence known as Sharia and Fiqh respectively. Another example is the Torah or Old Testament , in the Pentateuch or Five Books of Moses. This contains the basic code of Jewish law, which some Israeli communities choose to use. The Halakha is a code of Jewish law which summarises some of the Talmud's interpretations. Nevertheless, Israeli law allows litigants to use religious laws only if they choose. Canon law is only in use by members of the Catholic Church, [91] the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Anglican Communion .

Sharia law
Until the 18th century, Sharia law was practiced throughout the Muslim world in a non-codified form, with the Ottoman Empire 's Mecelle code in the 19th century being a first attempt at codifying elements of Sharia law. Since the mid-1940s, efforts have been made, in country after country, to bring Sharia law more into line with modern conditions and conceptions. [92] [93] In modern times, the legal systems of many Muslim countries draw upon both civil and common law traditions as well as Islamic law and custom. The constitutions of certain Muslim states, such as Egypt and Afghanistan, recognise Islam as the religion of the state, obliging legislature to adhere to Sharia. [94] Saudi Arabia recognises Quran as its constitution, and is governed on the basis of Islamic law. [95] Iran has also witnessed a reiteration of Islamic law into its legal system after 1979. [96] During the last few decades, one of the fundamental features of the movement of Islamic resurgence has been the call to restore the Sharia, which has generated a vast amount of literature and affected world politics . [97]

Legal institutions
The main institutions of law in industrialised countries are independent courts , representative parliaments, an accountable executive, the military and police, bureaucratic organisation, the legal profession and civil society itself. John Locke, in his Two Treatises of Government , and Baron de Montesquieu in The Spirit of the Laws , advocated for a separation of powers between the political, legislature and executive bodies. [98] Their principle was that no person should be able to usurp all powers of the state , in contrast to the absolutist theory of Thomas Hobbes ' Leviathan . [99]
Max Weber and others reshaped thinking on the extension of state. Modern military, policing and bureaucratic power over ordinary citizens' daily lives pose special problems for accountability that earlier writers such as Locke or Montesquieu could not have foreseen. The custom and practice of the legal profession is an important part of people's access to justice , whilst civil society is a term used to refer to the social institutions, communities and partnerships that form law's political basis.

Judiciary
A judiciary is a number of judges mediating disputes to determine outcome. Most countries have systems of appeal courts, answering up to a supreme legal authority. In the United States, this authority is the Supreme Court ; [100] in Australia, the High Court ; in the UK, the Supreme Court ; [101] in Germany, the Bundesverfassungsgericht ; and in France, the Cour de Cassation . [102] [103] For most European countries the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg can overrule national law, when EU law is relevant. The European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg allows citizens of the Council of Europe member states to bring cases relating to human rights issues before it. [104]
Some countries allow their highest judicial authority to overrule legislation they determine to be unconstitutional . For example, in Brown v. Board of Education , the United States Supreme Court nullified many state statutes that had established racially segregated schools, finding such statutes to be incompatible with the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution . [105]
A judiciary is theoretically bound by the constitution, just as all other government bodies are. In most countries judges may only interpret the constitution and all other laws. But in common law countries, where matters are not constitutional, the judiciary may also create law under the doctrine of precedent . The UK, Finland and New Zealand assert the ideal of parliamentary sovereignty , whereby the unelected judiciary may not overturn law passed by a democratic legislature. [106]
In communist states , such as China, the courts are often regarded as parts of the executive, or subservient to the legislature; governmental institutions and actors exert thus various forms of influence on the judiciary. [107] In Muslim countries, courts often examine whether state laws adhere to the Sharia: the Supreme Constitutional Court of Egypt may invalidate such laws, [108] and in Iran the Guardian Council ensures the compatibility of the legislation with the "criteria of Islam". [108] [109]

Legislature
Prominent examples of legislatures are the Houses of Parliament in London, the Congress in Washington D.C., the Bundestag in Berlin, the Duma in Moscow, the Parlamento Italiano in Rome and the Assemblée nationale in Paris. By the principle of representative government people vote for politicians to carry out their wishes. Although countries like Israel, Greece, Sweden and China are unicameral , most countries are bicameral , meaning they have two separately appointed legislative houses. [110]
In the 'lower house' politicians are elected to represent smaller constituencies . The 'upper house' is usually elected to represent states in a federal system (as in Australia, Germany or the United States) or different voting configuration in a unitary system (as in France). In the UK the upper house is appointed by the government as a house of review . One criticism of bicameral systems with two elected chambers is that the upper and lower houses may simply mirror one another. The traditional justification of bicameralism is that an upper chamber acts as a house of review. This can minimise arbitrariness and injustice in governmental action. [110]
To pass legislation, a majority of the members of a legislature must vote for a bill (proposed law) in each house. Normally there will be several readings and amendments proposed by the different political factions. If a country has an entrenched constitution, a special majority for changes to the constitution may be required, making changes to the law more difficult. A government usually leads the process, which can be formed from Members of Parliament (e.g. the UK or Germany). However, in a presidential system, the government is usually formed by an executive and his or her appointed cabinet officials (e.g. the United States or Brazil). [111]

Executive
The executive in a legal system serves as the centre of political authority of the State . In a parliamentary system , as with Britain, Italy, Germany, India, and Japan, the executive is known as the cabinet, and composed of members of the legislature. The executive is led by the head of government , whose office holds power under the confidence of the legislature. Because popular elections appoint political parties to govern, the leader of a party can change in between elections. [112]
The head of state is apart from the executive, and symbolically enacts laws and acts as representative of the nation. Examples include the President of Germany (appointed by members of federal and state legislatures ), the Queen of the United Kingdom (an hereditary office ), and the President of Austria (elected by popular vote). The other important model is the presidential system , found in the United States and in Brazil . In presidential systems, the executive acts as both head of state and head of government, and has power to appoint an unelected cabinet. Under a presidential system, the executive branch is separate from the legislature to which it is not accountable. [112] [113]
Although the role of the executive varies from country to country, usually it will propose the majority of legislation, and propose government agenda. In presidential systems, the executive often has the power to veto legislation. Most executives in both systems are responsible for foreign relations , the military and police, and the bureaucracy. Ministers or other officials head a country's public offices, such as a foreign ministry or defence ministry . The election of a different executive is therefore capable of revolutionising an entire country's approach to government.

Military and police
While military organisations have existed as long as government itself, the idea of a standing police force is a relatively modern concept. For example, Medieval England 's system of traveling criminal courts , or assizes , used show trials and public executions to instill communities with fear to maintain control. [114] The first modern police were probably those in 17th-century Paris, in the court of Louis XIV , [115] although the Paris Prefecture of Police claim they were the world's first uniformed policemen. [116]
Max Weber famously argued that the state is that which controls the monopoly on the legitimate use of force . [117] [118] The military and police carry out enforcement at the request of the government or the courts. The term failed state refers to states that cannot implement or enforce policies; their police and military no longer control security and order and society moves into anarchy, the absence of government. [119]

Bureaucracy
The etymology of "bureaucracy" derives from the French word for "office" ( bureau ) and the Ancient Greek for word "power" ( kratos ). [120] Like the military and police, a legal system's government servants and bodies that make up its bureaucracy carry out the directives of the executive. One of the earliest references to the concept was made by Baron de Grimm , a German author who lived in France. In 1765 he wrote,
Cynicism over "officialdom" is still common, and the workings of public servants is typically contrasted to private enterprise motivated by profit . [122] In fact private companies, especially large ones, also have bureaucracies. [123] Negative perceptions of " red tape " aside, public services such as schooling, health care, policing or public transport are considered a crucial state function making public bureaucratic action the locus of government power. [123]
Writing in the early 20th century, Max Weber believed that a definitive feature of a developed state had come to be its bureaucratic support. [124] Weber wrote that the typical characteristics of modern bureaucracy are that officials define its mission, the scope of work is bound by rules, and management is composed of career experts who manage top down, communicating through writing and binding public servants' discretion with rules. [125]

Legal profession
A corollary of the rule of law is the existence of a legal profession sufficiently autonomous to invoke the authority of the independent judiciary; the right to assistance of a barrister in a court proceeding emanates from this corollary—in England the function of barrister or advocate is distinguished from legal counselor. [127] As the European Court of Human Rights has stated, the law should be adequately accessible to everyone and people should be able to foresee how the law affects them. [128]
In order to maintain professionalism, the practice of law is typically overseen by either a government or independent regulating body such as a bar association , bar council or law society . Modern lawyers achieve distinct professional identity through specified legal procedures (e.g. successfully passing a qualifying examination), are required by law to have a special qualification (a legal education earning the student a Bachelor of Laws , a Bachelor of Civil Law , or a Juris Doctor degree. Higher academic degrees may also be pursued. Examples include a Master of Laws , a Master of Legal Studies , a Bar Professional Training Course or a Doctor of Laws .), and are constituted in office by legal forms of appointment ( being admitted to the bar ). There are few titles of respect to signify famous lawyers, such as Esquire , to indicate barristers of greater dignity, [129] [130] and Doctor of law , to indicate a person who obtained a PhD in Law.
Many Muslim countries have developed similar rules about legal education and the legal profession, but some still allow lawyers with training in traditional Islamic law to practice law before personal status law courts. [131] In China and other developing countries there are not sufficient professionally trained people to staff the existing judicial systems, and, accordingly, formal standards are more relaxed. [132]
Once accredited, a lawyer will often work in a law firm , in a chambers as a sole practitioner, in a government post or in a private corporation as an internal counsel . In addition a lawyer may become a legal researcher who provides on-demand legal research through a library, a commercial service or freelance work. Many people trained in law put their skills to use outside the legal field entirely. [133]
Significant to the practice of law in the common law tradition is the legal research to determine the current state of the law. This usually entails exploring case-law reports , legal periodicals and legislation. Law practice also involves drafting documents such as court pleadings , persuasive briefs , contracts, or wills and trusts. Negotiation and dispute resolution skills (including ADR techniques) are also important to legal practice, depending on the field. [133]

Civil society
The Classical republican concept of "civil society" dates back to Hobbes and Locke. [134] Locke saw civil society as people who have "a common established law and judicature to appeal to, with authority to decide controversies between them." [135] German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel distinguished the "state" from "civil society" ( bürgerliche Gesellschaft ) in Elements of the Philosophy of Right . [136]
Hegel believed that civil society and the state were polar opposites, within the scheme of his dialectic theory of history. The modern dipole state–civil society was reproduced in the theories of Alexis de Tocqueville and Karl Marx . [137] [138] Nowadays in post-modern theory civil society is necessarily a source of law, by being the basis from which people form opinions and lobby for what they believe law should be. As Australian barrister and author Geoffrey Robertson QC wrote of international law,
Freedom of speech , freedom of association and many other individual rights allow people to gather, discuss, criticise and hold to account their governments, from which the basis of a deliberative democracy is formed. The more people are involved with, concerned by and capable of changing how political power is exercised over their lives, the more acceptable and legitimate the law becomes to the people. The most familiar institutions of civil society include economic markets, profit-oriented firms, families, trade unions, hospitals, universities, schools, charities, debating clubs , non-governmental organisations, neighbourhoods, churches, and religious associations. [140]

Legal subjects
All legal systems deal with the same basic issues, but jurisdictions categorise and identify its legal subjects in different ways. A common distinction is that between " public law " (a term related closely to the state , and including constitutional, administrative and criminal law), and " private law " (which covers contract, tort and property). [141] In civil law systems, contract and tort fall under a general law of obligations , while trusts law is dealt with under statutory regimes or international conventions . International, constitutional and administrative law, criminal law, contract, tort, property law and trusts are regarded as the "traditional core subjects", [142] although there are many further disciplines .

International law
International law can refer to three things: public international law, private international law or conflict of laws and the law of supranational organisations.

Constitutional and administrative law
Constitutional and administrative law govern the affairs of the state. Constitutional law concerns both the relationships between the executive, legislature and judiciary and the human rights or civil liberties of individuals against the state. Most jurisdictions, like the United States and France , have a single codified constitution with a bill of rights . A few, like the United Kingdom , have no such document. A "constitution" is simply those laws which constitute the body politic , from statute , case law and convention . A case named Entick v Carrington [150] illustrates a constitutional principle deriving from the common law. Mr Entick's house was searched and ransacked by Sheriff Carrington. When Mr Entick complained in court, Sheriff Carrington argued that a warrant from a Government minister, the Earl of Halifax , was valid authority. However, there was no written statutory provision or court authority. The leading judge, Lord Camden , stated that,
The fundamental constitutional principle, inspired by John Locke , holds that the individual can do anything except that which is forbidden by law , and the state may do nothing except that which is authorised by law. [152] [153] Administrative law is the chief method for people to hold state bodies to account. People can sue an agency, local council, public service, or government ministry for judicial review of actions or decisions, to ensure that they comply with the law, and that the government entity observed required procedure. The first specialist administrative court was the Conseil d'État set up in 1799, as Napoleon assumed power in France. [154]

Criminal law
Criminal law, also known as penal law, pertains to crimes and punishment. [155] It thus regulates the definition of and penalties for offences found to have a sufficiently deleterious social impact but, in itself, makes no moral judgment on an offender nor imposes restrictions on society that physically prevent people from committing a crime in the first place. [156] Investigating, apprehending, charging, and trying suspected offenders is regulated by the law of criminal procedure . [157] The paradigm case of a crime lies in the proof, beyond reasonable doubt , that a person is guilty of two things. First, the accused must commit an act which is deemed by society to be criminal, or actus reus (guilty act). [158] Second, the accused must have the requisite malicious intent to do a criminal act, or mens rea (guilty mind). However, for so called " strict liability " crimes, an actus reus is enough. [159] Criminal systems of the civil law tradition distinguish between intention in the broad sense ( dolus directus and dolus eventualis ), and negligence. Negligence does not carry criminal responsibility unless a particular crime provides for its punishment. [160] [161]
Examples of crimes include murder, assault, fraud and theft. In exceptional circumstances defences can apply to specific acts, such as killing in self defence , or pleading insanity . Another example is in the 19th-century English case of R v Dudley and Stephens , which tested a defence of " necessity ". The Mignonette , sailing from Southampton to Sydney, sank. Three crew members and Richard Parker, a 17-year-old cabin boy, were stranded on a raft. They were starving and the cabin boy was close to death. Driven to extreme hunger, the crew killed and ate the cabin boy. The crew survived and were rescued, but put on trial for murder. They argued it was necessary to kill the cabin boy to preserve their own lives. Lord Coleridge , expressing immense disapproval, ruled, "to preserve one's life is generally speaking a duty, but it may be the plainest and the highest duty to sacrifice it." The men were sentenced to hang , but public opinion was overwhelmingly supportive of the crew's right to preserve their own lives. In the end, the Crown commuted their sentences to six months in jail. [162]
Criminal law offences are viewed as offences against not just individual victims, but the community as well. [156] The state, usually with the help of police, takes the lead in prosecution, which is why in common law countries cases are cited as " The People v ..." or " R (for Rex or Regina ) v ...". Also, lay juries are often used to determine the guilt of defendants on points of fact: juries cannot change legal rules. Some developed countries still condone capital punishment for criminal activity, but the normal punishment for a crime will be imprisonment , fines , state supervision (such as probation), or community service . Modern criminal law has been affected considerably by the social sciences, especially with respect to sentencing , legal research, legislation, and rehabilitation . [163] On the international field, 111 countries are members of the International Criminal Court , which was established to try people for crimes against humanity . [164]

Contract law
Contract law concerns enforceable promises, and can be summed up in the Latin phrase pacta sunt servanda (agreements must be kept). [165] In common law jurisdictions, three key elements to the creation of a contract are necessary: offer and acceptance , consideration and the intention to create legal relations. In Carlill v Carbolic Smoke Ball Company a medical firm advertised that its new wonder drug, the smokeball, would cure people's flu, and if it did not, the buyers would get £ 100. Many people sued for their £100 when the drug did not work. Fearing bankruptcy, Carbolic argued the advert was not to be taken as a serious, legally binding offer. It was an invitation to treat , mere puffery, a gimmick. But the Court of Appeal held that to a reasonable man Carbolic had made a serious offer, accentuated by their reassuring statement, "£1000 is deposited". Equally, people had given good consideration for the offer by going to the "distinct inconvenience" of using a faulty product. "Read the advertisement how you will, and twist it about as you will", said Lord Justice Lindley , "here is a distinct promise expressed in language which is perfectly unmistakable". [166]
"Consideration" indicates the fact that all parties to a contract have exchanged something of value. Some common law systems, including Australia, are moving away from the idea of consideration as a requirement. The idea of estoppel or culpa in contrahendo , can be used to create obligations during pre-contractual negotiations. [167] In civil law jurisdictions, consideration is not required for a contract to be binding. [168] In France, an ordinary contract is said to form simply on the basis of a "meeting of the minds" or a "concurrence of wills". Germany has a special approach to contracts, which ties into property law. Their ' abstraction principle ' ( Abstraktionsprinzip ) means that the personal obligation of contract forms separately from the title of property being conferred. When contracts are invalidated for some reason (e.g. a car buyer is so drunk that he lacks legal capacity to contract) [169] the contractual obligation to pay can be invalidated separately from the proprietary title of the car. Unjust enrichment law, rather than contract law, is then used to restore title to the rightful owner. [170]

Tort law
Torts, sometimes called delicts , are civil wrongs. To have acted tortiously, one must have breached a duty to another person, or infringed some pre-existing legal right. A simple example might be accidentally hitting someone with a cricket ball. [171] Under the law of negligence , the most common form of tort, the injured party could potentially claim compensation for their injuries from the party responsible. The principles of negligence are illustrated by Donoghue v Stevenson . [172] A friend of Mrs Donoghue ordered an opaque bottle of ginger beer (intended for the consumption of Mrs Donoghue) in a café in Paisley . Having consumed half of it, Mrs Donoghue poured the remainder into a tumbler. The decomposing remains of a snail floated out. She claimed to have suffered from shock, fell ill with gastroenteritis and sued the manufacturer for carelessly allowing the drink to be contaminated. The House of Lords decided that the manufacturer was liable for Mrs Donoghue's illness. Lord Atkin took a distinctly moral approach, and said,
This became the basis for the four principles of negligence: (1) Mr Stevenson owed Mrs Donoghue a duty of care to provide safe drinks (2) he breached his duty of care (3) the harm would not have occurred but for his breach and (4) his act was the proximate cause of her harm. [172] Another example of tort might be a neighbour making excessively loud noises with machinery on his property. [62] Under a nuisance claim the noise could be stopped. Torts can also involve intentional acts, such as assault , battery or trespass . A better known tort is defamation , which occurs, for example, when a newspaper makes unsupportable allegations that damage a politician's reputation. [174] More infamous are economic torts, which form the basis of labour law in some countries by making trade unions liable for strikes, [175] when statute does not provide immunity. [176]

Property law
Property law governs ownership and possession. Real property , sometimes called 'real estate', refers to ownership of land and things attached to it. [178] Personal property , refers to everything else; movable objects, such as computers, cars, jewelry or intangible rights, such as stocks and shares . A right in rem is a right to a specific piece of property, contrasting to a right in personam which allows compensation for a loss, but not a particular thing back. Land law forms the basis for most kinds of property law, and is the most complex. It concerns mortgages , rental agreements , licences , covenants , easements and the statutory systems for land registration. Regulations on the use of personal property fall under intellectual property, company law , trusts and commercial law . An example of a basic case of most property law is Armory v Delamirie [1722]. [179] A chimney sweep 's boy found a jewel encrusted with precious stones. He took it to a goldsmith to have it valued. The goldsmith's apprentice looked at it, sneakily removed the stones, told the boy it was worth three halfpence and that he would buy it. The boy said he would prefer the jewel back, so the apprentice gave it to him, but without the stones. The boy sued the goldsmith for his apprentice's attempt to cheat him. Lord Chief Justice Pratt ruled that even though the boy could not be said to own the jewel, he should be considered the rightful keeper ("finders keepers") until the original owner is found. In fact the apprentice and the boy both had a right of possession in the jewel (a technical concept, meaning evidence that something could belong to someone), but the boy's possessory interest was considered better, because it could be shown to be first in time. Possession may be nine tenths of the law, but not all.
This case is used to support the view of property in common law jurisdictions, that the person who can show the best claim to a piece of property, against any contesting party, is the owner. [180] By contrast, the classic civil law approach to property, propounded by Friedrich Carl von Savigny , is that it is a right good against the world. Obligations, like contracts and torts, are conceptualised as rights good between individuals. [181] The idea of property raises many further philosophical and political issues. Locke argued that our "lives, liberties and estates" are our property because we own our bodies and mix our labour with our surroundings. [182]

Equity and trusts
Equity is a body of rules that developed in England separately from the "common law". The common law was administered by judges and barristers. The Lord Chancellor on the other hand, as the King's keeper of conscience, could overrule the judge-made law if he thought it equitable to do so. [183] This meant equity came to operate more through principles than rigid rules. For instance, whereas neither the common law nor civil law systems allow people to split the ownership from the control of one piece of property, equity allows this through an arrangement known as a 'trust'. 'Trustees' control property, whereas the 'beneficial' (or 'equitable') ownership of trust property is held by people known as 'beneficiaries'. Trustees owe duties to their beneficiaries to take good care of the entrusted property. [184] In the early case of Keech v Sandford [1722] [185] a child had inherited the lease on a market in Romford , London. Mr Sandford was entrusted to look after this property until the child matured. But before then, the lease expired. The landlord had (apparently) told Mr Sandford that he did not want the child to have the renewed lease. Yet the landlord was happy (apparently) to give Mr Sandford the opportunity of the lease instead. Mr Sandford took it. When the child (now Mr Keech) grew up, he sued Mr Sandford for the profit that he had been making by getting the market's lease. Mr Sandford was meant to be trusted, but he put himself in a position of conflict of interest . The Lord Chancellor , Lord King , agreed and ordered Mr Sandford should disgorge his profits. He wrote,
Of course, Lord King LC was worried that trustees might exploit opportunities to use trust property for themselves instead of looking after it. Business speculators using trusts had just recently caused a stock market crash . Strict duties for trustees made their way into company law and were applied to directors and chief executive officers. Another example of a trustee's duty might be to invest property wisely or sell it. [186] This is especially the case for pension funds, the most important form of trust, where investors are trustees for people's savings until retirement. But trusts can also be set up for charitable purposes , famous examples being the British Museum or the Rockefeller Foundation .

Further disciplines
Law spreads far beyond the core subjects into virtually every area of life. Three categories are presented for convenience, though the subjects intertwine and overlap.

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00167
Alternative terms for free software
Alternative terms for free software , such as open source , FOSS , and FLOSS, have been a controversial issue among free and open source software users from the late 1990s onwards. [1] These terms share almost identical licence criteria and development practices.

Terms

Free software
In the 1950s to the 1990s software culture, the "free software" concept combined the nowadays differentiated software classes of public domain software , Freeware , Shareware and FOSS and was created in academia and by hobbyists and hackers . [2]
When the term "free software" was adopted by Richard Stallman in 1983, it was still ambiguously used to describe several kinds of software. [2] In February 1986 Richard Stallman formally defined "free software" with the publication of the The Free Software Definition in the FSF's now-discontinued GNU's Bulletin [3] as software which can be used, modified, and redistributed with little or no restriction, his four essential software freedoms . [3] Richard Stallman's Free Software Definition , adopted by the Free Software Foundation (FSF), defines free software as a matter of liberty, not price and is inspired by the previous public domain software ecosystem. [4] The canonical source for the document is in the philosophy section of the GNU Project website, where it is published in many languages. [5]

Open source software
In 1998 the term " open source software " (as abbreviation "OSS") was coined as alternative for " free software ". There were several reasons for the proposal of a new term. [6] On one hand a group from the free software ecosystem perceived the Free Software Foundation 's attitude on propagandizing the "free software" concept as "moralising and confrontational", which was also associated with the term. [7] In addition, the "available at no cost" ambiguity of the word "free" was seen as discouraging business adoption, [8] as also the historical ambiguous usage of the term "free software". [9] In a 1998 strategy session in California , " open source software " was selected by Todd Anderson , Larry Augustin , Jon Hall , Sam Ockman , Christine Peterson , and Eric S. Raymond . [10] Richard Stallman had not been invited. [11] The session was arranged in reaction to Netscape 's January 1998 announcement of a source code release for Navigator (as Mozilla ). Those at the meeting described "open source" as a "replacement label" for free software, [12] and the Open Source Initiative was soon-after founded by Eric Raymond and Bruce Perens to promote the term as part of "a marketing program for free software". [13] The Open Source Definition is used by the Open Source Initiative to determine whether a software license qualifies for the organization's insignia for open source software. The definition was based on the Debian Free Software Guidelines , written and adapted primarily by Bruce Perens . [14] [15] Perens did not base his writing on the four freedoms of free software from the Free Software Foundation , which were only later available on the web. [16] According to the OSI, Stallman initially flirted with the idea of adopting the open source term. [17]
On the end of 1990s the term "Open source" gained much traction in public media [18] and acceptance in software industry in context of the dotcom bubble and the open-source software driven Web 2.0 . For instance, Duke University scholar Christopher M. Kelty described the Free Software movement prior to 1998 as fragmented and "the term Open Source, by contrast, sought to encompass them all in one movement" . [9] The term "open source" gained brought spread as open source movement which inspired many successor movements like the Open content , Open source hardware , Open Knowledge movements. Under the impression of the success of "Open source" several journalists reported around 2000 the earlier "Free software" term and movement and its leader Stallman as being "forgotten". [19] [20] [21] In response, Stallman and his FSF objected to the term "open source software" and fought since then for the term "free software". [22] [23] Due to the rejection of the FSF and its leader Richard Stallman of the term open source software, the ecosystem is being divided in its terminology. For example, a 2002 European Union FOSS developer survey revealed that 32.6% of them associate themselves with OSS, 48% with free software, and only 19.4% are undecided or in between. [1] As both terms "free software" and "open-source software" have their fans and critics in the FOSS ecosystems, also unifying terms have been proposed; these include "software libre" (or libre software), "FLOSS" (free/libre and open-source software), and "FOSS" (or F/OSS, free and open-source software).

FOSS and F/OSS
The first known use of the phrase free open source software (in short FOSS or seldom F/OSS) on Usenet was in a posting on 18 March 1998, just a month after the term open source itself was coined. [24] In February 2002, F/OSS appeared on a Usenet newsgroup dedicated to Amiga computer games . [25] In early 2002, MITRE used the term FOSS in what would later be their 2003 report Use of Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) in the U.S. Department of Defense . [ citation needed ] The European Union's institutions later also used the FOSS term while before using FLOSS, [26] as also scholar in publications. [27]

Software libre
While probably used earlier (as early as the 1990s [28] ) "Software libre" got broader public reception when in 2000 the European Commission adopted it. [29] The word "libre", borrowed from the Spanish and French languages, means having liberty. This avoids the freedom-cost ambiguity of the English word "free".

FLOSS
FLOSS was used in 2001 as a project acronym by Rishab Aiyer Ghosh for free/libre and open-source software . Later that year, the European Commission (EC) used the phrase when they funded a study on the topic. [30] [31] [ better source needed ]
Unlike "libre software", which aimed to solve the ambiguity problem, "FLOSS" aimed to avoid taking sides in the debate over whether it was better to say "free software" or to say "open-source software".
Proponents of the term point out that parts of the FLOSS acronym can be translated into other languages, for example the "F" representing free (English) or frei (German), and the "L" representing libre (Spanish or French), livre (Portuguese), or libero (Italian), and so on. However, this term is not often used in official, non-English, documents, since the words in these languages for "free as in freedom" do not have the ambiguity problem of English's "free".
By the end of 2004, the FLOSS acronym had been used in official English documents issued by South Africa, [32] Spain, [33] and Brazil. [34] Other scholars and institutions use it too. [35]
Richard Stallman endorses the term FLOSS to refer to "open source" and "free software" without necessarily choosing between the two camps, however, he asks people to consider supporting the "free/libre software" camp. [36] [37] Stallman has suggested that the term "unfettered software" would be an appropriate, non-ambiguous replacement, but that he would not push for it because there was too much momentum and too much effort behind the term "free software".
The term "FLOSS" has come under some criticism for being counterproductive and sounding silly. For instance, Eric Raymond , co-founder of the Open Source Initiative, has stated in 2009:
Raymond quotes programmer Rick Moen as stating:

Ownership and attachments
None of these terms, or the term "free software" itself, have been trademarked. Bruce Perens of OSI attempted to register "open source" as a service mark for OSI in the United States of America , but that attempt failed to meet the relevant trademark standards of specificity. OSI claims a trademark on "OSI Certified", and applied for trademark registration, but did not complete the paperwork. The United States Patent and Trademark Office labels it as "abandoned". [39]
While the term "free software" is associated with FSF's definition, and the term "open source software" is associated with OSI's definition, the other terms have not been claimed by any group in particular. While the FSF's and OSI's definitions are worded quite differently the set of software that they cover is almost identical. [23] [40]
All of the terms are used interchangeably, the choice of which to use is mostly political (wanting to support a certain group) or practical (thinking that one term is the clearest).
The primary difference between free software and open source is one of philosophy. According to the Free Software Foundation, "Nearly all open source software is free software. The two terms describe almost the same category of software, but they stand for views based on fundamentally different values." [41]

Licences
The choice of term has little or no impact on which licences are valid or used by the different camps, while recommendations might vary. At least until the release of the GPLv3, [42] [43] [44] the usage of the GPLv2 united the Open source and free software camp. [45] [46] The vast majority of software referred to by all these terms is distributed under a small set of licences, all of which are unambiguously accepted by the various de facto and de jure guardians of each of these terms. The majority of the software is either one of few permissive software licenses (the BSD licenses , the MIT License , and the Apache License ) or one of few copyleft licenses (the GNU General Public License v2, GPLv3 , the GNU Lesser General Public License , or the Mozilla Public License ). [47] [48]
The Free Software Foundation ( List of FSF approved software licences ) and the Open Source Initiative ( List of OSI approved software licences ) each publish lists of licences that they accept as complying with their definitions of free software and open source software respectively. The Open Source Initiative considers almost all free software licenses to also be open source and way around. These include the latest versions of the FSF's three main licenses, the GPLv3, the Lesser General Public License (LGPL), and the GNU Affero General Public License (AGPL). [49]
Apart from these two organisations, many more FOSS organizations publish recommendations and comments on licenses and licensing matters. The Debian project is seen by some to provide useful advice on whether particular licences comply with their Debian Free Software Guidelines . Debian does not publish a list of "approved" licences, but its judgments can be tracked by checking what licences are used by software they have allowed into their distribution. [50] In addition, the Fedora Project does provide a list of approved licences (for Fedora) based on approval of the Free Software Foundation (FSF), the Open Source Initiative (OSI), and consultation with Red Hat Legal. [51] It exist also the copyfree movement, the BSDs as also the Apache and Mozilla Foundation with own points of views on licenses.

Public-domain software
There is also a class of software that is covered by the names discussed in this article, but which doesn't have a licence: software for which the source code is in the public domain . The use of such source code, and therefore the executable version, is not restricted by copyright and therefore does not need a free software licence to make it free software. However, not all countries have the same form of "public domain" regime and possibilities of dedicating works and the authors rights in the public domain.
Further, for distributors to be sure that software is released into the public domain, the usually need to see something written to confirm this. Thus even without a licence, a written note about lack of copyright and other exclusive rights often still exists (a waiver or anti-copyright notice ), which can be seen as license substitute. There are also mixed forms between waiver and license, for instance the public domain like licenses CC0 [52] [53] and the Unlicense , [54] [55] with an all permissive license as fallback in case of ineffectiveness of the waiver.

Non-English terms in anglophone regions
The free software community in some parts of India sometimes uses the term " Swatantra software" since the term "Swatantra" means free in Sanskrit , which is the ancestor of all Indo-European Languages of India, including Hindi , despite English being the lingua franca . [56] Other terms such as "kattatra menporul (கட்டற்ற_மென்பொருள்)" for free software, where kattatra means free and menporul means software is also being used in Tamil Nadu and Tamils in other parts of the world. In The Philippines , "malayang software" is sometimes used. The word "libre" exists in the Filipino language , and it came from the Spanish language, but has acquired the same cost/freedom ambiguity of the English word "free". [57] According to Meranau "Free" is KANDURI , Diccubayadan, Libre.

See also
WebPage index: 00168
Creative Commons license
A Creative Commons ( CC ) license is one of several public copyright licenses that enable the free distribution of an otherwise copyrighted work. A CC license is used when an author wants to give people the right to share, use, and build upon a work that he/she has created. CC provides an author flexibility (for example, he/she might choose to allow only non-commercial uses of his/her own work) and protects the people who use or redistribute an author's work from concerns of copyright infringement as long as they abide by the conditions that are specified in the license by which the author distributes the work.
There are several types of CC licenses. The licenses differ by several combinations that condition the terms of distribution. They were initially released on December 16, 2002 by Creative Commons , a U.S. non-profit corporation founded in 2001. There have also been five versions of the suite of licenses, numbered 1.0 through 4.0. [1] As of 2016 [update] , the 4.0 license suite is the most current.
In October 2014 the Open Knowledge Foundation approved the Creative Commons CC BY , CC BY-SA , and CC0 licenses as conformant with the " Open Definition " for content and data. [2] [3] [4]

Applicable works
Work licensed under a Creative Commons license is governed by applicable copyright law. [5] This allows Creative Commons licenses to be applied to all work falling under copyright, including: books, plays, movies, music, articles, photographs, blogs, and websites. Creative Commons does not recommend the use of Creative Commons licenses for software. [6]
There are over 35,000 works that are available in hardcopy and have a registered ISBN number. Creative Commons splits these works into two categories, one of which encompasses self-published books. [7]
However, application of a Creative Commons license may not modify the rights allowed by fair use or fair dealing or exert restrictions which violate copyright exceptions. [8] Furthermore, Creative Commons licenses are non-exclusive and non-revocable. [9] Any work or copies of the work obtained under a Creative Commons license may continue to be used under that license. [10]
In the case of works protected by multiple Creative Common licenses, the user may choose either. [11]

Types of licenses
The CC licenses all grant the "baseline rights", such as the right to distribute the copyrighted work worldwide for non-commercial purposes, and without modification. [12] The details of each of these licenses depend on the version, and comprises a selection out of four conditions:
The last two clauses are not free content licenses, according to definitions such as DFSG or the Free Software Foundation 's standards, and cannot be used in contexts that require these freedoms, such as Wikipedia . For software , Creative Commons includes three free licenses created by other institutions: the BSD License , the GNU LGPL , and the GNU GPL . [14]
Mixing and matching these conditions produces sixteen possible combinations, of which eleven are valid Creative Commons licenses and five are not. Of the five invalid combinations, four include both the "nd" and "sa" clauses, which are mutually exclusive; and one includes none of the clauses. Of the eleven valid combinations, the five that lack the "by" clause have been retired because 98% of licensors requested attribution, though they do remain available for reference on the website. [15] [16] [17] This leaves six regularly used licenses + the CC0 public domain waiver :

Seven regularly used licenses
[17] [18]
For example, the Creative Commons Attribution (BY) license allows one to share and remix (create derivative works), even for commercial use, so long as attribution is given. [19]

Version 4.0 and international use
The original non-localized Creative Commons licenses were written with the U.S. legal system in mind, therefore the wording may be incompatible with local legislation in other jurisdictions , rendering the licenses unenforceable there. To address this issue, Creative Commons asked its affiliates to translate the various licenses to reflect local laws in a process called " porting ." [20] As of July 2011, Creative Commons licenses have been ported to over 50 jurisdictions worldwide. [21]
The latest version 4.0 of the Creative Commons licenses, released on November 25, 2013, are generic licenses that are applicable to most jurisdictions and do not usually require ports. [22] [23] [24] [25] No new ports have been implemented in version 4.0 of the license. [26] Version 4.0 discourages using ported versions and instead acts as a single global license. [27]

Rights

Attribution
Since 2004, all current licenses (beside the CC0 waiver) require attribution of the original author, the BY component. [16] The attribution must be given to "the best of [one's] ability using the information available". [28] Generally this implies the following:

Non-commercial licenses
The "non-commercial" option included in some Creative Commons licenses is controversial in definition, [29] as it is sometimes unclear what can be considered a non-commercial setting, and application, since its restrictions differ from the principles of open content promoted by other permissive licenses . [30] In 2014 Wikimedia Deutschland published a guide to using Creative Commons licenses as wiki pages for translations and as PDF. [31]

Zero / public domain
Besides licenses, Creative Commons also offers through CC0 a way to release material worldwide into the public domain . [18] CC0 is a legal tool for waiving as many rights as legally possible. [33] Or, when not legally possible, CC0 acts as fallback as public domain equivalent license . [33] Development of CC0 began in 2007 [34] and the tool was released in 2009. [35] [36] A major target of the license was the scientific data community. [37]
In 2010, Creative Commons announced its Public Domain Mark , [38] a tool for labeling works already in the public domain. Together, CC0 and the Public Domain Mark replace the Public Domain Dedication and Certification, [39] which took a U.S.-centric approach and co-mingled distinct operations.
In 2011, the Free Software Foundation added CC0 to its free software licenses , [40] and currently recommends CC0 as the preferred method of releasing software into the public domain . [41]
In February 2012 CC0 was submitted to Open Source Initiative (OSI) for their approval. [42] However, controversy arose over its clause which excluded from the scope of the license any relevant patents held by the copyright holder. This clause was added with scientific data in mind rather than software, but some members of the OSI believed it could weaken users' defenses against software patents . As a result, Creative Commons withdrew their submission, and the license is not currently approved by the OSI. [37] [43]
In 2013, Unsplash began using the CC0 license to distribute free stock photography . [44] [45] It now distributes several million photos a month [46] and has inspired a host of similar sites, including CC0 photography companies and CC0 blogging companies. [47] Lawrence Lessig , the founder of Creative Commons, has contributed to the site. [48] [ dead link ]
In October 2014 the Open Knowledge Foundation approved the Creative Commons CC0 as conformant with the "Open Definition" and recommend the license to dedicate content to the public domain. [3] [4]

Adaptation
Rights in an adaptation can be expressed by a CC license that is compatible with the status or licensing of the original work or works on which the adaptation is based. [49]

Legal aspects
The legal implications of large numbers of works having Creative Commons licensing are difficult to predict, and there is speculation that media creators often lack insight to be able to choose the license which best meets their intent in applying it. [50]
Some works licensed using Creative Commons licenses have been involved in several court cases. [51] Creative Commons itself was not a party to any of these cases; they only involved licensors or licensees of Creative Commons licenses. When the cases went as far as decisions by judges (that is, they were not dismissed for lack of jurisdiction or were not settled privately out of court), they have all validated the legal robustness of Creative Commons public licenses. Here are some notable cases:

Dutch tabloid
In early 2006, podcaster Adam Curry sued a Dutch tabloid who published photos from Curry's Flickr page without Curry's permission. The photos were licensed under the Creative Commons Non-Commercial license. While the verdict was in favor of Curry, the tabloid avoided having to pay restitution to him as long as they did not repeat the offense. Professor Bernt Hugenholtz, main creator of the Dutch CC license and director of the Institute for Information Law of the University of Amsterdam, commented, "The Dutch Court's decision is especially noteworthy because it confirms that the conditions of a Creative Commons license automatically apply to the content licensed under it, and binds users of such content even without expressly agreeing to, or having knowledge of, the conditions of the license." [52] [53] [54] [55]

Virgin Mobile
In 2007, Virgin Mobile Australia launched an Australian bus stop ad campaign promoting their cellphone text messaging service using the work of amateur photographers who uploaded their work to Flickr using a Creative Commons-BY (Attribution) license. Users licensing their images this way freed their work for use by any other entity, as long as the original creator was attributed credit, without any other compensation required. Virgin upheld this single restriction by printing a URL leading to the photographer's Flickr page on each of their ads. However, one picture, depicting 15-year-old Alison Chang at a fund-raising carwash for her church, [56] caused some controversy when she sued Virgin Mobile. The photo was taken by Alison's church youth counselor, Justin Ho-Wee Wong, who uploaded the image to Flickr under the Creative Commons license. [56] In 2008, the case (concerning personality rights rather than copyright as such) was thrown out of a Texas court for lack of jurisdiction. [57] [58]

SGAE vs Fernández
In the fall of 2006, the collecting society Sociedad General de Autores y Editores ( SGAE ) in Spain sued Ricardo Andrés Utrera Fernández, owner of a disco bar located in Badajoz who played CC-licensed music. SGAE argued that Fernández should pay royalties for public performance of the music between November 2002 and August 2005. The Lower Court rejected the collecting society's claims because the owner of the bar proved that the music he was using was not managed by the society. [59]
In February 2006, the Cultural Association Ladinamo (based in Madrid, and represented by Javier de la Cueva ) was granted the use of copyleft music in their public activities. The sentence said: "Admitting the existence of music equipment, a joint evaluation of the evidence practiced, this court is convinced that the defendant prevents communication of works whose management is entrusted to the plaintiff [SGAE], using a repertoire of authors who have not assigned the exploitation of their rights to the SGAE, having at its disposal a database for that purpose and so it is manifested both by the legal representative of the Association and by Manuela Villa Acosta, in charge of the cultural programming of the association, which is compatible with the alternative character of the Association and its integration in the movement called ' copy left '". [60]

GateHouse Media, Inc. vs. That's Great News, LLC
On June 30, 2010 GateHouse Media filed a lawsuit against That's Great News . GateHouse Media owns a number of local newspapers, including Rockford Register Star , which is based in Rockford, Illinois. That's Great News makes plaques out of newspaper articles and sells them to the people featured in the articles. [61] GateHouse sued That's Great News for copyright infringement and breach of contract. GateHouse claimed that TGN violated the non-commercial and no-derivative works restrictions on GateHouse Creative Commons licensed work when TGN published the material on its website. The case was settled on August 17, 2010, though the settlement was not made public. [61] [62]

Drauglis v. Kappa Map Group, LLC
The plaintiff was photographer Art Drauglis, who uploaded several pictures to the photo-sharing website Flickr using Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 Generic License (CC BY-SA), including one entitled "Swain's Lock, Montgomery Co., MD.". The defendant was Kappa Map Group, a map-making company, which downloaded the image and used it in a compilation entitled "Montgomery Co. Maryland Street Atlas". Though there was nothing on the cover that indicated the origin of the picture, the text " Photo: Swain's Lock, Montgomery Co., MD Photographer: Carly Lesser & Art Drauglis, Creative Commoms [ sic ] , CC-BY-SA-2.0 " appeared at the bottom of the back cover.
The validity of the CC BY-SA 2.0 as a license was not in dispute. The CC BY-SA 2.0 requires that the licensee to use nothing less restrictive than the CC BY-SA 2.0 terms. The atlas was sold commercially and not for free reuse by others. The dispute was whether Drauglis' license terms that would apply to "derivative works" applied to the entire atlas. Drauglis sued the defendants on June 2014 for copyright infringement and license breach, seeking declaratory and injunctive relief, damages, fees, and costs. Drauglis asserted, among other things, that Kappa Map Group "exceeded the scope of the License because defendant did not publish the Atlas under a license with the same or similar terms as those under which the Photograph was originally licensed." [63] The judge dismissed the case on that count, ruling that the atlas was not a derivative work of the photograph in the sense of the license. Since the atlas was not a derivative work of the photograph, Kappa Map Group did not need to license the entire atlas under the CC BY-SA 2.0 license. The judge also determined that the work had been properly attributed. [64]

Verband zum Schutz geistigen Eigentums im Internet (VGSE)
This incident has not been tested in court, but it highlights a potentially disturbing practice. In July 2016, German computer magazine LinuxUser reports that a German blogger Christoph Langner used two CC-BY licensed photographs from Berlin photographer Dennis Skley on his private blog Linuxundich.de . Langner duly mentioned the author and the license and added a link to the original. Langner was later contacted by the Verband zum Schutz geistigen Eigentums im Internet (VGSE) (Association for the Protection of Intellectual Property in the Internet) with a demand for €2300 for failing to provide the full name of the work, the full name of the author, the license text, and a source link, as is apparently required by the fine print in the license. Of this sum, €40 goes to the photographer and remainder is retained by VGSE. [65] [66]

Works with a Creative Commons license
Creative Commons maintains a content directory wiki of organizations and projects using Creative Commons licenses. [67] On its website CC also provides case studies of projects using CC licenses across the world. [68] CC licensed content can also be accessed through a number of content directories and search engines (see CC licensed content directories ).

Retired licenses
Due to either disuse or criticism, a number of previously offered Creative Commons licenses have since been retired, [15] [69] and are no longer recommended for new works. The retired licenses include all licenses lacking the Attribution element other than CC0, as well as the following four licenses:

See also
WebPage index: 00169
Permissive software licence
A Permissive software license , sometimes also called BSD-like or BSD-style license, [2] is a FOSS software license with minimal requirements about how the software can be redistributed. Examples include the MIT License , BSD licenses and the Apache license . As of 2016, [update] the most popular FOSS license is the permissive MIT license. [3] [4]

Definitions
The Open Source Initiative defines a permissive software license as a "non- copyleft license ". [5] GitHub 's choosealicense website described the MIT permissive license as, "lets people do anything they want with your code as long as they provide attribution back to you and don’t hold you liable." [6] California Western School of Law 's newmediarights.com defined them as follows: "The ‘BSD-like’ licenses such as the BSD, MIT, and Apache licenses are extremely permissive, requiring little more than attributing the original portions of the licensed code to the original developers in your own code and/or documentation.". [2]

Other terms

Copycenter
Copycenter is a term originally used to explain the modified BSD licence , a permissive free software license. The term was presented by Kirk McKusick , a computer scientist famous for his work on BSD, during one of his speeches at BSDCon 1999. It is a word play on copyright , copyleft and copy center .
The liberty to 'make as many copies as you want' is in fact also provided by all copyleft licenses. However, unlike both copyleft licenses and copyright law, permissive free software licenses do not control the license terms that a derivative work falls under.

Copyfree
The Copyfree Initiative defines Copyfree as a type of permissive copyright license which falls under their Copyfree Standard Definition . [8]
Copyfree licenses include the Simplified BSD licence , the Open Works license, and others, but excludes the GNU GPL or other copyleft licenses. The Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication and the WTFPL license are also considered to be copyfree, as are other public domain equivalent licenses . [9]
While all copyfree licenses are permissive licenses, not all permissive licenses are copyfree, because they may introduce limitations not allowed under the copyfree definition. Therefore, copyfree can be seen as subset of permissive free licenses, comprising the most permissive of them. The Apache Licence 2.0 (as well as previous versions of Apache license) is an example of a non-copyfree permissive licence. [10] Another notable example is the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 license, which is also non-compliant with the Copyfree Standard Definition because the license forbids DRM technologies.

Comparison to public domain
Computer Associates Int'l v. Altai used the term "public domain" to refer to works that have become widely shared and distributed under permission, rather than work that was deliberately put into the public domain. However, permissive licenses are not actually equivalent to releasing a work into the public domain .
Permissive licenses often do stipulate some limited requirements, such as that the original authors must be credited ( attribution ). If a work is truly in the public domain, this is usually not legally required, but a United States copyright registration requires disclosing material that has been previously published, [12] and attribution may still be considered an ethical requirement in academia .

Comparison to copyleft
A major difference between the set of permissive and copyleft free software licenses is that when the software is being redistributed (either modified or unmodified), permissive licenses don't enforce the redistributor to open the modified source code. Copyleft ("sharealike") licenses enforce the publication of the source code under the copyleft license. [13] [14] Some people argue that copyleft licenses see the world as "evil" and therefore enforce "freedoms" ("availability of source code") while permissive licenses see the world as "good", therefore just allowing good actions and hoping for giving back in form of source code. [15] Permissive licenses don't try to guarantee that future generations of the software will remain free and publicly available, in contrast to licenses which have reciprocity / share-alike requirements which try to enforce this.
The FreeBSD project argues on the advantages of permissive licenses for companies and commercial use-cases: they place only "minimal restrictions on future behavior" and aren't "legal time-bombs" , unlike copyleft licenses. [16]
Also permissive licenses have often an excellent licence compatibility , [17] [18] in comparison to copyleft licenses who can't be always freely combined and mixed. [19] [20] However, most GPLv2 licensed software allows to upgrade to the terms of later versions of the GPL, achieving by that a somewhat better inter-GPL compatibility. Also, some copyleft licenses have exception clauses that allow combining them with software that is under different licenses or license versions. [21]

License compatibility
In general permissive licenses show a good licence compatibility with most other software licenses in most situations. [17] [18]
Due to their non-restrictiveness most permissive software licenses are even compatible with copyleft licenses, which are incompatible with most other licenses. Copyleft licenses don't allow the addition of additional restrictive clauses which would be often required in a combined work made from copyleft code and other licensed code. Only some older permissive licenses have clauses requiring advertising materials to credit the copyright holder which made them incompatible with copyleft licenses, for instance the 4-clause BSD license , the PHP Licence , and the OpenSSL License . Popular modern permissive licenses, as the MIT Licence , the 3-clause BSD licence , and the Zlib Licence , don't include advertising clauses and are compatible with many copyleft licenses.
Some licenses do not allow derived works to add a restriction that says a redistributor cannot add more restrictions. Examples include the CDDL and MsPL . However such restrictions also make the license incompatible with permissive free software licenses.
Some licenses are permissive but do not qualify as free software licenses as defined by the Free Software Foundation .

Reception and adoption
While always an important part of the FOSS license landscape, in the 2010s years several authors noted a raising popularity of the permissive licenses in contrast to the copyleft license. [23] [24] [25] [26]
As of 2015, [update] the MIT licence, a permissive license, is the most popular license in the FOSS domain before a copyleft one, the second placed GPLv2 . [3] [4]

See also
WebPage index: 00170
Clip art
Clip art , in the graphic arts , is pre-made images used to illustrate any medium. Today, clip art is used extensively in both personal and commercial projects, ranging from home-printed greeting cards to commercial candles . Clip art comes in many forms, both electronic and printed. However, most clip art today is created, distributed, and used in an electronic form. Since its inception, clip art has evolved to include a wide variety of content, file formats, illustration styles, and licensing restrictions. Clip art is generally composed exclusively of illustrations (created by hand or by computer software), and does not include stock photography .

History
The term "clipart" originated through the practice of physically cutting images from pre-existing printed works for use in other publishing projects. Before the advent of computers in desktop publishing, clip art was used through a process called paste up . Many clip art images in this era qualified as line art . In this process, the clip art images are cut out by hand, then attached via adhesives to a board representing a scale size of the finished, printed work. After the addition of text and art created through phototypesetting , the finished, camera-ready pages are called mechanicals. Since the 1990s, nearly all publishers have replaced the paste up process with desktop publishing .
After the introduction of mass-produced personal computers such as the IBM PC in 1981 and the Apple Macintosh in 1984, the widespread use of clip art by consumers became possible through the invention of desktop publishing. For the IBM PC, the first library of professionally drawn clip art was provided with VCN ExecuVision , introduced in 1983. These images were used in business presentations, as well as for other types of presentations. Many people credit Apple Computer with providing desktop publishing with the tools required to make it a reality for consumers, with the introduction of the Macintosh's graphical user interface (GUI) in 1984 and the LaserWriter laser printer in late 1985. After software maker Aldus introduced PageMaker in 1985, professional quality desktop publishing became possible with consumer desktop computers.
After 1986, desktop publishing generated a widespread need for pre-made, electronic images as consumers began to produce newsletters and brochures using their own computers. Electronic clip art emerged to fill the need. Early electronic clip art was simple line art or bitmap images due to the lack of sophisticated electronic illustration tools. With the introduction of the Apple Macintosh program MacPaint , consumers were provided the ability to edit and use bit-mapped clip art for the first time.
One of the first successful electronic clip art pioneers was T/Maker Company, a Mountain View, California , company, which had its early roots with an alternative word processor, WriteNow , commissioned for the Macintosh by Steve Jobs . Beginning in 1984, T/Maker took advantage of the capability of the Macintosh to provide bit-mapped graphics in black and white; by publishing small, retail collections of these images under the brand name "ClickArt". The first version of "ClickArt" was a mixed collection of images designed for personal use. The illustrators who created the first "serious" clip art for business/organizational (professional) use were Mike Mathis, Joan Shogren , and Dennis Fregger ; published by T/Maker in 1984 as "ClickArt Publications".
In 1986, the first vector-based clip art disc was released by Compuset, a small desktop publishing company based in Eureka, California. The black-and-white art was painstakingly created by Rick Siegfried with MacDraw, sometimes using hundreds of simple objects combined to create complex images. It was released on a single-sided floppy disc.
In 1986, Adobe Systems introduced Adobe Illustrator for the Macintosh, allowing home computer users the first opportunity to manipulate vector art in a GUI. This made the higher-resolution vector art possible and in 1987 T/Maker published the first vector-based clip art images made with Illustrator, despite widespread unfamiliarity with the bezier curves required to edit vector art. However, graphic designers and many consumers quickly realized the enormous advantages of vector art, and T/Maker's clip art became the gold standard of the industry in the late 1980s and early 1990s. In 1994, T/Maker was sold to Deluxe Corp and then two years later to its main rival, Broderbund .
With widespread adoption of the CD-ROM in the early 1990s, several pre-computer clip art companies such as Dover Publications also began offering electronic clip art.
The mid-1990s ushered in more innovation in the clip art industry, as well as a marketing focus on quantity over quality. Even T/Maker, whose success was built upon selling small, high quality clip art packages of approximately 200 images, began to get interested in the volume clip art market. In March, 1995, T/Maker became the exclusive publisher of over 500,000 copyright-free images which was, at the time, one of the world's largest clip art libraries. This licensing agreement was subsequently transferred to Broderbund.
Also during this period, word processing companies, including Microsoft , began offering clip art as a built-in feature of their products. In 1996, Microsoft Word 6.0 included only 82 WMF clip art files as part of its default installation. Today, Microsoft offers clip art as part of over 140,000 media elements in the Microsoft Office product suite.
Other companies such as Nova Development and Clip Art Incorporated also pioneered the marketing of large clip art collections in the late 1990s, including Nova's "Art Explosion" series, which sold clip art in increasingly large libraries up to a million images.
Between 1998 and 2001, T/Maker's clip art assets were sold each year as a result of some of the largest mergers and acquisitions in the computer software industry, including those of The Learning Company (in 1998) and Mattel (in 1999). All of T/Maker's clip art is currently marketed through the Broderbund division of the Irish company Riverdeep .
In the early 2000s, the World Wide Web continued to gain popularity as a retail software distribution channel, and several companies pioneered the sale of clip art through online, searchable libraries, including Clipart.com (part of Jupiter Media), WeddingClipart.com (part of Letters and Arts Incorporated), and GraphicsFactory.com (part of Clip Art Incorporated). Because of the Web, clip art is now not only sold through retail channels as packaged bundles of images, but also as individual images and subscriptions to entire libraries (which allow you to download an unlimited number of images for the duration of the subscription).
In the mid-2000s, the clip art market is segmented in several different ways, including the data type, the art style, the delivery medium, and the marketing method.
On December 1, 2014, Microsoft officially ended its support of Clip Art in Microsoft Office products. These programs now guide users to the Bing image search. [1]
Clip art is divided into two different data types represented by many different file formats: bitmap and vector art . Clip art vendors may provide images of just one type or both. The delivery medium of a clip art product varies from different types of traditionally boxed retail packages to online download sites. Clip art is sold via both traditional and web-based retail channels (as with Nova Development products), as well as via online, searchable libraries (as with Clipart.com). Clip art vendors typically market clip art by focusing either on quantity or vertical market specialty. The marketing method often goes hand in hand with the art style of the clip art sold.
To compete largely on quantity, some clip art vendors must produce or license new and old clip art collections in volume. Clip art marketed in this way is often less expensive but simpler in structure and detail, as is typified by cartoons, line art, and symbols. Clip art which is sold according to smaller, specialized subject genres tends to be more complex, modern, detailed, and expensive.

File formats
Electronic clip art is available in several different file formats . It is important for clip art users to understand the differences between file formats so that they can use an appropriate image file and get the resolution and detail results they need.
Clip art file formats are divided into 2 different types: bitmap or vector graphics .
Bitmap (or "rasterized") file formats are used to describe rectangular images made up of a grid of multicolored or black and white pixels. Scanned photos, for example, make use of a bitmap file format. Bitmap images are always limited in quality by their resolution, which must be fixed at the time the file is created. If the image is not rectangular, then it is saved on a default background color (usually white) defined by the smallest bounding rectangle in which the image fits.
Because of their fixed resolution, printing bitmap images can easily produce grainy, jaggy, or blurry results if the resolution is not ideally suited to the printer resolution. In addition, bitmap images become grainy when they are scaled larger than their intended resolution. A few bitmap file formats (such as Apple's PICT format) support alpha channels , which allow bitmap images to have transparent backgrounds or an image selection which uses antialiasing . Most common web-based file formats such as GIF , JPEG , and PNG are bitmap file formats. The GIF file format is one of the simplest, low-resolution bitmap file formats, only supporting 256 colors per image. As a result, however, GIF files can be extremely small in file size. Other common bitmap file formats are BMP ( Windows bitmap ), TGA , and TIFF . Most clip art is provided in a low resolution, bitmap file format which is unsuitable for scaling, transparent backgrounds, or good-quality printed materials. However, bitmap file formats are ideal for photos, especially when combined with lossy data compression algorithms such as those available for JPEG files.
In contrast to the grid format of bitmap images, Vector graphics file formats use geometric modeling to describe an image as a series of points, lines, curves, and polygons. Because the image is described using geometric data instead of fixed pixels, the image can be scaled to any size while retaining "resolution independence", meaning that the image can be printed at the highest resolution a printer supports, resulting in a clear, crisp image. Vector file formats are usually superior in resolution and ease of editing as compared to bitmap file formats, but are not as widely supported by software and are not well-suited for storing pixel-specific data such as scanned photographs. In the early years of electronic clip art, vector illustrations were limited to simple line art representations. However, by the early 2000s, vector illustration tools could produce virtually the same illustrations as bitmap illustration tools, while still providing all of the advantages of vector file formats. The most common vector file format is Adobe's EPS ( Encapsulated PostScript ) file format. Microsoft has a much simpler, less sophisticated vector file format called WMF ( Windows Metafile ). The World Wide Web Consortium has developed a new, XML -based vector file format called SVG ( Scalable Vector Graphics ) and all major modern web browsers - including Mozilla Firefox , Internet Explorer 9 , Google Chrome , Opera , and Safari have at least some degree of support for SVG and can render the markup directly. For those with image-editing experience or interest to work with vector file formats, vector clip art provides the most flexible, highest quality images.

Image rights
All clip art usage is governed by the terms of individual copyrights and usage rights. The copyright and usage rights of a clip art image are important to understand so that the image is used in a legal, permitted way. The three most common categories of image rights are royalty free , rights managed , and public domain .
Most commercial clip art is sold with a limited royalty free license which allows customers to use the image for most personal, educational and non-profit applications. Some royalty free clip art also includes limited commercial rights (the right to use images in for-profit products). However, royalty free image rights often vary from vendor to vendor.
Some fine art, clip art is still sold on a rights managed basis. However this type of image rights have seen a steep decline in the past 20 years as royalty free licenses have become the preferred model for clip art.
Public domain images continue to be one of the most popular types of clip art because the image rights are free. However, many images are erroneously described as part of the public domain are actually copyrighted, and thus illegal to use without proper permissions. The main cause for this confusion is because once a public domain image is redrawn or edited in any way, it becomes a brand new image which is copyrightable by the editor.
The United States District Court ruled in 1999 as part of Bridgeman Art Library v. Corel Corp that exact copies of public domain images were not restricted under US copyright law, however the scope of this ruling only applies to photographs currently. It is originality, not skill, neither experience nor effort, which affects copyrightability of derivative images. In fact, the US Supreme Court in Feist v. Rural ruled that the difficulty of labor and expenses must be rejected as considerations in copyrightability.
Copyright on other clipart stands in contrast to exact replica photographs of paintings. The large clip art libraries produced by Dover Publications or the University of South Florida's Clipart ETC [2] project are based on public domain images, but because they have been scanned and edited by hand, they are now derivative works and copyrighted, subject to very specific usage policies. In order for a clip art image based on a public domain source to be truly in the public domain, the proper rights must be granted by the individual or organization which digitized and edited the original source of the image.
The popularity of the Web has facilitated widespread copying of pirated clip art which is then sold or given away as "free clip art". Virtually all images published after January 1, 1923 still have copyright protection under the laws of most countries. Images published prior to 1923 need to be carefully researched to make sure they are in the public domain . [ citation needed ] Creative Commons licenses is the forefront of the copyleft movement or a new form of free digital clipart and photo image distribution. Many website such as Flickr and Interartcenter use Creative Commons as an alternative to the full attribution copyrights.
The exception for clip art illustrations created after 1923 are those which are specifically donated to the public domain by the artist or publisher. For vector art, the open source community established Openclipart in 2004 as a clearinghouse for images which are legitimately donated to the public domain by their copyright owners. By 2014, the library contained over 50,000 vector images.

See also
WebPage index: 00171
Peer-to-peer
Peer-to-peer ( P2P ) computing or networking is a distributed application architecture that partitions tasks or workloads between peers. Peers are equally privileged, equipotent participants in the application. They are said to form a peer-to-peer network of nodes.
Peers make a portion of their resources, such as processing power, disk storage or network bandwidth, directly available to other network participants, without the need for central coordination by servers or stable hosts. [1] Peers are both suppliers and consumers of resources, in contrast to the traditional client-server model in which the consumption and supply of resources is divided. Emerging collaborative P2P systems are going beyond the era of peers doing similar things while sharing resources, and are looking for diverse peers that can bring in unique resources and capabilities to a virtual community thereby empowering it to engage in greater tasks beyond those that can be accomplished by individual peers, yet that are beneficial to all the peers. [2]
While P2P systems had previously been used in many application domains, [3] the architecture was popularized by the file sharing system Napster , originally released in 1999. The concept has inspired new structures and philosophies in many areas of human interaction. In such social contexts, peer-to-peer as a meme refers to the egalitarian social networking that has emerged throughout society, enabled by Internet technologies in general.

Historical development
While P2P systems had previously been used in many application domains, [3] the concept was popularized by file sharing systems such as the music-sharing application Napster (originally released in 1999). [ citation needed ] The peer-to-peer movement allowed millions of Internet users to connect "directly, forming groups and collaborating to become user-created search engines, virtual supercomputers, and filesystems." [4] The basic concept of peer-to-peer computing was envisioned in earlier software systems and networking discussions, reaching back to principles stated in the first Request for Comments , RFC 1 . [5]
Tim Berners-Lee 's vision for the World Wide Web was close to a P2P network in that it assumed each user of the web would be an active editor and contributor, creating and linking content to form an interlinked "web" of links. The early Internet was more open than present day, where two machines connected to the Internet could send packets to each other without firewalls and other security measures. [4] This contrasts to the broadcasting -like structure of the web as it has developed over the years. [6] As a precursor to the Internet, ARPANET was a successful client-server network where "every participating node could request and serve content." However, ARPANET was not self-organized, and it lacked the ability to "provide any means for context or content-based routing beyond 'simple' address-based routing." [7]
Therefore, a distributed messaging system that is often likened as an early peer-to-peer architecture was established: USENET . USENET was developed in 1979 and is a system that enforces a decentralized model of control. The basic model is a client-server model from the user or client perspective that offers a self-organizing approach to newsgroup servers. However, news servers communicate with one another as peers to propagate Usenet news articles over the entire group of network servers. The same consideration applies to SMTP email in the sense that the core email-relaying network of mail transfer agents has a peer-to-peer character, while the periphery of e-mail clients and their direct connections is strictly a client-server relationship. [ citation needed ]
In May 1999, with millions more people on the Internet, Shawn Fanning introduced the music and file-sharing application called Napster. [7] Napster was the beginning of peer-to-peer networks, as we know them today, where "participating users establish a virtual network, entirely independent from the physical network, without having to obey any administrative authorities or restrictions." [7]

Architecture
A peer-to-peer network is designed around the notion of equal peer nodes simultaneously functioning as both "clients" and "servers" to the other nodes on the network. This model of network arrangement differs from the client–server model where communication is usually to and from a central server. A typical example of a file transfer that uses the client-server model is the File Transfer Protocol (FTP) service in which the client and server programs are distinct: the clients initiate the transfer, and the servers satisfy these requests.

Routing and resource discovery
Peer-to-peer networks generally implement some form of virtual overlay network on top of the physical network topology, where the nodes in the overlay form a subset of the nodes in the physical network. Data is still exchanged directly over the underlying TCP/IP network, but at the application layer peers are able to communicate with each other directly, via the logical overlay links (each of which corresponds to a path through the underlying physical network). Overlays are used for indexing and peer discovery, and make the P2P system independent from the physical network topology. Based on how the nodes are linked to each other within the overlay network, and how resources are indexed and located, we can classify networks as unstructured or structured (or as a hybrid between the two). [8] [9] [10]

Unstructured networks
Unstructured peer-to-peer networks do not impose a particular structure on the overlay network by design, but rather are formed by nodes that randomly form connections to each other. [11] ( Gnutella , Gossip , and Kazaa are examples of unstructured P2P protocols). [12]
Because there is no structure globally imposed upon them, unstructured networks are easy to build and allow for localized optimizations to different regions of the overlay. [13] Also, because the role of all peers in the network is the same, unstructured networks are highly robust in the face of high rates of "churn"—that is, when large numbers of peers are frequently joining and leaving the network. [14] [15]
However the primary limitations of unstructured networks also arise from this lack of structure. In particular, when a peer wants to find a desired piece of data in the network, the search query must be flooded through the network to find as many peers as possible that share the data. Flooding causes a very high amount of signaling traffic in the network, uses more CPU /memory (by requiring every peer to process all search queries), and does not ensure that search queries will always be resolved. Furthermore, since there is no correlation between a peer and the content managed by it, there is no guarantee that flooding will find a peer that has the desired data. Popular content is likely to be available at several peers and any peer searching for it is likely to find the same thing. But if a peer is looking for rare data shared by only a few other peers, then it is highly unlikely that search will be successful. [16]

Structured networks
In structured peer-to-peer networks the overlay is organized into a specific topology, and the protocol ensures that any node can efficiently [17] search the network for a file/resource, even if the resource is extremely rare.
The most common type of structured P2P networks implement a distributed hash table (DHT), [18] [19] in which a variant of consistent hashing is used to assign ownership of each file to a particular peer. [20] [21] This enables peers to search for resources on the network using a hash table : that is, ( key , value ) pairs are stored in the DHT, and any participating node can efficiently retrieve the value associated with a given key. [22] [23]
However, in order to route traffic efficiently through the network, nodes in a structured overlay must maintain lists of neighbors that satisfy specific criteria. This makes them less robust in networks with a high rate of churn (i.e. with large numbers of nodes frequently joining and leaving the network). [15] [24] More recent evaluation of P2P resource discovery solutions under real workloads have pointed out several issues in DHT-based solutions such as high cost of advertising/discovering resources and static and dynamic load imbalance. [25]
Notable distributed networks that use DHTs include BitTorrent's distributed tracker, the Kad network , the Storm botnet , YaCy , and the Coral Content Distribution Network . Some prominent research projects include the Chord project , Kademlia , PAST storage utility , P-Grid , a self-organized and emerging overlay network, and CoopNet content distribution system . [26] DHT-based networks have also been widely utilized for accomplishing efficient resource discovery [27] [28] for grid computing systems, as it aids in resource management and scheduling of applications.

Hybrid models
Hybrid models are a combination of peer-to-peer and client-server models. [29] A common hybrid model is to have a central server that helps peers find each other. Spotify is an example of a hybrid model. There are a variety of hybrid models, all of which make trade-offs between the centralized functionality provided by a structured server/client network and the node equality afforded by the pure peer-to-peer unstructured networks. Currently, hybrid models have better performance than either pure unstructured networks or pure structured networks because certain functions, such as searching, do require a centralized functionality but benefit from the decentralized aggregation of nodes provided by unstructured networks. [30]

Security and trust
Peer-to-peer systems pose unique challenges from a computer security perspective.
Like any other form of software , P2P applications can contain vulnerabilities . What makes this particularly dangerous for P2P software, however, is that peer-to-peer applications act as servers as well as clients, meaning that they can be more vulnerable to remote exploits . [31]

Routing attacks
Also, since each node plays a role in routing traffic through the network, malicious users can perform a variety of "routing attacks", or denial of service attacks. Examples of common routing attacks include "incorrect lookup routing" whereby malicious nodes deliberately forward requests incorrectly or return false results, "incorrect routing updates" where malicious nodes corrupt the routing tables of neighboring nodes by sending them false information, and "incorrect routing network partition" where when new nodes are joining they bootstrap via a malicious node, which places the new node in a partition of the network that is populated by other malicious nodes. [32]

Corrupted data and malware
The prevalence of malware varies between different peer-to-peer protocols. Studies analyzing the spread of malware on P2P networks found, for example, that 63% of the answered download requests on the Limewire network contained some form of malware, whereas only 3% of the content on OpenFT contained malware. In both cases, the top three most common types of malware accounted for the large majority of cases (99% in Limewire, and 65% in OpenFT). Another study analyzing traffic on the Kazaa network found that 15% of the 500,000 file sample taken were infected by one or more of the 365 different computer viruses that were tested for. [33]
Corrupted data can also be distributed on P2P networks by modifying files that are already being shared on the network. For example, on the FastTrack network, the RIAA managed to introduce faked chunks into downloads and downloaded files (mostly MP3 files). Files infected with the RIAA virus were unusable afterwards and contained malicious code. The RIAA is also known to have uploaded fake music and movies to P2P networks in order to deter illegal file sharing. [34] Consequently, the P2P networks of today have seen an enormous increase of their security and file verification mechanisms. Modern hashing , chunk verification and different encryption methods have made most networks resistant to almost any type of attack, even when major parts of the respective network have been replaced by faked or nonfunctional hosts. [35]

Resilient and scalable computer networks
The decentralized nature of P2P networks increases robustness because it removes the single point of failure that can be inherent in a client-server based system. [36] As nodes arrive and demand on the system increases, the total capacity of the system also increases, and the likelihood of failure decreases. If one peer on the network fails to function properly, the whole network is not compromised or damaged. In contrast, in a typical client–server architecture, clients share only their demands with the system, but not their resources. In this case, as more clients join the system, fewer resources are available to serve each client, and if the central server fails, the entire network is taken down.

Distributed storage and search
There are both advantages and disadvantages in P2P networks related to the topic of data backup , recovery, and availability. In a centralized network, the system administrators are the only forces controlling the availability of files being shared. If the administrators decide to no longer distribute a file, they simply have to remove it from their servers, and it will no longer be available to users. Along with leaving the users powerless in deciding what is distributed throughout the community, this makes the entire system vulnerable to threats and requests from the government and other large forces. For example, YouTube has been pressured by the RIAA, MPAA, and entertainment industry to filter out copyrighted content. Although server-client networks are able to monitor and manage content availability, they can have more stability in the availability of the content they choose to host. A client should not have trouble accessing obscure content that is being shared on a stable centralized network. P2P networks, however, are more unreliable in sharing unpopular files because sharing files in a P2P network requires that at least one node in the network has the requested data, and that node must be able to connect to the node requesting the data. This requirement is occasionally hard to meet because users may delete or stop sharing data at any point. [37]
In this sense, the community of users in a P2P network is completely responsible for deciding what content is available. Unpopular files will eventually disappear and become unavailable as more people stop sharing them. Popular files, however, will be highly and easily distributed. Popular files on a P2P network actually have more stability and availability than files on central networks. In a centralized network a simple loss of connection between the server and clients is enough to cause a failure, but in P2P networks the connections between every node must be lost in order to cause a data sharing failure. In a centralized system, the administrators are responsible for all data recovery and backups, while in P2P systems, each node requires its own backup system. Because of the lack of central authority in P2P networks, forces such as the recording industry, RIAA, MPAA, and the government are unable to delete or stop the sharing of content on P2P systems. [38]

Applications

Content delivery
In P2P networks, clients both provide and use resources. This means that unlike client-server systems, the content serving capacity of peer-to-peer networks can actually increase as more users begin to access the content (especially with protocols such as Bittorrent that require users to share, refer a performance measurement study [39] ). This property is one of the major advantages of using P2P networks because it makes the setup and running costs very small for the original content distributor. [40] [41]

File-sharing networks
Many file peer-to-peer file sharing networks, such as Gnutella , G2 , and the eDonkey network popularized peer-to-peer technologies.

Copyright infringements
Peer-to-peer networking involves data transfer from one user to another without using an intermediate server. Companies developing P2P applications have been involved in numerous legal cases, primarily in the United States, over conflicts with copyright law. [43] Two major cases are Grokster vs RIAA and MGM Studios, Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd. . [44] In both of the cases the file sharing technology was ruled to be legal as long as the developers had no ability to prevent the sharing of the copyrighted material. [ citation needed ]

Multimedia

Other P2P applications

Social implications

Incentivizing resource sharing and cooperation
Cooperation among a community of participants is key to the continued success of P2P systems aimed at casual human users; these reach their full potential only when large numbers of nodes contribute resources. But in current practice P2P networks often contain large numbers of users who utilize resources shared by other nodes, but who do not share anything themselves (often referred to as the "freeloader problem"). Freeloading can have a profound impact on the network and in some cases can cause the community to collapse. [46] In these types of networks "users have natural disincentives to cooperate because cooperation consumes their own resources and may degrade their own performance." [47] Studying the social attributes of P2P networks is challenging due to large populations of turnover, asymmetry of interest and zero-cost identity. [47] A variety of incentive mechanisms have been implemented to encourage or even force nodes to contribute resources. [48]
Some researchers have explored the benefits of enabling virtual communities to self-organize and introduce incentives for resource sharing and cooperation, arguing that the social aspect missing from today's P2P systems should be seen both as a goal and a means for self-organized virtual communities to be built and fostered. [49] Ongoing research efforts for designing effective incentive mechanisms in P2P systems, based on principles from game theory, are beginning to take on a more psychological and information-processing direction.

Privacy and anonymity
Some peer-to-peer networks (e.g. Freenet ) place a heavy emphasis on privacy and anonymity —that is, ensuring that the contents of communications are hidden from eavesdroppers, and that the identities/locations of the participants are concealed. Public key cryptography can be used to provide encryption , data validation , authorization, and authentication for data/messages. Onion routing and other mix network protocols (e.g. Tarzan) can be used to provide anonymity. [50]

Political implications

Intellectual property law and illegal sharing
Although peer-to-peer networks can be used for legitimate purposes, rights holders have targeted peer-to-peer over the involvement with sharing copyrighted material. Peer-to-peer networking involves data transfer from one user to another without using an intermediate server. Companies developing P2P applications have been involved in numerous legal cases, primarily in the United States, primarily over issues surrounding copyright law. [43] Two major cases are Grokster vs RIAA and MGM Studios, Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd. . [44] In both of the cases the file sharing technology was ruled to be legal as long as the developers had no ability to prevent the sharing of the copyrighted material. To establish criminal liability for the copyright infringement on peer-to-peer systems, the government must prove that the defendant infringed a copyright willingly for the purpose of personal financial gain or commercial advantage. [51] Fair use exceptions allow limited use of copyrighted material to be downloaded without acquiring permission from the rights holders. These documents are usually news reporting or under the lines of research and scholarly work. Controversies have developed over the concern of illegitimate use of peer-to-peer networks regarding public safety and national security. When a file is downloaded through a peer-to-peer network, it is impossible to know who created the file or what users are connected to the network at a given time. Trustworthiness of sources is a potential security threat that can be seen with peer-to-peer systems. [52]

Network neutrality
Peer-to-peer applications present one of the core issues in the network neutrality controversy. Internet service providers ( ISPs ) have been known to throttle P2P file-sharing traffic due to its high- bandwidth usage. [53] Compared to Web browsing, e-mail or many other uses of the internet, where data is only transferred in short intervals and relative small quantities, P2P file-sharing often consists of relatively heavy bandwidth usage due to ongoing file transfers and swarm/network coordination packets. In October 2007, Comcast , one of the largest broadband Internet providers in the United States, started blocking P2P applications such as BitTorrent . Their rationale was that P2P is mostly used to share illegal content, and their infrastructure is not designed for continuous, high-bandwidth traffic. Critics point out that P2P networking has legitimate legal uses, and that this is another way that large providers are trying to control use and content on the Internet, and direct people towards a client-server -based application architecture. The client-server model provides financial barriers-to-entry to small publishers and individuals, and can be less efficient for sharing large files. As a reaction to this bandwidth throttling , several P2P applications started implementing protocol obfuscation, such as the BitTorrent protocol encryption . Techniques for achieving "protocol obfuscation" involves removing otherwise easily identifiable properties of protocols, such as deterministic byte sequences and packet sizes, by making the data look as if it were random. [54] The ISP's solution to the high bandwidth is P2P caching , where an ISP stores the part of files most accessed by P2P clients in order to save access to the Internet.

Current research
Researchers have used computer simulations to aid in understanding and evaluating the complex behaviors of individuals within the network. "Networking research often relies on simulation in order to test and evaluate new ideas. An important requirement of this process is that results must be reproducible so that other researchers can replicate, validate, and extend existing work." [55] If the research cannot be reproduced, then the opportunity for further research is hindered. "Even though new simulators continue to be released, the research community tends towards only a handful of open-source simulators. The demand for features in simulators, as shown by our criteria and survey, is high. Therefore, the community should work together to get these features in open-source software. This would reduce the need for custom simulators, and hence increase repeatability and reputability of experiments." [55]
Besides above, there have been work done on ns-2 open source network simulator. One research issue related to free rider detection and punishment has been explored using ns-2 simulator here. [56]

See also
WebPage index: 00172
Computer-aided manufacturing
Computer-aided manufacturing ( CAM ) is the use of software to control machine tools and related ones in the manufacturing of workpieces. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] This is not the only definition for CAM, but it is the most common; [1] CAM may also refer to the use of a computer to assist in all operations of a manufacturing plant, including planning, management, transportation and storage. [6] [7] Its primary purpose is to create a faster production process and components and tooling with more precise dimensions and material consistency, which in some cases, uses only the required amount of raw material (thus minimizing waste), while simultaneously reducing energy consumption. [ citation needed ] CAM is now a system used in schools and lower educational purposes. CAM is a subsequent computer-aided process after computer-aided design (CAD) and sometimes computer-aided engineering (CAE), as the model generated in CAD and verified in CAE can be input into CAM software, which then controls the machine tool. CAM is used in many schools alongside computer-aided design (CAD) to create objects.

Overview
Traditionally, CAM has been considered as a numerical control (NC) programming tool, where in two-dimensional (2-D) or three-dimensional (3-D) models of components generated in CAD As with other “Computer-Aided” technologies, CAM does not eliminate the need for skilled professionals such as manufacturing engineers , NC programmers, or machinists . CAM, in fact, leverages both the value of the most skilled manufacturing professionals through advanced productivity tools, while building the skills of new professionals through visualization, simulation and optimization tools.

History
Early commercial applications of CAM was in large companies in the automotive and aerospace industries, for example Pierre Béziers work developing the CAD/CAM application UNISURF in the 1960s for car body design and tooling at Renault . [8]
Historically, CAM software was seen to have several shortcomings that necessitated an overly high level of involvement by skilled CNC machinists. Fallows created the first CAD software but this had severe shortcomings and was promptly taken back into the developing stage. [ citation needed ] CAM software would output code for the least capable machine, as each machine tool control added on to the standard G-code set for increased flexibility. In some cases, such as improperly set up CAM software or specific tools, the CNC machine required manual editing before the program will run properly. None of these issues were so insurmountable that a thoughtful engineer or skilled machine operator could not overcome for prototyping or small production runs; G-Code is a simple language. In high production or high precision shops, a different set of problems were encountered where an experienced CNC machinist must both hand-code programs and run CAM software.
Integration of CAD with other components of CAD/CAM/CAE Product lifecycle management (PLM) environment requires an effective CAD data exchange . Usually it had been necessary to force the CAD operator to export the data in one of the common data formats, such as IGES or STL or Parasolid formats that are supported by a wide variety of software. The output from the CAM software is usually a simple text file of G-code/M-codes, sometimes many thousands of commands long, that is then transferred to a machine tool using a direct numerical control (DNC) program or in modern Controllers using a common USB Storage Device.
CAM packages could not, and still cannot, reason as a machinist can. They could not optimize toolpaths to the extent required of mass production . Users would select the type of tool, machining process and paths to be used. While an engineer may have a working knowledge of G-code programming, small optimization and wear issues compound over time. Mass-produced items that require machining are often initially created through casting or some other non-machine method. This enables hand-written, short, and highly optimized G-code that could not be produced in a CAM package.
At least in the United States, there is a shortage of young, skilled machinists entering the workforce able to perform at the extremes of manufacturing; high precision and mass production. [9] [ citation needed ] As CAM software and machines become more complicated, the skills required of a machinist or machine operator advance to approach that of a computer programmer and engineer rather than eliminating the CNC machinist from the workforce.
Typical areas of concern:

Overcoming historical shortcomings
Over time, the historical shortcomings of CAM are being attenuated, both by providers of niche solutions and by providers of high-end solutions. This is occurring primarily in three arenas:

Machining process
Most machining progresses through many stages, [11] each of which is implemented by a variety of basic and sophisticated strategies, depending on the material and the software available.

Software: large vendors
The top 20 largest CAM software companies, by direct revenues in year 2015, are sorted by global revenues:

See also
WebPage index: 00173
BioMed Central
BioMed Central ( BMC ) is a United Kingdom-based, for-profit scientific publisher specialising in open access journal publication. BioMed Central and its sister companies Chemistry Central and PhysMath Central publish over 200 scientific journals . Most BioMed Central journals are now published only online. BioMed Central describes itself as the first and largest open access science publisher. It is owned by Springer Nature .

History
BioMed Central was founded in 2000 as part of the Current Science Group (now Science Navigation Group, SNG), a nursery of scientific publishing companies. SNG chairman Vitek Tracz developed the concept for the company after NIH director Harold Varmus 's PubMed Central concept for open-access publishing was scaled back. [1] The first director of the company was Jan Velterop . In 2002, the company's business model evolved to include article processing charges, and these have since been the primary source of revenue.
In October 2008, it was announced that BioMed Central (along with Chemistry Central and PhysMath Central ) had been acquired by Springer Science+Business Media , the second largest STM publisher. [2]
In 2007 Yale University Libraries stopped subsidizing page charges for affiliates of Yale who are using BioMed Central as the publisher of their works. [3]
In November 2008, BioMed Central became an official supporting organisation of Healthcare Information For All . [4]

Journals
The flagship journals produced by BioMed Central include Genome Biology , BMC Medicine , and BMC Biology . It also produces the BMC journal series of 65 journals covering the fields of biology and medicine. Chemistry Central and the PhysMath Central series of journals are also produced by the company. Most of the other journals published by BioMed Central are owned and produced independently by societies and academic editorial boards, with BioMed Central providing the hosting, publishing platform and marketing.
All journals are published online; some of the flagship journals have in the past also been available as print subscriptions, but currently Arthritis Research & Therapy is the only journal to offer this. Publications in BioMed Central journals are, immediately upon publication, released under the Creative Commons "Attribution" license which grants permission to reuse publications and produce derivative work. The only exceptions to this (as of 2010) were the flagship journals, which reserved rights on review and commentary content; those articles were available to purchase on a subscription or on a pay-per-view basis, becoming freely available (but not fully open access) to all after six months; however, as of January 2015, "no subscription fees apply to these journals or to any articles published in them." [5]

BMC journal series
The BMC-series of journals is a collection of 65 online research journals published by BioMed Central. [6] Like all other BioMed Central journals, they have a policy of open access to the research articles they publish. Between them, they cover all major subject areas within biology and medicine. Two of the journals, BMC Biology and BMC Medicine , have a broad scope, and aim to publish particularly significant research. A third journal, BMC Research Notes , publishes research from all areas of biology and medicine without making impact or interest criteria for publication, while BMC Proceedings publishes conference proceedings. The other 61 journals specialise on a particular subject area. Due to their free licensing, images from BMC journals can be reused in other places.
Most BMC series journals have an impact factor . For the 49 journals with impact factors , it ranged from 1 ( BMC International Health and Human Rights ) to 6.68 ( BMC Medicine ). [7]

Databases
The company also has hosted biomedical databases, including Current Controlled Trials , a database of clinical trials . [8] The Biology Image Library and the Cases Database , a database of medical case reports , [9] were closed in 2014. [10] The company also provided hosting for institutional repositories of publications based on the DSpace platform under the brand Open Repository. [11] The Open Repository activity was sold to Atmire in 2016. [12]

See also
WebPage index: 00174
Nature Publishing Group
Nature Publishing Group is a division of the international scientific publishing company Springer Nature that publishes academic journals , magazines , online databases, and services in science and medicine. Nature Publishing Group's flagship publication is Nature , a weekly multidisciplinary journal first published in 1869. It also publishes Nature research journals, Nature Reviews journals (since 2000), and society -owned academic journals. Springer Nature also publishes Scientific American in 16 languages, a magazine intended for the general public. In 2013, Nature Publishing Group bought a controlling stake [1] in Frontiers . [2]
Before Springer Nature was formed in 2015, the Nature Publishing Group was a part of Macmillan Science and Education, a fully owned subsidiary of Holtzbrinck Publishing Group . [3]

Company overview
The Nature Publishing Group employs over 800 people in its offices in London , New York City , San Francisco , Seoul , Washington, D.C. , Boston , Tokyo , Paris , Munich , Hong Kong , Melbourne , Gurgaon , Mexico City , and Basingstoke . [4]

Products

Journals
As of September 2016, NPG publishes 148 academic journals. [5] The former Nature Clinical Practice series was rebranded and folded into the Nature Reviews series in April 2009. [6] They also publish the njp (Nature Journal Partner) series.

Access and pricing
In most cases, the costs of Springer Nature's publications are recovered via subscription to individuals and institutions. Over 40 journals allow their authors to publish open access articles, with the author (or their institution or research funder) paying a publication charge to the journal. The publisher also has several open access journals . Authors are also allowed to post accepted, unedited papers on their websites or the funding body's archives no earlier than 6 months after publication. [7]
In June 2010, a letter outlining the University of California libraries' pricing challenges with NPG was distributed to university faculty by campus librarians with the support of the systemwide University Committee on Library and Scholarly Communication. The letter also described a potential boycott if the dispute was not resolved. [8] In August 2010, a joint statement was released stating "Our two organizations have agreed to work together in the coming months to address our mutual short- and long-term challenges, including an exploration of potential new approaches and evolving publishing models." [9]
On 2 December 2014, NPG announced that it would make content from all of Nature ' s journals available online for free. However, articles are presented using the digital rights management system ReadCube (which is funded by the Macmillan subsidiary Digital Science), which only provides "read-only" access, and does not allow readers to download, copy, print, or otherwise distribute the content. Additionally, links to these articles can only be generated by Nature subscribers and a group of selected media outlets—but the links can be publicly distributed through online articles and social networks afterwards. Providers can also provide annotations on the linked articles. [10] The move was designed to counter the trend of "dark sharing", while leveraging ReadCube to provide analytics . While considering it a compromise between fully restricted access, critics do not consider this to be a true open access scheme due to its restrictions on use and distribution. [11]

Textbooks
In 2011, Nature launched its first line of electronic textbooks for the college market, starting with Principles of Biology , which was adopted by California State University . [12] [13] The textbook line has been described by Vikram Savkar, Senior Vice President and Publishing Director at Nature Publishing Group, as potentially breaking down the traditional textbook publishing model. [14]

Other services
Other active Nature Publishing Group services include:
Past experiments at offering online services include:

See also
WebPage index: 00175
Rule of law
The rule of law is the legal principle that law should govern a nation , as opposed to being governed by decisions of individual government officials . It primarily refers to the influence and authority of law within society, particularly as a constraint upon behaviour, including behaviour of government officials. [2] The phrase can be traced back to 16th century Britain , and in the following century the Scottish theologian Samuel Rutherford used the phrase in his argument against the divine right of kings . [3] John Locke defined freedom under the rule of law as follows:
The rule of law was further popularized in the 19th century by British jurist A. V. Dicey . The concept, if not the phrase, was familiar to ancient philosophers such as Aristotle , who wrote "Law should govern". [5]
Rule of law implies that every citizen is subject to the law, including lawmakers themselves. In this sense, it stands in contrast to an autocracy , dictatorship , or oligarchy where the rulers are held above the law. Lack of the rule of law can be found in both democracies and dictatorships, for example because of neglect or ignorance of the law, and the rule of law is more apt to decay if a government has insufficient corrective mechanisms for restoring it. Government based upon the rule of law is called nomocracy .

History
Although credit for popularizing the expression "the rule of law" in modern times is usually given to A. V. Dicey , [6] [7] development of the legal concept can be traced through history to many ancient civilizations, including ancient Greece , China , Mesopotamia , India , and Rome . [8]

Antiquity
In the West , the ancient Greeks initially regarded the best form of government as rule by the best men. [9] Plato advocated a benevolent monarchy ruled by an idealized philosopher king , who was above the law. [9] Plato nevertheless hoped that the best men would be good at respecting established laws, explaining that "Where the law is subject to some other authority and has none of its own, the collapse of the state, in my view, is not far off; but if law is the master of the government and the government is its slave, then the situation is full of promise and men enjoy all the blessings that the gods shower on a state." [10] More than Plato attempted to do, Aristotle flatly opposed letting the highest officials wield power beyond guarding and serving the laws. [9] In other words, Aristotle advocated the rule of law:
According to the Roman statesman Cicero , "We are all servants of the laws in order that we may be free." [11] During the Roman Republic, controversial magistrates might be put on trial when their terms of office expired. Under the Roman Empire, the sovereign was personally immune ( legibus solutus ), but those with grievances could sue the treasury. [6]
In China, members of the school of legalism during the 3rd century BC argued for using law as a tool of governance, but they promoted "rule by law" as opposed to "rule of law", meaning that they placed the aristocrats and emperor above the law. [12] In contrast, the Huang-Lao school of Daoism rejected legal positivism in favor of a natural law that even the ruler would be subject to. [13]
There has recently been an effort to reevaluate the influence of the Bible on Western constitutional law. In the Old Testament , there was some language in Deuteronomy imposing restrictions on the Jewish king, regarding such things as how many wives he could have, and how many horses he could own for his personal use. According to Professor Bernard M. Levinson , "This legislation was so utopian in its own time that it seems never to have been implemented...." [14] The Deuteronomic social vision may have influenced opponents of the divine right of kings , including Bishop John Ponet in sixteenth-century England. [15]

Middle Ages
In Islamic jurisprudence rule of law was formulated in the seventh century, so that no official could claim to be above the law, not even the caliph . [16] However, this was not a reference to secular law, but to Islamic religious law in the form of Sharia law . [17]
Alfred the Great , Anglo-Saxon King of the 9th century, reformed the law of his kingdom and created a law code (see Doom Book ) with the biblical Mosaic law and Christian commandments as its basis. He ruled that justice had to be equal between people, whether rich or poor, friends or enemies. This was likely inspired from Leviticus 19: "You shall do no injustice in judgment! You shall not be partial to the poor; nor defer to the great! But you are to judge your neighbour fairly!".
In 1215, Archbishop Stephen Langton gathered the Barons in England and forced King John and future sovereigns and magistrates back under the rule of law, preserving ancient liberties by Magna Carta in return for exacting taxes. [18] [19] This foundation for a constitution was carried into the United States Constitution .
In 1481, during the reign of Ferdinand II of Aragon , the Constitució de l'Observança was approved by the General Court of Catalonia , establishing the submission of royal power (included its officers) to the laws of the Principality of Catalonia . [20]

Early modern period
The first known use of this English phrase occurred around AD 1500 [21] Another early example of the phrase "rule of law" is found in a petition to James I of England in 1610, from the House of Commons :
In 1607, English Chief Justice Sir Edward Coke said in the Case of Prohibitions (according to his own report) "that the law was the golden met-wand and measure to try the causes of the subjects; and which protected His Majesty in safety and peace: with which the King was greatly offended, and said, that then he should be under the law, which was treason to affirm, as he said; to which I said, that Bracton saith, quod Rex non debed esse sub homine, sed sub Deo et lege (That the King ought not to be under any man but under God and the law.)."
Among the first modern authors to use the term and give the principle theoretical foundations was Samuel Rutherford in Lex, Rex (1644). [3] The title, Latin for "the law is king", subverts the traditional formulation rex lex ("the king is law"). [23] John Locke also discussed this issue in his Second Treatise of Government (1690). The principle was also discussed by Montesquieu in The Spirit of the Laws (1748). [24] The phrase "rule of law" appears in Samuel Johnson 's Dictionary (1755). [25]
In 1776, the notion that no one is above the law was popular during the founding of the United States. For example, Thomas Paine wrote in his pamphlet Common Sense that "in America, the law is king . For as in absolute governments the King is law, so in free countries the law ought to be king; and there ought to be no other." [26] In 1780, John Adams enshrined this principle in the Massachusetts Constitution by seeking to establish "a government of laws and not of men." [27]
The influence of Britain, France and the United States contributed to spreading the principle of the rule of law to other countries around the world. [28] [29]

Meaning and categorization of interpretations
The Oxford English Dictionary has defined "rule of law" this way: [2]
Rule of law implies that every citizen is subject to the law. It stands in contrast to the idea that the ruler is above the law, for example by divine right .
Despite wide use by politicians, judges and academics, the rule of law has been described as "an exceedingly elusive notion". [30] Among modern legal theorists , one finds that at least two principal conceptions of the rule of law can be identified: a formalist or "thin" definition, and a substantive or " thick " definition; one occasionally encounters a third "functional" conception. [31] Formalist definitions of the rule of law do not make a judgment about the "justness" of law itself, but define specific procedural attributes that a legal framework must have in order to be in compliance with the rule of law. Substantive conceptions of the rule of law go beyond this and include certain substantive rights that are said to be based on, or derived from, the rule of law. [32]
Most legal theorists believe that the rule of law has purely formal characteristics, meaning that the law must be publicly declared (prohibitions or exigencies), with prospective application (punishments or consequences tied to a given prohibition or exigency), and possess the characteristics of generality, equality, and certainty, but there are no requirements with regard to the content of the law. Others, including a few legal theorists, believe that the rule of law necessarily entails protection of individual rights. Within legal theory, these two approaches to the rule of law are seen as the two basic alternatives, respectively labelled the formal and substantive approaches. Still, there are other views as well. Some believe that democracy is part of the rule of law. [33]
The "formal" interpretation is more widespread than the "substantive" interpretation. Formalists hold that the law must be prospective, well-known, and have characteristics of generality, equality, and certainty. Other than that, the formal view contains no requirements as to the content of the law. [31] This formal approach allows laws that protect democracy and individual rights, but recognizes the existence of "rule of law" in countries that do not necessarily have such laws protecting democracy or individual rights.
The substantive interpretation holds that the rule of law intrinsically protects some or all individual rights.
The functional interpretation of the term "rule of law", consistent with the traditional English meaning, contrasts the "rule of law" with the " rule of man ." [33] According to the functional view, a society in which government officers have a great deal of discretion has a low degree of "rule of law", whereas a society in which government officers have little discretion has a high degree of "rule of law". [33] Upholding the rule of law can sometimes require the punishment of those who commit offenses that are justifiable under natural law but not statutory law. [34] The rule of law is thus somewhat at odds with flexibility, even when flexibility may be preferable. [33]
The ancient concept of rule of law can be distinguished from rule by law, according to political science professor Li Shuguang: "The difference....is that, under the rule of law, the law is preeminent and can serve as a check against the abuse of power. Under rule by law, the law is a mere tool for a government, that suppresses in a legalistic fashion." [35]

Status in various jurisdictions
The rule of law has been considered as one of the key dimensions that determine the quality and good governance of a country. [36] Research, like the Worldwide Governance Indicators , defines the rule of law as: "the extent to which agents have confidence and abide by the rules of society, and in particular the quality of contract enforcement, the police and the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime or violence." [36] Based on this definition the Worldwide Governance Indicators project has developed aggregate measurements for the rule of law in more than 200 countries, as seen in the map below. [37] A government based on the rule of law can be called a "nomocracy", from the Greek nomos (law) and kratos (power or rule). [38]

Europe
The preamble of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms says "the governments of European countries which are like-minded and have a common heritage of political traditions, ideals, freedom and the rule of law".
In France and Germany the concepts of rule of law ( Etat de droit and Rechtsstaat respectively) are analogous to the principles of constitutional supremacy and protection of fundamental rights from public authorities (see public law ), particularly the legislature . [39] [40] France was one of the early pioneers of the ideas of the rule of law. [41] The German interpretation is more "rigid" but similar to that of France and the United Kingdom. [42] [43]
Finland 's constitution explicitly requires rule of law by stipulating that "the exercise of public powers shall be based on an Act. In all public activity, the law shall be strictly observed."

United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom the rule of law is a long-standing principle of the way the country is governed, dating from Magna Carta in 1215 and the Bill of Rights 1689 . [23] [44] [45] In the 19th century, A. V. Dicey , a constitutional scholar and lawyer, wrote of the twin pillars of the British constitution in his classic work Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution (1885); these two pillars are the rule of law and parliamentary sovereignty . [46]

Americas

United States
All government officers of the United States , including the President , the Justices of the Supreme Court , state judges and legislators, and all members of Congress , pledge first and foremost to uphold the Constitution . These oaths affirm that the rule of law is superior to the rule of any human leader. [47] At the same time, the federal government has considerable discretion: the legislative branch is free to decide what statutes it will write, as long as it stays within its enumerated powers and respects the constitutionally protected rights of individuals . Likewise, the judicial branch has a degree of judicial discretion , [48] and the executive branch also has various discretionary powers including prosecutorial discretion .
Scholars continue to debate whether the U.S. Constitution adopted a particular interpretation of the "rule of law," and if so, which one. For example, John Harrison asserts that the word "law" in the Constitution is simply defined as that which is legally binding, rather than being "defined by formal or substantive criteria," and therefore judges do not have discretion to decide that laws fail to satisfy such unwritten and vague criteria. [49] Law Professor Frederick Mark Gedicks disagrees, writing that Cicero , Augustine , Thomas Aquinas , and the framers of the U.S. Constitution believed that an unjust law was not really a law at all. [50]
Some modern scholars contend that the rule of law has been corroded during the past century by the instrumental view of law promoted by legal realists such as Oliver Wendell Holmes and Roscoe Pound . For example, Brian Tamanaha asserts: "The rule of law is a centuries-old ideal, but the notion that law is a means to an end became entrenched only in the course of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries." [51]
Others argue that the rule of law has survived but was transformed to allow for the exercise of discretion by administrators. For much of American history, the dominant notion of the rule of law, in this setting, has been some version of A. V. Dicey's: "no man is punishable or can be lawfully made to suffer in body or goods except for a distinct breach of law established in the ordinary legal manner before the ordinary Courts of the land." That is, individuals should be able to challenge an administrative order by bringing suit in a court of general jurisdiction. As the dockets of worker compensation commissions, public utility commissions and other agencies burgeoned, it soon became apparent that letting judges decide for themselves all the facts in a dispute (such as the extent of an injury in a worker's compensation case) would overwhelm the courts and destroy the advantages of specialization that led to the creation of administrative agencies in the first place. Even Charles Evans Hughes, a Chief Justice of the United States, believed "you must have administration, and you must have administration by administrative officers." By 1941, a compromise had emerged. If administrators adopted procedures that more-or-less tracked "the ordinary legal manner" of the courts, further review of the facts by "the ordinary Courts of the land" was unnecessary. That is, if you had your "day in commission," the rule of law did not require a further "day in court." Thus Dicey's rule of law was recast into a purely procedural form. [52]
James Wilson said during the Philadelphia Convention in 1787 that, "Laws may be unjust, may be unwise, may be dangerous, may be destructive; and yet not be so unconstitutional as to justify the Judges in refusing to give them effect." George Mason agreed that judges "could declare an unconstitutional law void. But with regard to every law, however unjust, oppressive or pernicious, which did not come plainly under this description, they would be under the necessity as judges to give it a free course." [53] Chief Justice John Marshall (joined by Justice Joseph Story ) took a similar position in 1827: "When its existence as law is denied, that existence cannot be proved by showing what are the qualities of a law." [54]

Asia
East Asian cultures are influenced by two schools of thought, Confucianism , which advocated good governance as rule by leaders who are benevolent and virtuous, and Legalism , which advocated strict adherence to law. The influence of one school of thought over the other has varied throughout the centuries. One study indicates that throughout East Asia, only South Korea , Singapore , Japan , Taiwan and Hong Kong have societies that are robustly committed to a law-bound state. [55] According to Awzar Thi, a member of the Asian Human Rights Commission , the rule of law in Thailand , Cambodia , and most of Asia is weak or nonexistent:
In countries such as China and Vietnam , the transition to a market economy has been a major factor in a move toward the rule of law, because a rule of law is important to foreign investors and to economic development. It remains unclear whether the rule of law in countries like China and Vietnam will be limited to commercial matters or will spill into other areas as well, and if so whether that spillover will enhance prospects for related values such as democracy and human rights. [57] The rule of law in China has been widely discussed and debated by both legal scholars and politicians in China.
In Thailand , a kingdom that has had a constitution since the initial attempt to overthrow the absolute monarchy system in 1932, the rule of law has been more of a principle than actual practice. [ citation needed ] Ancient prejudices and political bias have been present in the three branches of government with each of their foundings, and justice has been processed formally according to the law but in fact more closely aligned with royalist principles that are still advocated in the 21st century. [ citation needed ] In November 2013, Thailand faced still further threats to the rule of law when the executive branch rejected a supreme court decision over how to select senators. [ citation needed ]
In India , the longest constitutional text in the history of the world has governed that country since 1950. Although the Constitution of India may have been intended to provide details that would limit the opportunity for judicial discretion, the more text there is in a constitution the greater opportunity the judiciary may have to exercise judicial review . [58] According to Indian journalist Harish Khare , "The rule of law or rather the Constitution [is] in danger of being supplanted by the rule of judges." [59]
Japan had centuries of tradition prior to World War II , during which there were laws, but they did not provide a central organizing principle for society, and they did not constrain the powers of government (Boadi, 2001). As the 21st century began, the percentage of people who were lawyers and judges in Japan remained very low relative to western Europe and the United States, and legislation in Japan tended to be terse and general, leaving much discretion in the hands of bureaucrats. [60] [61]

Organizations
Various organizations are involved in promoting the rule of law.

International Commission of Jurists
In 1959, an international gathering of over 185 judges, lawyers, and law professors from 53 countries, meeting in New Delhi and speaking as the International Commission of Jurists , made a declaration as to the fundamental principle of the rule of law. This was the Declaration of Delhi . They declared that the rule of law implies certain rights and freedoms, that it implies an independent judiciary, and that it implies social, economic and cultural conditions conducive to human dignity. The Declaration of Delhi did not, however, suggest that the rule of law requires legislative power to be subject to judicial review . [62]

United Nations
The Secretary-General of the United Nations defines the rule of law as: [63]
The General Assembly has considered rule of law as an agenda item since 1992, with renewed interest since 2006 and has adopted resolutions at its last three sessions. [64] The Security Council has held a number of thematic debates on the rule of law, [65] and adopted resolutions emphasizing the importance of these issues in the context of women, peace and security, [66] children in armed conflict, [67] and the protection of civilians in armed conflict. [68] The Peacebuilding Commission has also regularly addressed rule of law issues with respect to countries on its agenda. [69] The Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action also requires the rule of law be included in human rights education . [70]

International Bar Association
The Council of the International Bar Association passed a resolution in 2009 endorsing a substantive or "thick" definition of the rule of law: [71]

World Justice Project
As used by the World Justice Project , a non-profit organization committed to advancing the rule of law around the world, the rule of law refers to a rules-based system in which the following four universal principles are upheld: [72]
The World Justice Project has developed an Index to measure the extent to which countries adhere to the rule of law in practice. The WJP Rule of Law Index is composed of 9 factors and 52 sub-factors, and covers a variety of dimensions of the rule of law—such as whether government officials are accountable under the law, and whether legal institutions protect fundamental rights and allow ordinary people access to justice. [73]

The International Development Law Organization (IDLO)
The International Development Law Organization (IDLO) is an intergovernmental organization with a joint focus on the promotion of rule of law and development. It works to empower people and communities to claim their rights, and provides governments with the know-how to realize them. [74] It supports emerging economies and middle-income countries to strengthen their legal capacity and rule of law framework for sustainable development and economic opportunity. [75] It is the only intergovernmental organization with an exclusive mandate to promote the rule of law and has experience working in more than 170 countries around the world. [76]
The International Development Law Organization has a holistic definition of the rule of law:
IDLO is headquartered in Rome and has a branch office in The Hague and has Permanent Observer Status at the United Nations General Assembly in New York City.

The International Network to Promote the Rule of Law (INPROL)
The International Network to Promote the Rule of Law (INPROL) is a network of over 3,000 law practitioners from 120 countries and 300 organizations working on rule of law issues in post-conflict and developing countries from a policy, practice and research perspective. INPROL is based at the US Institute of Peace (USIP) in partnership with the US Department of State Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Strategic Police Matters Unit, the Center of Excellence for Police Stability Unit, and William and Marry School of Law in the United States. [78] It's affiliate organizations include the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Folke Bernadotte Academy, International Bar Association, International Association of Chiefs of Police, International Association of Women Police, International Corrections and Prisons Association, International Association for Court Administration, International Security Sector Advisory Team at the Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces, Worldwide Association of Women Forensic Experts (WAWFE), and International Institute for Law and Human Rights.
INPROL provides an online forum for the exchange of information about best practices. Members may post questions, and expect a response from their fellow rule of law practitioners worldwide on their experiences in addressing rule of law issues.

In relation to economics
One important aspect of the rule-of-law initiatives is the study and analysis of the rule of law’s impact on economic development . The rule-of-law movement cannot be fully successful in transitional and developing countries without an answer to the question: does the rule of law matter for economic development or not? [79] Constitutional economics is the study of the compatibility of economic and financial decisions within existing constitutional law frameworks, and such a framework includes government spending on the judiciary , which, in many transitional and developing countries , is completely controlled by the executive. It is useful to distinguish between the two methods of corruption of the judiciary: corruption by the executive branch, in contrast to corruption by private actors.
The standards of constitutional economics can be used during annual budget process , and if that budget planning is transparent then the rule of law may benefit. The availability of an effective court system, to be used by the civil society in situations of unfair government spending and executive impoundment of previously authorized appropriations, is a key element for the success of the rule-of-law endeavor. [80]
The Rule of Law is especially important as an influence on the economic development in developing and transitional countries. To date, the term “rule of law” has been used primarily in the English-speaking countries, and it is not yet fully clarified even with regard to such well-established democracies as, for instance, Sweden, Denmark, France, Germany, or Japan. A common language between lawyers of common law and civil law countries as well as between legal communities of developed and developing countries is critically important for research of links between the rule of law and real economy. [81]
The "rule of law" primarily connotes "protection of property rights." [82] The economist F. A. Hayek analyzed how the Rule of Law might be beneficial to the free market. Hayek proposed that under the Rule of Law individuals would be able to make wise investments and future plans with some confidence in a successful return on investment when he stated: "under the Rule of Law the government is prevented from stultifying individual efforts by ad hoc action. Within the known rules of the game the individual is free to pursue his personal ends and desires, certain that the powers of government will not be used deliberately to frustrate his efforts." [83]
Studies have shown that weak rule of law (for example, discretionary regulatory enforcement) discourages investment. Economists have found, for example, that a rise in discretionary regulatory enforcement caused US firms' to abandon international investments. [84]

In relation to culture
The rule of law can be hampered when there is a disconnect between legal and popular consensus. An example is intellectual property. Under the auspices of the World Intellectual Property Organization , nominally strong copyright laws have been implemented throughout most of the world; but because the attitude of much of the population does not conform to these laws, a rebellion against ownership rights has manifested in rampant piracy , including an increase in peer-to-peer file sharing . [85] Similarly, in Russia, tax evasion is common and a person who admits he does not pay taxes is not judged or criticized by his colleagues and friends, because the tax system is viewed as unreasonable. [86] Bribery likewise has different normative implications across cultures. [82]

See also

By jurisdiction

Legal scholars

Notes and references

Bibliography

External links
WebPage index: 00176
Legislation.gov.uk
Legislation.gov.uk , formerly the UK Statute Law Database , is the official web -accessible database of the statute law of the United Kingdom , hosted by The National Archives . It contains all primary legislation in force as of 1991, and all primary and secondary legislation since that date; it does not include legislation which was fully repealed prior to 1991. The contents have been revised to reflect legislative changes up to 2002, with material that has been amended since 2002 noted in a table but not yet fully updated. [ needs update ]

New Statute Law Database
In December 2008 the Statute Law Database team transferred to The National Archives , which meant that the responsibility for the OPSI [ clarification needed ] and SLD websites became the responsibility of one department. A major consideration of the transfer was to enable the rationalisation of the two websites in order to provide one point of access to all UK legislation and in doing so reduce duplication in effort, increase efficiency (for example taking advantage of technological developments to streamline processes) and provide a more user friendly and accessible service across the board. Since December 2008 a considerable amount [ vague ] of work has taken place to look at who the customers of the joint services are and look carefully at their requirements. [ citation needed ]
The content of the new Statute Law Database consists of the combined content of the previous UK Statute Law Database (SLD), [1] and the Office of Public Sector Information (OPSI) website. [2] Updated legislation on the new website is the same data as that available on SLD. The only exceptions are a few acts that are being updated by the editorial team that are available on SLD but will not be available on the new site until the revisions are complete and they are ready to be published to SLD and the new website. Many of the revised documents held by SLD are also available in the OPSI dataset as an “as enacted” version. The new website combines these so one can switch between the different versions.
Aspects of the new site:

History

Background
Access to statute law in the United Kingdom was, for some time, a difficult matter. As the Hansard Society noted in 1992, "[a]t present the accessibility of statute law to users and the wider public is slow, inconvenient, complicated and subject to several impediments. To put it bluntly, it is often very difficult to find out what the text of a law is – let alone what it means. Something must be done." [3]

Development

1991 to 1995
The idea for creating a UK-wide legislation database dates back to 1991 when the government awarded a contract to Syntegra , a BT company previously known as "Secure Information Systems Limited", to create a database containing all the public Acts comprised in the publication Statutes in Force together with all amendments made since a "base date" of 1 February 1991. The database was delivered by Syntegra in November 1993, but not accepted by the government until Summer 1995 at a cost of £700,000. [4] The database was originally intended for use by the Office of the Parliamentary Counsel , but following testing with the public service it was decided to make it available to legal practitioners and the private sector on a commercial basis, as well as to public libraries and Citizens Advice Bureaux . [3]
The original database consisted of an Interleaf editorial system which allowed legislation to be held and edited in SGML . In 1991 there were no plans to make the database available on the internet. The aim of the project was to create an electronic version of Statutes In Force which would be available on CD-ROM to much the same audience as that to which Statutes In Force had been available prior to 1991. [5]
In 1995 Syntegra developed the first version of the Statute Law Database website. This was only ever available in pilot form and to a limited number of Government users.

1996 to 2000
On 9 February 1996, Roger Freeman , the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster , announced that the copyright and charging policy of the Statute Law Database would "be decided nearer the time of implementation in 1997". [6] This date was pushed forwarded to 1999 [7] and then to 2000. [8]
In March 1999, it was disclosed that "[t]he partially updated database is presently available to a number of users within central government who have access to the Statutory Publications Office Intranet. The Lord Chancellor's Department are considering options for the future marketing of the Statute Law Database. These options include free Internet access, the granting of non-exclusive licences to legal information publishers and the provision of a subscription on-line service." [9] In September a demonstration version of the database was made available on the Syntegra Track Record website, containing legislation for the years 1985 to 1995, though this was quickly removed. [10]

2001 to 2006
In 2004, it was announced that the system designed by Syntegra would be modernised by replacing its editorial database, developing two new enquiry systems (one for government departments (accessible via the Government Secure Intranet , "GSI") and the other for the general public), and the revision and updating of the statute book . [10] Two contracts were signed by the Department for Constitutional Affairs (DCA) with Computacenter , one for the delivery of the editorial system, the other for the government enquiry system. The combined cost of the contracts was £458,000. [11]
A content management system named TSO ActiveText (after TSO, The Stationery Office ) is used in the new system to store legislation in XML with a specific DTD . Documents in ActiveText are fragmented and can be edited using XMetaL which allows editors to check documents in and out of the database for editing. All the legislation from the original SGML database was converted into XML. After the editorial system was completed, further development began on a new online Statute Law Database Enquiry System . [5] [12]
The government's enquiry system was launched on 31 May 2006 with a plan to roll out general access in three phases. The first stage would open the database to a very limited number of users for testing. On 2 August 2006 the Department for Constitutional Affairs (DCA) commenced the second stage of the database project, allowing the system to be tested in use by issuing login details and passwords to a wide range of selected customers including Government users, law librarians, police staff, Citizens Advice Bureaux and students. The pilot did not specifically include any commercial legal publishers. [5] Initially, the DCA intended to charge users for access to "historical law", but not current law, however, following pressure notably from The Guardian and its "Free Our Data" campaign, it was announced in October that the system would be free to use. [13] The SPO's Clare Allison revealed nevertheless that the DCA would be "looking at options that concern the commercial reuse of the data". [14]
The delays involved in realising the database led to a number groups requesting the raw data of the legislation in order to put together their own versions. Among those refused access was Julian Todd, the co-creator of the website TheyWorkForYou , who stated "I can’t comprehend what the DCA thinks it is gaining by not giving us a database dump of the law." [15] Todd had submitted a request under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 for disclosure of the data, but this was refused and he brought an appeal before the Information Commissioner .
The database was finally made available to the public on 20 December 2006. Announcing its launch, Baroness Ashton , a Parliamentary Under-Secretary in the Department for Constitutional Affairs , said that "[t]he Statute Law Database provides an authoritative and easy-to-use historical database of UK statute law. I hope it will be welcomed as a useful tool for professionals who need to keep up with changes to the law as well as those who simply have an interest in historic and current legislation." [16]

2007–present

Content
The database contains the text of primary legislation in force at 1 February 1991 and secondary legislation issued after that date, some 30,000 texts. All primary legislation on the site has been revised to show the effect of legislation and amendments enacted until 2002. [16] The database is not fully up to date and, as of 2009, there is no estimate for when it will be fully up to date. As of 2009 [update] , editors were applying amendments enacted between 2003 and 2007. Acts are targeted for updating according to a system of priorities based on demand ascertained mainly from Webtrends reports showing which Acts are viewed most frequently. [5] Until December 2008, the responsibility for keeping the database up-to-date lay with the Statutory Publications Office, part of the Ministry of Justice . Since that date, responsibility has been transferred to a team within the Information and Policy Services Directorate (formerly called the Office of Public Sector Information ) of The National Archives . [17] Following the transfer, a programme of work is now underway to bring together the content of the existing Statute Law Database with "as enacted" original legislation from the website of the Office of Public Sector Information (OPSI) to form a single "UK Legislation" website. [5]
In addition, a "table of effects" has been published every year since 2002 which lists all the legislation repealed, the effects of primary and secondary legislation brought into force since 2002 on primary legislation in the database.

Primary legislation
The database content includes the following primary legislation in
Other primary legislation that is held in unrevised form includes:

Secondary legislation
The database also contains certain secondary legislation which is not updated :

Current limitations
While the database reflects amendments to primary legislation, it is not up to date.
Also the database does not currently include:
There are no plans to extend the database to include the above material. However, a Select Committee report on the "Merits of Statutory Instruments", published on 7 November 2006, recommended that the database should be extended to cover secondary as well as primary legislation. The government responded that this was indeed important, but that "[t]he immediate priority is to ensure that a fully revised and up to date version of the official statute book is delivered for use by the public and that work on this is maintained. After this has been achieved consideration will then be given as to how work can be extended to updating secondary legislation." [18]

See also
WebPage index: 00177
Free software movement
The free software movement ( FSM ) or free / open source software movement ( FOSSM ) or free / libre open source software ( FLOSS ) is a social movement [1] with the goal of obtaining and guaranteeing certain freedoms for software users , namely the freedom to run the software, to study and change the software, and to redistribute copies with or without changes. Although drawing on traditions and philosophies among members of the 1970s hacker culture and academia, Richard Stallman formally founded the movement in 1983 by launching the GNU Project . [2] Stallman later established the Free Software Foundation in 1985 to support the movement.

Philosophy
The philosophy of the movement is that the use of computers should not lead to people being prevented from cooperating with each other. In practice, this means rejecting " proprietary software ", which imposes such restrictions, and promoting free software , [3] with the ultimate goal of liberating everyone in cyberspace [4] – that is, every computer user. Stallman notes that this action will promote rather than hinder the progression of technology, since "it means that much wasteful duplication of system programming effort will be avoided. This effort can go instead into advancing the state of the art". [5]
Members of the free software movement believe that all users of software should have the freedoms listed in The Free Software Definition . Many of them hold that it is immoral to prohibit or prevent people from exercising these freedoms and that these freedoms are required to create a decent society where software users can help each other, and to have control over their computers. [6]
Some free software users and programmers do not believe that proprietary software is strictly immoral, citing an increased profitability in the business models available for proprietary software or technical features and convenience as their reasons. [7]
"While social change may occur as an unintended by-product of technological change, advocates of new technologies often have promoted them as instruments of positive social change." This quote by San Jose State professor Joel West explains much of the philosophy, or the reason that the free source movement is alive. If it is assumed that social change is not only affected, but in some points of view, directed by the advancement of technology, is it ethical to hold these technologies from certain people? If not to make a direct change, this movement is in place to raise awareness about the effects that take place because of the physical things around us. A computer, for instance, allows us so many more freedoms than we have without a computer, but should these technological mediums be implied freedoms, or selective privileges? The debate over the morality of both sides to the free software movement is a difficult topic to compromise respective opposition. [8]
The Free Software Foundation also believes all software needs free documentation , in particular because conscientious programmers should be able to update manuals to reflect modification that they made to the software, but deems the freedom to modify less important for other types of written works. [9] Within the free software movement, the FLOSS Manuals foundation specialises on the goal of providing such documentation. Members of the free software movement advocate that works which serve a practical purpose should also be free. [10]

Actions

Writing and spreading free software
The core work of the free software movement focused on software development. The free software movement also rejects proprietary software, refusing to install software that does not give them the freedoms of free software. According to Stallman, "The only thing in the software field that is worse than an unauthorised copy of a proprietary program, is an authorised copy of the proprietary program because this does the same harm to its whole community of users, and in addition, usually the developer, the perpetrator of this evil, profits from it." [11]

Building awareness
Some supporters of the free software movement take up public speaking , or host a stall at software-related conferences to raise awareness of software freedom. This is seen as important since people who receive free software, but who are not aware that it is free software, will later accept a non-free replacement or will add software that is not free software. [12]

Ethical equality
Margaret S. Elliot, a researcher in the Institute for Software at the University of California Irvine, not only outlines many benefits that could come from a free software movement, she claims that it is inherently necessary to give every person equal opportunity to utilize the Internet, assuming that the computer is globally accessible. Since the world has become more based in the framework of technology and its advancement, creating a selective internet that allows only some to surf the web freely is nonsensical according to Elliot. If there is a desire to live in a more coexistent world that is benefited by communication and global assistance, then globally free software should be a position to strive for, according to many scholars who promote awareness about the free software movement. The ideas sparked by the GNU associates are an attempt to promote a "cooperative environment" that understands the benefits of having a local community and a global community. [13]

Legislation
A lot of lobbying work has been done against software patents and expansions of copyright law. Other lobbying focusses directly on use of free software by government agencies and government-funded projects.
The Venezuelan government implemented a free software law in January 2006. Decree No. 3,390 mandated all government agencies to migrate to free software over a two-year period. [14]
Congressmen Edgar David Villanueva and Jacques Rodrich Ackerman have been instrumental in introducing free software in Peru , with bill 1609 on "Free Software in Public Administration". [15] The incident invited the attention of got Microsoft Inc, Peru, whose general manager wrote a letter to Villanueva. His response received worldwide attention and is seen as a classic piece of argumentation favouring use of free software in governments. [16]
In the United States, there have been efforts to pass legislation at the state level encouraging use of free software by state government agencies. [17]

Subgroups and schisms
Like many social movements, the free software movement has ongoing internal conflict between the many FOSS organizations ( FSF , OSI , Debian , Mozilla Foundation , Apache Foundation etc.) and their personalities. For instance there is disagreement about the amount of compromises and pragmatism needed versus the need for strict adherence to values. [18]

Open source
Even though commercial free software was not uncommon at the time, in 1998 after an announcement that Netscape would liberate their popular Web browser, a strategy session was held to develop a stronger business case for free software which would focus on technology rather than politics. [19] After this Eric Raymond and Bruce Perens founded the Open Source Initiative (OSI), to promote the term " open source software " as an alternative term for free software . OSI wanted to address the perceived shortcomings in ambiguous "free software" term, [20] [21] [22] and also some members of OSI didn't follow the free software movement's focus on non-free software as a social and ethical problem but instead focused on the advantages of open source as superior model for software development. [23] The latter became the view of people like Eric Raymond and Linus Torvalds, while Bruce Perens argues that open source was simply meant to popularize free software under a new brand, and even called to come back to the basic ethical principles. [24]
Some free software advocates use the term free and open source software (FOSS) as an inclusive compromise, drawing on both philosophies to bring both free software advocates and open source software advocates together to work on projects with more cohesion. Some users believe that a compromise term encompassing both aspects is ideal, to promote both the user's freedom with the software and also to promote the perceived superiority of an open source development model. This eclectic view is reinforced by the fact that the overwhelming majority of OSI-approved licenses and self-avowed open source programs are also compatible with the free software formalisms and vice versa.
While some people prefer to link the two ideas of "open source software" and "free software" together, they offer two separate ideas and values. This ambiguity began in 1998 when people started to use the term "open source software" rather than "free software". People in the community of free software used these separate terms as a way to differentiate what they did. The open source movement addresses software being open as a practical question as opposed to an ethical dilemma. In other words, it focuses more on the development. The open source movement ultimately determines that non-free software is not the solution of best interest but nonetheless a solution.
On the other hand, the free software movement views free software as a moral imperative: that proprietary software should be rejected for selfish and social reasons, and that only free software should be developed and taught to cope with the task of making computing technology beneficial to humanity. It is argued that whatever economical or technical merits free software may have are consequences stemming from the rights that free software developers and users enjoy. An example of this is empowerment resulting in the unlikelihood of free software being designed to mistreat or spy on users. At the same time, the benefits purveyed by the open source movement have been challenged both from inside and outside the free software movement. It is unclear whether free and open source software actually leads to more performant and less vulnerable code, with researchers Robert Glass and Benjamin Mako Hill providing statistical insight that this is usually not the case. [25] [26]
Regarding the meaning and misunderstandings of the word free , those who work within the free software camp have searched for less ambiguous terms and analogies like "free beer vs free speech" in efforts to refine their definition so there is no confusion concerning free software profitability. The loan adjective libre has gained some traction in the English-speaking free software movement as unequivocally conveying the state of being in freedom that free software refers to, although it is used in an explanatory or alternative fashion and is not considered schismatic. In fact, free software has always been referred to using the word libre and its translations in languages with such words. The free software movement replies that while free is prone to confuse the novice because of its two intuitive meanings at least one of them is the right one, and it is hard to get it wrong once the difference has been learned. It is ironically noted that open source also leads to a misunderstanding in which people think source code disclosure is enough to meet the open source criteria. [10] In India, where the free software movement has gained a lot of ground and the government having adopted a policy [27] in this regard, the term swatantra [28] and its variants are widely used as a replacement of the term 'free'.
The switch from the free software movement to the open source movement has had negative effects on the progression of community, according to Christopher Kelty who dedicates a scholarly chapter to the free software movements in "Theorizing Media and Practice". The open source movement denies that selectivity and the privatization of software is unethical. Although the open source movement is working towards the same social benefits as the free software movement, Kelty claims that by disregarding this fundamental belief of the free software advocates, one is destroying the overall argument. If it can be claimed that it is ethical to limit the internet and other technology to only users who have the means to use this software, then there is no argument against the way things are at the moment; there is no need to complain if all morality is in effect. [29]
Although the movements have separate values and goals, people in both the open source community and free software community collaborate when it comes to practical projects. [30] By 2005, Richard Glass considered the differences to be a "serious fracture" but "vitally important to those on both sides of the fracture" and "of little importance to anyone else studying the movement from a software engineering perspective" since they have had "little effect on the field". [31]

Stallman and Torvalds
The two most prominent people associated with the movement, Richard Stallman and Linus Torvalds , may be seen as representatives of the value based versus apolitical philosophies, as well as the GNU versus Linux coding styles . In the GNU/Linux naming controversy the FSF argues for the term GNU/Linux because GNU was a longstanding project to develop a free operating system, of which they assert the kernel was the last missing piece. [32]

Criticism and controversy

Should principles be compromised?
Eric Raymond criticises the speed at which the free software movement is progressing, suggesting that temporary compromises should be made for long-term gains. Raymond argues that this could raise awareness of the software and thus increase the free software movement's influence on relevant standards and legislation. [33]
Richard Stallman, on the other hand, sees the current level of compromise as a greater cause for worry. [18] [34] [35]

How will programmers get paid?
Stallman said that this is where people get the misconception of "free": there is no wrong in programmers' requesting payment for a proposed project. Restricting and controlling the user's decisions on use is the actual violation of freedom. Stallman defends that in some cases, monetary incentive is not necessary for motivation since the pleasure in expressing creativity is a reward in itself. [5] On the other hand, Stallman admits that is not easy to raise money for FOSS software projects. [36]

"Viral" licensing
The free software movement champions copyleft licensing schema (often pejoratively called " viral licenses "). In its strongest form, copyleft mandates that any works derived from copyleft-licensed software must also carry a copyleft license, so the license spreads from work to work like a computer virus might spread from machine to machine. These licensing terms can only be enforced through asserting copyrights. [37] Critics of copyleft licensing challenge the idea that restricting modifications is in line with the free software movement's emphasis on various "freedoms," especially when alternatives like MIT , BSD , and Apache licenses are more permissive. [38] [39] Proponents enjoy the assurance that copylefted work cannot usually be incorporated into non-free software projects. [40] They emphasize that copyleft licenses may not attach for all uses and that in any case, developers can simply choose not to use copyleft-licensed software. [41] [42]

License proliferation and compatibility
FOSS license proliferation is a serious concern in the FOSS domain due to increased complexity of license compatibility considerations which limits and complicates source code reuse between FOSS projects. [43] The OSI and the FSF maintain own lists of dozens of existing and acceptable FOSS licenses. [44] There is an agreement among most that the creation of new licenses should be minimized at all cost and these created should be made compatible with the major existing FOSS licenses. Therefore, there was a strong controversy around the update of the GPlv2 to the GPLv3 in 2007, [45] [46] as the updated license is not compatible with the previous version. [47] [48] [49] Several projects (mostly of the open source faction [46] like the Linux kernel [50] [51] ) decided to not adopt the GPLv3 while the GNU projects adopted the GPLv3.

See also
WebPage index: 00178
Open-source hardware
Open-source hardware , consists of physical artifacts of technology designed and offered by the open design movement. Both free and open-source software (FOSS) as well as open-source hardware is created by this open-source culture movement and applies a like concept to a variety of components. It is sometimes, thus, referred to as FOSH (free and open-source hardware). The term usually means that information about the hardware is easily discerned so that others can make it - coupling it closely to the maker movement . [1] Hardware design (i.e. mechanical drawings, schematics , bills of material , PCB layout data, HDL source code [2] and integrated circuit layout data), in addition to the software that drives the hardware, are all released under free/ libre terms. The original sharer gains feedback and potentially improvements on the design from the FOSH community. There is now significant evidence that such sharing can drive a high return on investment for investors. [3]
Since the rise of reconfigurable programmable logic devices , sharing of logic designs has been a form of open-source hardware. Instead of the schematics, hardware description language (HDL) code is shared. HDL descriptions are commonly used to set up system-on-a-chip systems either in field-programmable gate arrays (FPGA) or directly in application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) designs. HDL modules, when distributed, are called semiconductor intellectual property cores , or IP cores .

History
The first hardware focused " open source " activities were started around 1997 by Bruce Perens , creator of the Open Source Definition , co-founder of the Open Source Initiative , and a ham radio operator . He launched the Open Hardware Certification Program, which had the goal of allowing hardware manufacturers to self-certify their products as open. [4] [5]
Shortly after the launch of the Open Hardware Certification Program, David Freeman announced the Open Hardware Specification Project (OHSpec), another attempt at licensing hardware components whose interfaces are available publicly and of creating an entirely new computing platform as an alternative to proprietary computing systems. [6] In early 1999, Sepehr Kiani, Ryan Vallance and Samir Nayfeh joined efforts to apply the open source philosophy to machine design applications. Together they established the Open Design Foundation (ODF) as a non-profit corporation, and set out to develop an Open Design Definition. But most of these activities faded out after a few years.
By the mid 2000s open source hardware again became a hub of activity due to the emergence of several major open source hardware projects and companies, such as OpenCores , RepRap ( 3D printing ), Arduino , Adafruit and SparkFun . In 2007, Perens reactivated the openhardware.org website.
Following the Open Graphics Project , an effort to design, implement, and manufacture a free and open 3D graphics chip set and reference graphics card, Timothy Miller suggested the creation of an organization to safeguard the interests of the Open Graphics Project community. Thus, Patrick McNamara founded the Open Hardware Foundation (OHF) in 2007. [7]
The Tucson Amateur Packet Radio Corporation (TAPR), founded in 1982 as a non-profit organization of amateur radio operators with the goals of supporting R&D efforts in the area of amateur digital communications, created in 2007 the first open hardware license, the TAPR Open Hardware License . The OSI president Eric S. Raymond expressed some concerns about certain aspects of the OHL and decided to not review the license. [8]
Around 2010 in context of the Freedom Defined project, the Open Hardware Definition was created as collaborative work of many [9] and is accepted as of 2016 by dozens of organizations and companies. [10]
In July 2011, CERN ( European Organization for Nuclear Research ) released an open source hardware license, CERN OHL . Javier Serrano, an engineer at CERN’s Beams Department and the founder of the Open Hardware Repository, explained: “By sharing designs openly, CERN expects to improve the quality of designs through peer review and to guarantee their users – including commercial companies – the freedom to study, modify and manufacture them, leading to better hardware and less duplication of efforts” . [11] While initially drafted to address CERN-specific concerns, such as tracing the impact of the organization’s research, in its current form it can be used by anyone developing open source hardware. [12]
Following the 2011 Open Hardware Summit, and after heated debates on licenses and what constitutes open source hardware, Bruce Perens abandoned the OSHW Definition and the concerted efforts of those involved with it. [13] Openhardware.org, led by Bruce Perens, promotes and identifies practices that meet all the combined requirements of the Open Source Hardware Definition, the Open Source Definition, and the Four Freedoms of the Free Software Foundation [14] Since 2014 openhardware.org is not online and seems to have ceased activity. [15]
The Open Source Hardware Association (OSHWA) at proposes Open source hardware and acts as hub of open source hardware activity of all genres, while cooperating with other entities such as TAPR, CERN, and OSI. The OSHWA was established as an organization in June 2012 in Delaware and filed for tax exemption status in July 2013. [16] After same debates about trademark interferences with the OSI, in 2012 the OSHWA and the OSI signed a co-existence agreement. [17] [18]
In 2012, after years of skepticism on the relevance of free hardware designs , [19] the Free Software Foundation started the " Respects Your Freedom " (RYF) computer hardware product certification program. It was intended to encourage the creation and sale of hardware that respects users' freedom and privacy, and aims to ensure that users have control over their devices. [20] [21] The FSF's RYF certificate faced criticism for the requirement to comply with the controversial debated FSF terminology, [22] which is seen by some as unrelated topic and unneeded political polarization for a technological certificate. [23] Also FSF's Replicant project suggested in 2016 an alternative "free hardware" definition, derived from the FSF's four freedoms . [24]

Licenses
Rather than creating a new license, some open-source hardware projects simply use existing, free and open-source software licenses. [25] These licenses may not accord well with patent law . [26]
Later, several new licenses have been proposed, designed to address issues specific to hardware designs. [27] In these licenses, many of the fundamental principles expressed in open-source software (OSS) licenses have been "ported" to their counterpart hardware projects. New hardware licenses are often explained as the "hardware equivalent" of a well-known OSS license, such as the GPL , LGPL , or BSD license .
Despite superficial similarities to software licenses , most hardware licenses are fundamentally different: by nature, they typically rely more heavily on patent law than on copyright law, as many hardware designs are not copyrightable. [28] Whereas a copyright license may control the distribution of the source code or design documents, a patent license may control the use and manufacturing of the physical device built from the design documents. This distinction is explicitly mentioned in the preamble of the TAPR Open Hardware License :
Noteworthy licenses include:
The Open Source Hardware Association recommends seven licenses which follow their open-source hardware definition . [34] From the general copyleft licenses the GNU General Public License (GPL) and Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike license, from the HW specific copyleft licenses the CERN Open Hardware License (OHL) and TAPR Open Hardware License (OHL) and from the permissive licenses the FreeBSD license , the MIT license , and the Creative Commons Attribution license. [35] Openhardware.org recommended in 2012 the TAPR Open Hardware License, Creative Commons BY-SA 3.0 and GPL 3.0 license. [36]
Organizations tend to rally around a shared license. For example, Opencores prefers the LGPL or a Modified BSD License , [37] FreeCores insists on the GPL , [38] Open Hardware Foundation promotes " copyleft " or other permissive licenses", [39] the Open Graphics Project uses a variety of licenses, including the MIT license , GPL , and a proprietary license, [40] and the Balloon Project wrote their own license. [41]

Development
Extensive discussion has taken place on ways to make open-source hardware as accessible as open-source software . Discussions focus on multiple areas, [42] such as the level at which open-source hardware is defined, [43] ways to collaborate in hardware development, as well as a model for sustainable development by making open-source appropriate technology . [44] [45] In addition there has been considerable work to produce open-source hardware for scientific hardware using a combination of open-source electronics and 3-D printing . [46] [47]
One of the major differences between developing open-source software and developing open-source hardware is that hardware results in tangible outputs, which cost money to prototype and manufacture. As a result, the phrase "free as in speech, not as in beer", [48] [ not in citation given ] more formally known as Gratis versus Libre , distinguishes between the idea of zero cost and the freedom to use and modify information. While open-source hardware faces challenges in minimizing cost and reducing financial risks for individual project developers, some community members have proposed models to address these needs. [49] Given this, there are initiatives to develop sustainable community funding mechanisms, such as the Open Source Hardware Central Bank. [50]
Often vendors of chips and other electronic components will sponsor contests with the provision that the participants and winners must share their designs. Circuit Cellar magazine organizes some of these contests.

Open-source labs
A guide has been published ( Open-Source Lab (book) by Joshua Pearce ) on using open-source electronics and 3D printing to make open-source labs . Today scientists are creating many such labs, examples include:

Open-source electronics
One of the most popular types of open-source hardware is electronics. There are numerous companies that provide large varieties of open-source electronics such as Sparkfun , Adafruit and Seeed. In addition, there are NPOs and companies that provide a specific open-source electronic component such as the Arduino electronics prototyping platform. There are numerous examples of speciality open-source electronics such as low-cost voltage and current GMAW open-source 3-D printer monitor [53] [54] and a robotics-assisted mass spectrometry assay platform. [55] [56] Open-source electronics finds various uses, including automation of chemical procedures. [57] [58]

Business models
Open hardware companies are experimenting with different business models. In one example, littleBits implements open-source business models by making the design files available for the circuit designs in each littleBits module, in accordance with the CERN Open Hardware License Version 1.2. [59] In another example, Arduino has registered its name as a trademark . Others may manufacture their designs but can't put the Arduino name on them. Thus they can distinguish their products from others by appellation. [60] There are many applicable business models for implementing some open-source hardware even in traditional firms. For example, to accelerate development and technical innovation the photovoltaic industry has experimented with partnerships, franchises, secondary supplier and completely open-source models. [61]
Recently, many open source hardware projects were funded via crowdfunding on Indiegogo or Kickstarter . Especially popular is Crowdsupply for crowdfunding open hardware projects. [62]

Reception and impact
Richard Stallman , the founder of the Free Software movement, was in 1999 skeptical on the idea and relevance of Free hardware (his terminology what is now known as open-source hardware). [63] In a 2015 Wired article he adapted his point of view slightly; while he still sees no ethical parallel between free software and free hardware, he acknowledges the importance. [64] Also, Stallman uses and suggest the term free hardware design over open source hardware , a request which is consistent with his earlier rejection of the term open source software (see also Alternative terms for free software ). [64]
Other authors, such as Joshua Pearce have argued there is an ethical imperative for open-source hardware – specifically with respect open-source appropriate technology for sustainable development . [65] In 2014, he also wrote the book Open-Source Lab: How to Build Your Own Hardware and Reduce Research Costs , which details the development of free and open-source hardware primarily for scientists and university faculty . [66] [67]

See also
WebPage index: 00179
Telstra Corporation Ltd v Desktop Marketing Systems Pty Ltd
Telstra Corporation Limited v Desktop Marketing Systems Pty Ltd is a 2001 decision of the Federal Court of Australia related to the originality required to attract copyright protection. [1] Heard before Justice Finkelstein in June 2000, the case concerned the release of a product called "Phonedisc" created by the Respondents, Desktop Marketing Systems.
In his decision handed down on 25 May 2001, Justice Finkelstein found that the contents of that product, which allowed the user to perform reverse telephone searches by service number , was almost identical in content to the publicly listed directories, even if some of the content was listed in a different fashion. The court found that Telstra , the Australian owner/publisher of the White Pages and Yellow Pages telephone directories, had copyright in the content of those directories. Consequently, the use of the data by the Respondents constituted copyright infringement , and the product was removed from sale. Furthermore, as a result of this decision, a similar web-based directory called "Blackpages", published by 2600 Australia , also terminated its service.
On 8 February 2010, the decision was overturned in a ruling by Justice Gordon by Telstra v Phone Directories , [2] following the decision of the High Court in IceTV v Nine Network . [3] The ruling stated that copyright was not applicable to these works as Telstra conceded that there was no identifiable author contributing to the publication, even considering third parties, and hence did not represent a sufficient literary effort to warrant protection. Further considerations were raised regarding the level of collaboration required between staff members to warrant the concept of joint authorship, as well as the level of intellectual effort required to arrange and organise the listings. Subsequently, none of the works were established as "original works", noting that there should exist a correlative relationship between originality and authorship.
WebPage index: 00180
SourceForge
SourceForge is a Web-based service that offers software developers a centralized online location to control and manage free and open-source software projects. It provides a source code repository , bug tracking , mirroring of downloads for load balancing , a wiki for documentation, developer and user mailing lists , user-support forums , user-written reviews and ratings, a news bulletin, micro-blog for publishing project updates, and other features.
SourceForge was one of the first to offer this service free of charge to open source projects. [5] [ discuss ] Since 2012 the website runs on Apache Allura software. SourceForge offers free access to hosting and tools for developers of free / open-source software , competing with other providers such as GitHub , Bitbucket , RubyForge , Tigris.org , BountySource , Launchpad , BerliOS , JavaForge , GNU Savannah , and GitLab .
As of March 2014, [update] the SourceForge repository claimed to host more than 430,000 projects and had more than 3.7 million registered users. [6] The domain sourceforge.net attracted at least 33 million visitors by August 2009 according to a Compete.com survey. [7]
From mid-2013 SourceForge introduced a program called DevShare, which offered projects a way to monetize their downloads by having an optional download that includes prompts for the user to download additional software that is not part of the project. Negative community reactions to the partnership program led to review of the program, nonetheless, the program was opened up to all SourceForge projects on February 7, 2014. [8] [9] The program was cancelled by new owners BizX on February 9, 2016; [10] on May 17, 2016 they announced that it would scan all projects for malware and display warnings on downloads. [11]

Concept
SourceForge is a web-based source code repository. It acts as a centralized location for free and open-source software projects. It was the first to offer this service for free to open-source projects. Project developers have access to centralized storage and tools for managing projects, though it is best known for providing revision control systems such as CVS , SVN , Bazaar , Git and Mercurial . [12] Major features (amongst others) [13] include project wikis , metrics and analysis, access to a MySQL database , and unique sub-domain URLs (in the form http:// project-name .sourceforge.net ).
The vast number of users at SourceForge.net (over 3 million as of 2013) [7] exposes prominent projects to a variety of developers and can create a positive feedback loop . As a project's activity rises, SourceForge.net's internal ranking system makes it more visible to other developers through SourceForge directory and Enterprise Directory. [14] [15] Given that many open-source projects fail due to lack of developer support, exposure to such a large community of developers can continually breathe new life into a project.

Revenue model
SourceForge's traditional revenue model is through advertising banner sales on their site. In 2006 SourceForge Inc. reported quarterly takings of US$ 6.5 million. [16] In 2009 SourceForge reported a gross quarterly income of US$23 million through media and e-commerce streams. [17] In 2011 a revenue of 20 million USD was reported for the combined value of the SourceForge, slashdot and freecode holdings, prior to SourceForge's acquisition. [18]
Since 2013 additional revenue generation schemes, such as bundleware models, [19] were trialled, with the goal of increasing SourceForge's revenue. The result has in some cases been the appearance of malware bundled with SourceForge downloads. [20] On February 9, 2016, SourceForge announced they had eliminated their DevShare program practice of bundling installers with project downloads. [21]

History
SourceForge , founded in 1999 by VA Software , was the first provider of a centralized location for free and open-source software developers to control and manage software development and offering this service without charge. [5] The software running the SourceForge site was released as free software in January 2000 [22] [23] and was later named SourceForge Alexandria. [24] The last release under a free license was made in November 2001; [25] after the dot-com bubble , SourceForge was later powered by the proprietary SourceForge Enterprise Edition , a separate product re-written in Java [26] [27] which was marketed for offshore outsourcing . [28]
In September 2002 SourceForge was temporarily banned in China . [29] The site was banned again in China, for about a month, in July 2008. [30] [31] On August 6, 2012, sourceforge.net was banned again. Several days later the ban was lifted.
In November 2008 SourceForge was sued by the French collection society Société civile des Producteurs de Phonogrammes en France (SPPF) for hosting downloads of the file sharing application Shareaza . [32]
In 2009 SourceForge announced a new site platform known as Allura, which would be an extensible, open source platform licensed under the Apache License , utilizing components such as Python and MongoDB , and offering REST APIs . [33] In June 2012 the Allura project was donated to the Apache Software Foundation as Apache Allura [34] [35]
In September 2012 SourceForge, Slashdot , and Freecode were acquired from Geeknet by the online job site Dice.com for $20 million, and incorporated into a subsidiary known as Slashdot Media. [36] [37] On September 26, 2012, it was reported that attackers had compromised a SourceForge mirror, and modified a download of phpMyAdmin to add security exploits. [38]
In July 2015 Dice announced that it planned to sell SourceForge and Slashdot; on January 27, 2016, the two sites were sold to the San Diego-based BizX , LLC for an undisclosed amount. [39] [40] [41] [42]

Controversies
Some of SourceForge's monetization practices have been met with criticism by developers and end users.

DevShare adware
In July 2013 SourceForge announced that it would provide project owners with an optional feature called DevShare , which places closed-source ad-supported content into the binary installers and gives the project part of the ad revenue. [43] Opinions of this new feature vary, with some complaining about users not being as aware of what they are getting or being able to trust the downloaded content, whereas others see it as a reasonably harmless option that keeps individual projects and users in control. [44]
In November 2013 GIMP , a free image manipulation program, removed its download from SourceForge, citing misleading download buttons that potentially confuse customers, as well as SourceForge's own Windows installer, which bundles potentially unwanted programs . In a statement, GIMP called SourceForge a once "useful and trustworthy place to develop and host FLOSS applications" that now faces "a problem with the ads they allow on their sites ..." [45] [46] [47]
In response to the DevShare adware many users and projects migrated to GitHub , other software hosting facilities, or self-host their software. [48] [49] In May 2015 SourceForge took control of pages for five projects that had migrated to other hosting sites and replaced the project downloads with adware -laden downloads. [50] Community concerns triggered a prompt review of SourceForge mirroring program, and third-party bundling of mirrored content was discontinued on May 27, 2015. [50]
After SourceForge was sold to BizX in 2016, DevShare was discontinued. [51] [52] On May 17, 2016, SourceForge announced that they were now scanning all projects for malware, and displaying warnings on projects detected to have malware. [53]

Project hijackings and bundled malware
GIMP, who discontinued their use of SourceForge as a download mirror in November 2013, [45] [54] reported in May 2015 that SourceForge was hosting versions of their Windows binaries that "put other software apart from GIMP on our users' systems" on their Open Source Mirror directory, [55] [56] which SourceForge claims is a collection of abandoned projects. [57] [58] This came despite SourceForge's commitment in November 2013 to never bundle adware with project downloads without developers' consent. [54] [55] [59] GIMP said "To us, this firmly places SourceForge among the dodgy crowd of download sites."
On June 1, 2015, SourceForge claimed that they stopped coupling "third party offers" with unmaintained SourceForge projects. [60] Since this announcement was made, a number of other developers reported that their SourceForge projects had been taken over by SourceForge staff accounts (but have not had binaries edited), including nmap , [59] [61] and VLC media player . [62] On June 18, 2015, SourceForge announced that SourceForge-maintained mirrored projects were removed, and anticipated the formation of a Community Panel to review their mirroring practices. [63]

Project of the Month
Since 2002 SourceForge features a Project of the Month . [64]

Reception

Usage
As of May 2013, [update] the SourceForge repository hosted more than 300,000 projects and had more than 3 million registered users, [65] although not all were active. The domain sourceforge.net attracted at least 33 million visitors by August 2009 according to a Compete.com survey. [7]

Country restrictions
In its terms of use, [66] SourceForge states that its services are not available to users in countries on the sanction list of the U.S. Office of Foreign Assets Control (including Cuba, Iran, North Korea, Sudan and Syria). Since 2008 the secure server used for making contributions to the site has blocked access from those countries. As of January 2010 [update] the site had blocked all access from those countries, including downloads. Any IP address that appeared to belong to one of those countries could not use the site. [67] A month later SourceForge relaxed the restrictions so that individual projects could indicate whether or not SourceForge should block their software from download to those countries. [68]
Crimea has been blocked since 1 February 2015 [69] [70] [71] [ better source needed ]

See also
WebPage index: 00181
Heinz Heise
Heinz Heise is a publishing house based in Hanover , Germany . Its focus is PC -oriented publications such as c't , iX and heise.de , as well as corresponding online services published by its UK-based subsidiary Heise Media UK Ltd.

History
Heise was created by Heinz Heise in Hanover in 1949 as an address and telephone directory publisher, then later expanded to include magazines and loose leaf collections. In 2001, the company was divided into separate enterprises, all of which came under the umbrella of their parent company, the Heise Media Group . Their turnover was in year 2008 at 108,7 million euro. [1]
In July 2006, Heise Security was launched in the UK. [2] It mostly featured translated news from the German site, but also featured locally relevant stories. The UK version of Heise Online came in February 2008. In February 2009, the UK site was renamed to The H , and located at h-online.com . [3] In July 2013, The H was closed down because it proved difficult to monetize traffic to the website. [4] The website archive was taken down and the site redirected to heise.de in January 2014. [5] It was brought back online a few days later. [6]

Publications
Heise publishes the magazines:
These publications feed into the Heise News Ticker , which ranks among the most successful German language news portals which includes a frequented user forum. [7] The company also owns Heise Online ( heise.de ), which, as of December 2009, is a top 1000 website in the world, and a top 50 site in Germany according to Alexa traffic rankings. [8]
In the UK, Heise had a subsidiary Heise Media UK Ltd. , which published The H ( h-online.com ) with the following channels:
"The H" was closed down in July 2013 for lack of a "working business model". [9]
WebPage index: 00182
BMJ (company)
BMJ (previously BMJ Group , rebranded in 2013), is a global healthcare knowledge provider of journals, clinical decision support and medical education. It is a wholly owned subsidiary of the British Medical Association . Established in 1840 with the publication of the Provincial Medical and Surgical Journal (later the first edition of the British Medical Journal ), it is now a fully commercial organisation with about 480 staff and offices based in 7 locations around the world including North America, South America, Europe, India and China.
BMJ's mission statement is:
"BMJ advances healthcare worldwide by sharing knowledge and expertise to improve experiences and outcomes." Its vision is to create 'a healthier world'. [1]
BMJ is a global academic publisher providing a wide range of evidence-based medicine products in print, online and at events, to healthcare professionals and institutional clients: academic institutions, governments and Ministries of Health, healthcare providers and medical societies. It offers the medical community a comprehensive information support system that improves patient outcomes and the decisions people make every day. The company also offers many other products that support clinicians throughout their career, such as BMJ Careers and BMJ Learning .
BMJ's products and services also extend to offer rights and licensing, and targeted advertising and sponsorship opportunities for pharmaceutical and healthcare companies, recruiters, and the general medical community.

BMJ major publications

BMJ campaigns

Online history

See also
WebPage index: 00183
Gripe site
A gripe site is a type of website devoted to the critique and or mockery of a person , place , politician , corporation , or institution . They are also known as "complaint" or "sucks" sites. The Internet provides a low-cost public platform for anyone, even of modest means, to reach a global audience via a "gripe" website. The web gives ordinary individuals the opportunity to publicly criticise the rich and powerful, including multinational corporations .
The following definition of a "gripe site" is from comments by an American lawyer Paul Levy, published online by Public Citizen : "A 'gripe site' is a web site established to criticize an institution such as a corporation, union, government body, or political figure. Not surprisingly, powerful institutions often do not take kindly to being criticized, and they have invented a variety of ways to try to suppress the speech of their adversaries." [ citation needed ]
In an attempt to shut down a gripe site, companies have sued the gripe site owner alleging defamation, trademark infringement, trademark dilution, libel, and copyright infringement. [ citation needed ]

See also
WebPage index: 00184
Mashup (video)
A video mashup (also written as video mash-up ) combines multiple pre-existing video sources with no discernible relation with each other into a unified video. These are derivative works as defined by the United States Copyright Act 17 U.S.C. § 101 , and as such, may find protection from copyright claims under the doctrine of fair use . [1] Examples of mashup videos include movie trailer remixes , vids , YouTube Poop , and supercuts . [2] [3]

Music Video mashups
These two types of music video mashup are usually edited to match the rhythm of the song, and seeking to show a particular aesthetic style.And towards to a celebrative communication. [4]
The last two types are typical use-generated contents in the age of Web2.0,which reflects the more participation in mashup or remix culture.

Political mashups
Political video mashups are a primary example of citizen-generated content. These mashups allow the creator to form new meanings by juxtaposing two pieces of original source material, for example, someone may take footage of a politician's speech and 'mash it up' with footage from a popular reality television show. This form of mashup, according to Richard L. Edwards and Chuck Tryon, can be accepted as allegories of citizen empowerment. According to their article 'Political Video Mashups as Allegories of Citizen Empowerment', the videos are empowering because the users become more literate with online and offline information they receive daily; they become more active when it comes to interpreting meaning and also realising how a speech may have been manipulated. [8]
Online videos such as political mashups are starting to take on a serious role within the politics of the United States of America. In the 2008 elections (often referred to as the 'YouTube elections') more than 40% of voters watched video content relating to the elections online. Now that the internet is so widely accessible it enables the user to make and find digestible content; political mashup videos can make a serious speech more humorous, accessible and understandable. However, because anybody can create these mashups, it is important to remember that the original meaning could have been violated. Edwards and Tryon mention that parody has become the most important form of critical intertextuality. [8] Often, the creator of a political mashup will completely flip the meaning in order to make it funny, some mashup artists choose to make an entirely manufactured meaning from source material. Notable examples of political mashup videos and artists can be found below.

Trailer mashups
Trailer mashups also known as recut trailers, involve collecting multiple pieces of film footage from one or multiple movies and editing them to create a new trailer. Trailer mashups are often created for a movie that does not exist or to change the genre of an existing film. Trailer mashups existence and popularity can be credited to convergence culture and the Web 2.0 infrastructure, allowing films to be easily accessed and shared online on video sharing websites such as YouTube.
Film has long been a read-only medium, it was only meant to be watched. With the expansion of YouTube and other video sharing websites over the years it has allowed film to be transformed into a read-write form of media. Digital files can now be accessed, edited and uploaded onto the internet. Free editing software is widely accessible so anyone with access to digital movie files can create a trailer mashup. [9]
The trailer mashups are not only a user generated form of digital creativity but a way to create anticipation for future releases, working in tandem with current movie trailers. Movie trailers are designed to give minimal plot detail and to create hype and anticipation. Fan made trailer mashups allow the audience to perform their own cinematic spin on current movie footage. This allows the trailer to focus on a specific actor or portion of the film. It could even change the plot or genre of the film entirely. The user generated trailer mashup allows for the creator disregard advertising and promotion paths. [10]

Supercut mashups
The term supercut was first created by Andy Baio . Also known as supercut video mashups, they focus on the phrases and devices that are repeated in movies and TV and repeat them in a comic effect. The video content adds context to these clichés, and presents them in a new light, or inspire a moratorium on them.
The supercut first appeared a year after YouTube was created. In 2006, an audience that would turn out to grow to more than six million watched CSI: Miami’s David Caruso don a pair of sunglasses after making a glib remark about a victim. In the video Caruso keeps doing that same action for seven minutes. The clip was perhaps the most prominent supercut before the term was even invented, and that was not by accident. It was because of the way the creator edited away to the screaming finale of the opening credits in between each iteration, establishing a jokey rhythm and a perennial callback. Details like these are key in the supercut genre. [11]

Web application video mashups
According to Eduardo Navas, [12] web application mashups is a type of Regenerative Remix that developed with an interest to extend the functionality of software for specific purposes. Usually combinations of pre-existing sources brought together.The emergence of the web application mashups is for practical purposes. However, Navas recognizes that the reflexive mashups also can be used for entertainment and the most typical example is Vine .
Vine is the most used video app in the market, [13] which for creating 6-second looping videos, prioritizes the visual. To better understand the creative capabilities of Vine’s limitations, we analyze its formal elements. The interface centers on a timeline: the video recording begins as the user touches the screen of their mobile device, and the recording takes place only so long as they’re touching the screen. Given this touch-and-hold interface, there’s no post-production editing: edits can be made by letting go of the touch before the end of the six seconds, framing a new shot, and then touching again to capture the next image in the montage. [14]

Mashups and montage
- Being : It is an everlasting form of friction between two contradictory opposites . - Synthesis : It comes to be from the opposition between thesis and antithesis (is used in writing or speech when two opposites are introduced for contrasting effect ).
A precedent for video mashups can be discovered in the montage films of Eisenstein.

Notable examples
Cassetteboy - Their videos mainly focus on comedy, but many have a political message within them. For example, Cameron’s Conference Rap (which uses clips of David Cameron set to the beat of Eminem ’s Lose Yourself ), Cassetteboy vs Nick Griffin vs Question Time and Cassetteboy vs The News . However, not all have such a strong political emphasis. In an interview, Mike (one of the two people behind the channel) talks about how mash-up is an accessible practice, saying “It’s not an easy thing to do, but you don’t need very much to do it. You don’t need a camera or a microphone. You just need some footage and these days we’re drowning in digital content.” [16]
YouTube Rewind - YouTube Rewind is a yearly video series produced and released by YouTube, starting in 2010. It is a mash-up of various videos that went viral on the website in the previous year. The series started by simply placing clips of the videos next to one another in a countdown style, but then changed to a mash-up of both video and music, using YouTube stars to reference the videos. It does not have a political or informative stance, but rather one that is celebratory of the website and the people who are active on it.
What’s the Mashup? - What’s the Mashup? is a YouTube channel run by a Parisian man named Julien. The channel is another one that uses mash-up in a comedic way, often using clips from two different pop culture texts (such as TV and film) and mashing them into one narrative. He says that mash-up videos appeal when they use something that everyone is familiar with, hence his choice to focus on pop culture. [17] Unlike many other mash-up artists, he edits his videos in such a way that they don’t appear to be separate narratives, but rather one continuous story.

Mashups and copyright
Mashup videos are increasingly popular online. When the mashup creators remix two or more videos or music from various sources e.g. TV, film, music etc., they may not be aware of the copyright of the original source. Without the permission of copyright owner, mashup video artists may violate the copyright law and charged by criminal copyright infringement. If they violate the law, their videos will be forced to take down on YouTube. YouTube can ban their accounts and they are forbidden to post anything online. In a more serious case, the copyright owners reserve their rights to sue the mashup artists and they may have a maximum punishment of five years in jail and large fines. [18] It is an obstacle that hinders mashup artists to develop mashup video more. The original copyright law is written in 1980s or even earlier and it did not include the possibilities of copyright infringement exist in digital era. Therefore, mashup artists and public suggests a reform of copyright law regarding on remix culture and mashup videos in order to give more freedom for mashup artists to create their work.

United States
In the United States, the Copyright Act of 1976 acts as the basis of copyright law to protect the rights of the original creators. It protects the original works of authorship. To some extent, it allows artists to reproduce the work and create derivative works of the original work. [19]
Fair use is a limitation and exception to the copyright law. According to the Hofstra Law Review , “If mashup artists could prove that they use others’ songs or clips to criticize, comment, or teach, then mashup artists might be able to use the copyrighted material without authorization." [20]
Courts in the United States balance four factors when considering fair use:

United Kingdom
Starting from Wednesday 1 October 2014, the new EU law becomes effective in the United Kingdom. [21] There is an amendment to the Copyright, Design and Patents Act 1988. It is now legal for people to use “limited amount” of copyrighted material in online video for the purposes of “parody, caricature or pastiche” without the consent of the copyright holder, only if their work do not convey a discriminatory message, or compete with the original. A judge will decide whether the video is funny enough to classify as a parody and if it violates the law.
Although the mashup video is now legal in practice, it does not affect YouTube’s terms of service. The most famous example in Britain is the Cassetteboy. Cassetteboy’s videos can be shown on TV channels now but sometimes YouTube can take down their videos if they violate the copyright of the music or clips in their videos. [16]

See also
WebPage index: 00185
Software patent
A suggested definition of software patent has been proposed by the Foundation for a Free Information Infrastructure (FFII) as being a " patent on any performance of a computer realised by means of a computer program ". [1] According to the European Patent Office , there is no legal or conclusive definition for a software patent. [2] According to the FFII, software patents should not exist under European law. [3]
Globally the situation is more complex and reflects varying cultural views of invention itself. [ citation needed ] [ vague ] Most countries place some limits on the patenting of inventions involving software, but there is no one legal definition of a software patent. For example, U.S. patent law excludes "abstract ideas", and this has been used to refuse some patents involving software. In Europe, "computer programs as such" are excluded from patentability, thus European Patent Office policy is consequently that a program for a computer is not patentable if it does not have the potential to cause a "technical effect" which is by now understood as a material effect (a "transformation of nature"). [4]
There is a debate over the extent to which software patents should be granted, if at all. Important issues concerning software patents include:

Background
A patent is a set of exclusionary rights granted by a state to a patent holder for a limited period of time, usually 20 years. These rights are granted to patent applicants in exchange for their disclosure of the inventions. Once a patent is granted in a given country, no person may make, use, sell or import/export the claimed invention in that country without the permission of the patent holder. Permission, where granted, is typically in the form of a license which conditions are set by the patent owner: it may be gratis or in return for a royalty payment or lump sum fee.
Patents are territorial in nature. To obtain a patent, inventors must file patent applications in each and every country in which they want a patent. For example, separate applications must be filed in Japan , China , the United States and India if the applicant wishes to obtain patents in those countries. However, some regional offices exist, such as the European Patent Office (EPO), which act as supranational bodies with the power to grant patents which can then be brought into effect in the member states, and an international procedure also exists for filing a single international application under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT), which can then give rise to patent protection in most countries.
These different countries and regional offices have different standards for granting patents. This is particularly true of software or computer-implemented inventions, especially where the software is implementing a business method.

Early example of a software patent
On 21 May 1962, a British patent application entitled " A Computer Arranged for the Automatic Solution of Linear Programming Problems " was filed. [8] The invention was concerned with efficient memory management for the simplex algorithm , and could be implemented by purely software means. The patent was granted on August 17, 1966 and seems to be one of the first software patents. [9] [10]

Jurisdictions
Substantive law regarding the patentability of software and computer-implemented inventions, and case law interpreting the legal provisions, are different under different jurisdictions.
Software patents under multilateral treaties :
Software patents under national laws:

Australia
In Australia , pure or abstract methods of doing business are not considered to be patentable. [11] [ non-primary source needed ] In order for a software solution implementing a business method to be patentable, it must involve more than the utilisation of well-known search and processing function of a computer, otherwise it will not be patentable. [12]

Canada
In Canada , courts have held that the use of a computer alone neither lends, nor reduces patentability of an invention. However, it is the position of the Canadian Patent Office that where a computer is an "essential element" of a patent's claims, the claimed invention is generally patentable subject matter. [13]

Europe
Within European Union member states, the EPO and other national patent offices have issued many patents for inventions involving software since the European Patent Convention (EPC) came into force in the late 1970s. Article 52 EPC excludes "programs for computers" from patentability (Art. 52(2)) to the extent that a patent application relates to a computer program "as such" (Art. 52(3)). This has been interpreted to mean that any invention that makes a non-obvious "technical contribution" or solves a "technical problem" in a non-obvious way is patentable even if that technical problem is solved by running a computer program. [14]
Computer-implemented inventions that only solve a business problem using a computer, rather than a technical problem, are considered unpatentable as lacking an inventive step (see T 258/03 ). Nevertheless, the fact that an invention is useful in business does not mean it is not patentable if it also solves a technical problem.
A summary of the developments concerning patentability of computer programs under the European Patent Convention is given in (see G 3/08 ) as a response of the Enlarged Board of Appeal to questions filed by the President of the European Patent Office according to Art. 112(1)b) EPC.
Concerns have been raised that the new (2015) Unified Patent Court will be much more open to patents generally and software patents in particular. [15] [16] [17]

Germany
In April 2013, the German Parliament adopted a joint motion "against the growing trend of patent offices to grant patents on software programs." [18]

United Kingdom
United Kingdom patent law is interpreted to have the same effect as the European Patent Convention such that "programs for computers" are excluded from patentability to the extent that a patent application relates to a computer program "as such". Current case law in the UK states that an (alleged) invention will only be regarded as an invention if it provides a contribution that is not excluded and that is also technical. A computer program implementing a business process is therefore not an invention, but a computer program implementing an industrial process may well be.

India
In India , a clause to include software patents was quashed by the Indian Parliament in April 2005. [19] However, following publication of the new guidelines on the examination of computer-related inventions on 19 February 2016, the Office of the Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trade marks accepts applications for software patents, as long as the software is not "per se". [20]

Japan
Software-related inventions are patentable. To qualify as an invention, however, there must be "a creation of technical ideas utilizing a law of nature" [21] although this requirement is typically met by "concretely realising the information processing performed by the software by using hardware resources". [22] Software-related inventions may be considered obvious if they involve the application of an operation known in other fields, the addition of a commonly known means or replacement by equivalent, the implementation in software of functions which were previously performed by hardware, or the systematisation of known human transactions. [23]
In 1999, the allowance rate for business method patents at the Japan Patent Office (JPO) reached an all-time high of roughly 35 percent. Subsequently, the JPO experienced a surge in business method patent filings. This surge was met with a dramatic decrease in the average grant rate of business method patents during the following six years; it lingered around 8 percent between 2003 and 2006 (8 percent is extremely low in comparison to the average of 50 percent across all technical fields). Since 2006, the average grant rate for business method patents has risen to the current rate of roughly 25 percent. [24]

New Zealand
In New Zealand computer programs are to be excluded from patentability under a 2010 Patents Bill, but guidelines permitting embedded software are to be drafted once the bill has passed. [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] From 2013 computer programs 'as such' are excluded from patentability. The as such wording rules out only those software based patents where novelty lies solely in the software. Similar to Europe. [30]

Philippines
In the Philippines , "schemes, rules and methods of performing mental acts, playing games or doing business, and programs for computers" are non-patentable inventions under Sec. 22.2 of Republic Act No. 8293, otherwise known as the "Intellectual Property Code of the Philippines."

Russian Federation
In the Russian Federation according to article #1350 of the Civil Code the following are not patentable:

South Africa
In South Africa , "a program for a computer" is excluded from recognition as an invention by section 25(2) of the Patents Act. [31] However, this restriction applies "only to the extent to which a patent or an application for a patent relates to that thing as such" [32] and should not prevent, for example, a product, process, or method which may be implemented on a computer from being an invention, provided that the requirements of novelty and inventiveness are met.

South Korea
In South Korea , software is considered patentable and many patents directed towards "computer programs" have been issued. [33] In 2006, Microsoft 's sales of its "Office" suite were jeopardized due to a possible patent infringement. [34] A ruling by the Supreme Court of Korea found that patents directed towards automatic language translation within software programs were valid and possibly violated by its software. [34]

United States
The United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patents that may be referred to as software patents since at least the early 1970s. [35] In Gottschalk v. Benson (1972), the United States Supreme Court ruled that a patent for a process should not be allowed if it would "wholly pre-empt the mathematical formula and in practical effect would be a patent on the algorithm itself", adding that "it is said that the decision precludes a patent for any program servicing a computer. We do not so hold." [36] In 1981, the Supreme Court stated that "a claim drawn to subject matter otherwise statutory does not become nonstatutory simply because it uses a mathematical formula, computer program, or digital computer" and a claim is patentable if it contains "a mathematical formula [and] implements or applies the formula in a structure or process which, when considered as a whole, is performing a function which the patent laws were designed to protect". [37]
Due to different treatment of federal patent rights in different parts of the country, in 1982 the U.S. Congress created a new court (the Federal Circuit ) to hear patent cases. Following several landmark decisions by this court, by the early 1990s the patentability of software was well established, and in 1996 the USPTO issued Final Computer Related Examination Guidelines stating that "A practical application of a computer-related invention is statutory subject matter. This requirement can be discerned from the variously phrased prohibitions against the patenting of abstract ideas, laws of nature or natural phenomena" (emphasis added). [38]
The recent expansion of the Internet and e-commerce has led to many patents being applied for and being granted for business methods implemented in software and the question of whether business methods are statutory subject matter is a separate issue from the question of whether software is. Critics of the Federal Circuit believe that the non-obviousness standard is partly responsible for the large increase in patents for software and business methods. [39] There have been several successful enforcement trials in the United States, some of which are listed in the list of software patents article.

Purpose of patents
For the U.S., the purpose of patents is laid down in the constitutional clause that gives Congress the power "[t]o promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries;" (Article I, Section 8, Clause 8). For Europe, there is no similar definition. Commonly four patent justification theories are recognised, as laid down for instance by Machlup in 1958, [40] which include justice to the inventor and benefit for society by rewarding inventors. Disclosure is required in return for the exclusive right, and disclosure may promote further development. However, the value of disclosure should not be overestimated: some inventions could not be kept secret otherwise, and patents also prohibit independent reinventions to be exploited.
There is debate as to whether or not these aims are achieved with software patents.

Proposals
In seeking to find a balance, different countries have different policies as to where the boundary between patentable and non-patentable software should lie. In Europe, a number of different proposals for setting a boundary line were put forward during the debate concerning the proposed Directive on the patentability of computer-implemented inventions , none of which were found acceptable by the various parties to the debate. Two particular suggestions for a hurdle that software must pass to be patentable include:
In the US, Ben Klemens , a Guest Scholar at the Brookings Institution , proposed that patents should be granted only to inventions that include a physical component that is by itself nonobvious. [44] This is based on Justice William Rehnquist 's ruling in the U.S. Supreme Court case of Diamond v. Diehr that stated that "... insignificant postsolution activity will not transform an unpatentable principle into a patentable process." [ citation needed ] By this rule, one would consider software loaded onto a stock PC to be an abstract algorithm with obvious postsolution activity, while a new circuit design implementing the logic would likely be a nonobvious physical device. Upholding an "insignificant postsolution activity" rule as per Justice Rehnquist 's ruling would also eliminate most business method patents .

Obviousness
A common objection to software patents is that they relate to trivial inventions. [45] A patent on an invention that many people would easily develop independently of one another should not, it is argued, be granted since this impedes development.
Different countries have different ways of dealing with the question of inventive step and non-obviousness in relation to software patents. Europe uses an 'Inventive step test'; see the Inventive step requirement in Europe and, for instance, T 258/03 .

Criticism

Compatibility
There are a number of high-profile examples where the patenting of a data exchange standards forced another programming group to introduce an alternative format. For instance, the Portable Network Graphics (PNG) format was largely introduced to avoid the Graphics Interchange Format (GIF) patent problems, and Ogg Vorbis to avoid MP3 . If it is discovered that these new suggested formats are themselves covered by existing patents, the final result may be a large number of incompatible formats. Creating such formats and supporting them costs money and creates inconvenience to users.

Computer-implemented invention (CII)
Under the EPC, and in particular its Article 52, [46] " programs for computers " are not regarded as inventions for the purpose of granting European patents, [47] but this exclusion from patentability only applies to the extent to which a European patent application or European patent relates to a computer program as such. [48] As a result of this partial exclusion, and despite the fact that the EPO subjects patent applications in this field to a much stricter scrutiny [49] when compared to their American counterpart , that does not mean that all inventions including some software are de jure not patentable .

Overlap with copyright
Patent and copyright protection constitute two different means of legal protection which may cover the same subject-matter, such as computer programs, since each of these two means of protection serves its own purpose. [50] Software is protected as works of literature under the Berne Convention . This allows the creator to prevent another entity from copying the program and there is generally no need to register code in order for it to be copyrighted.
Patents, on the other hand, give their owners the right to prevent others from using a claimed invention, even if it was independently developed and there was no copying involved. In fact, one of the most recent EPO decisions [51] clarifies the distinction, stating that software is patentable, because it is basically only a technical method executed on a computer, which is to be distinguished from the program itself for executing the method, the program being merely an expression of the method, and thus being copyrighted.
Patents cover the underlying methodologies embodied in a given piece of software, or the function that the software is intended to serve, independent of the particular language or code that the software is written in. Copyright prevents the direct copying of some or all of a particular version of a given piece of software, but does not prevent other authors from writing their own embodiments of the underlying methodologies. Copyright can also be used to prevent a given set of data from being copied while still allowing the author to keep the contents of said set of data a trade secret . [ citation needed ]
Whether and how the numerus clausus principle shall apply to the legal hybrid software [52] to provide a judicious balance between property rights of the title holders and freedom rights of computing professionals [53] and the society as a whole, [54] is in dispute. [55] [56] [57]

Free and open source software
There is strong dislike in the free software community towards software patents. Much of this has been caused by free software or open source projects terminating [58] when the owners of patents covering aspects of a project demanded license fees that the project could not pay, or was not willing to pay, or offered licenses with terms that the project was unwilling to accept, or could not accept, because it conflicted with the free software license in use. [59]
Several patent holders have offered royalty-free patent licenses for a very small portion of their patent portfolios. Such actions have provoked only minor reaction from the free and open source software communities for reasons such as fear of the patent holder changing their mind or the license terms being so narrow as to have little use. [60] Companies that have done this include Apple Inc , [ citation needed ] IBM , [61] Microsoft , [62] Nokia , [ citation needed ] Novell , [63] Red Hat , [64] and Sun Microsystems . [65]
In 2005 Sun Microsystems announced that they were making a portfolio of 1,600 patents available through a patent license called Common Development and Distribution License . [66]
In 2006, Microsoft's pledge not to sue Novell Linux customers, openSUSE contributors, and free/open source software developers over patents [67] and the associated collaboration agreement with Novell [68] was met with disdain from the Software Freedom Law Center [69] while commentators from the Free Software Foundation stated that the agreement would not comply with GPLv3 . Meanwhile, Microsoft has reached similar agreements with Dell, Inc. and Samsung , [70] due to alleged patent infringements of the GNU/Linux operating system. Microsoft has also derived revenue from Android by making such agreements-not-to-sue with Android vendors. [71]

Unisys case
In the late 1990s, Unisys claimed to have granted royalty free licenses to hundreds of not-for-profit organizations that used the patented LZW compression method and, by extension, the GIF image format. However, this did not include most software developers and Unisys were "barraged" by negative and "sometimes obscene" emails from software developers. [72]

Licensing
Patenting software is widespread in the US. As of 2004, approximately 145,000 patents had issued in the 22 classes of patents covering "computer implemented inventions". (see table to the right).
Many software companies cross license their patents to each other. These agreements allow each party to practice the other party's patented inventions without the threat of being sued for patent infringement . Microsoft , for example, has agreements with IBM , Sun Microsystems (now Oracle Corporation ), SAP , Hewlett-Packard , Siemens AG , Cisco , Autodesk [74] and recently Novell . Microsoft cross-licensed its patents with Sun, despite being direct competitors, and with Autodesk even though Autodesk has far fewer patents than Microsoft.
The ability to negotiate cross licensing agreements is a major reason that many software companies, including those providing open source software, file patents. As of June 2006, for example, Red Hat has developed a portfolio of 10 issued US patents, 1 issued European patent, 163 pending US patent applications, and 33 pending international PCT ( Patent Cooperation Treaty ) patent applications. Red Hat uses this portfolio to cross license with proprietary software companies so that they can preserve their freedom to operate. [64]
Other patent holders are in the business of inventing new "computer implemented inventions" and then commercializing the inventions by licensing the patents to other companies that manufacture the inventions. Walker Digital , for example, has generated a large patent portfolio from its research efforts, including the basic patent on the Priceline.com reverse auction technology. US universities also fall into this class of patent owners. They collectively generate about $1.4 billion per year through licensing the inventions they develop to both established and start up companies in all fields of technology, including software. [75]
Still other patent holders focus on obtaining patents from original inventors and licensing them to companies that have introduced commercial products into the marketplace after the patents were filed. Some of these patent holders, such as Intellectual Ventures , are privately held companies financed by large corporations such as Apple, Microsoft, Intel , Google , etc. Others, such as Acacia Technologies , are publicly traded companies with institutional investors being the primary shareholders. [76]
The practice of acquiring patents merely to license them is controversial in the software industry. Companies that have this business model are pejoratively referred to as patent trolls . It is an integral part of the business model that patent licensing companies sue infringers that do not take a license. Furthermore, they may take advantage of the fact that many companies will pay a modest license fee (e.g.$100,000 to $1,000,000) for rights to a patent of questionable validity, rather than pay the high legal fees ($2,000,000 or more) to demonstrate in court that the patent is invalid. [ citation needed ]

See also
WebPage index: 00186
Anti-copyright notice
An anti-copyright notice is a specific statement that is added to a work in order to encourage wide distribution. Such notices are legally required to host such specific media; under the Berne Convention in international copyright law , works are protected even if no copyright statement is attached to them. However, " anti-copyright " statements typically do not take the form of either sophisticated public copyright licenses or a simple dedication to the public domain ; instead, they usually just encourage wide distribution. It is possible to denounce all claims to copyright in a work including moral rights in a written disclaimer. [ citation needed ]
An example of an anti-copyright notice is the following: "Anti-Copyright! Reprint freely, in any manner desired, even without naming the source." Where such notices are attached depends highly on the type of work. They are often found in socialist anarchist magazines and books. [ citation needed ]
A copyright waiver might [ clarification needed ] state the following:
The Creative Commons CC0 was created for compatibility with also law domains (e.g. civil law of continental Europe ) which have problems with the concept of dedicating into public domain , as waiver statement with a fallback all- permissive license . [1] [2] The Unlicense , published around 2010, has a focus on an anti-copyright message. [3]
Woody Guthrie used an anti-copyright notice on his songs:
Despite this, a number of organisations claim copyright of Guthrie's songs. [5]
Most people [ citation needed ] would regard "anti-copyright" notices as being equivalent to a dedication of material into the public domain (as in the second example above). Some of these disclaimers, however, are less accurate and need to be interpreted individually as the term anti-copyright has no accepted legal meaning. For example, if just free distribution is encouraged, modification or lack of attribution is still illegal, making the material ineligible for collaborative writing projects like English Wikipedia . In such a case anti-copyright is not a true denial of copyright, but just a modification of the protection it affords copyright holders.
WebPage index: 00187
Infoanarchism
Infoanarchism is an umbrella term for various groups of people who are opposed to forms of intellectual property , such as copyright and patents , and censorship in general. The term was coined in a TIME Magazine article called "The Infoanarchist" in July 2000. The article was about Ian Clarke , known as the original designer and lead developer of Freenet . [1]
The anti-copyright movement includes a wide range of groups and views. Infoanarchists have emerged as part of the broader copyright social conflict and copyright debate.
While crypto-anarchism is focused on confidential, untraceable communication between individuals, the term Infoanarchism focuses more on the public anonymous availability of informational resources.
Infoanarchists have mixed views on the right to individual privacy , with some supporting its active enforcement and others wishing to push the responsibility to the citizen.
Infoanarchists may encourage and practice the use of anonymous networks, like Freenet , Entropy , Tor or I2P , to protect against legal attacks, as they make it difficult for observers, or any middleman, to determine what traffic is going across the network. They can be used for unrestricted copying.
Prominent inforanarchist bloggers include Anarcho-Queer and RageMovement are present on the micro-blogging website, tumblr. [ citation needed ] These anarchists are predominantly syndicalist, communist, or socialist anarchists and have advocated online information be private although information published by the creator may be used among users collectively without any need of credit being due. Online infoanarchists justify their ideology claiming that when purposely published information becomes available then that, in turn, signifies a right for unlimited use of that information.

See also
WebPage index: 00188
Inducement prize contest
An inducement prize contest (IPC) is a competition that awards a cash prize for the accomplishment of a feat, usually of engineering. IPCs are typically designed to extend the limits of human ability. Some of the most famous IPCs include the Longitude prize (1714–1765), the Orteig Prize (1919–1927) and the prizes from the X Prize Foundation .
IPCs are distinct from recognition prizes, such as the Nobel Prize , in that IPCs have prospectively defined criteria for what feat is to be achieved for winning the prize, while recognition prizes may be based on the beneficial effects of the feat.
Research has shown that IPCs can be extremely effective in pushing the advancement of technology.

History of IPCs
Throughout history, there have been instances where IPCs were successfully utilized to push the boundaries of what would have been considered state-of-the-art at the time. [1]
The Longitude Prize was a reward offered by the British government for a simple and practical method for the precise determination of a ship's longitude . The prize, established through an Act of Parliament (the Longitude Act ) in 1714, was administered by the Board of Longitude . Another example happened during the first years of the Napoleonic Wars . The French government offered a hefty cash award of 12,000 francs to any inventor who could devise a cheap and effective method of preserving large amounts of food. The larger armies of the period required increased, regular supplies of quality food. Limited food availability was among the factors limiting military campaigns to the summer and autumn months. In 1809, a French confectioner and brewer, Nicolas Appert , observed that food cooked inside a jar did not spoil unless the seals leaked, and developed a method of sealing food in glass jars. [2] The reason for lack of spoilage was unknown at the time, since it would be another 50 years before Louis Pasteur demonstrated the role of microbes in food spoilage. Yet another example is the Orteig Prize which was a $25,000 reward offered on May 19, 1919, by New York hotel owner Raymond Orteig to the first allied aviator(s) to fly non-stop from New York City to Paris or vice versa. On offer for five years, it attracted no competitors. Orteig renewed the offer for another five years in 1924 when the state of aviation technology had advanced to the point that numerous competitors vied for the prize. Several famous aviators made unsuccessful attempts at the New York–Paris flight before relatively unknown American Charles Lindbergh won the prize in 1927 in his aircraft Spirit of St. Louis .
In recent years, there has been increasing interest in the development of IPCs to push technical boundaries in several key areas such as aerospace, life sciences, and sustainable energy among others. Some now predict that global recession may make prizes more prevalent rather than less as prizes are argued to be a cost effective tool for advancing markets. Big prizes for big challenges - 13 predictions for 2013 [3]
A leading organization in development and managing IPCs is the X PRIZE Foundation. Its mission is to bring about “radical breakthroughs for the benefit of humanity” through incentivized competition. It fosters high-profile competitions that motivate individuals, companies and organizations across all disciplines to develop innovative ideas and technologies that help solve the grand challenges that restrict humanity’s progress. The most high-profile X PRIZE to date was the Ansari X PRIZE relating to spacecraft development awarded in 2004. This prize was intended to inspire research and development into technology for space exploration. Indeed, the X Prize has inspired other "letter" named inducement prize competitions such as the H-Prize , N-Prize , and so forth. In 2006, there was much interest in prizes for automotive achievement, such as the 250 mpg car. [ citation needed ]
In Europe there has been a re-emergence of challenge prizes that following in the tradition of the Longitude Prize for solutions which impact on social problems. The Centre for Challenge Prizes based in London is an example of this running prizes for innovations that for example reduce social isolation or make renewable energy generators accessible to off the grid refugees and returnees. [4]

Economics of IPCs
In some literature on the subject, it has been stated that well-designed IPCs can garner economic activity on the order of 10 to 20 times the amount of the prize face value. [ citation needed ]

List of IPCs

See also
WebPage index: 00189
Cultural environmentalism
Cultural environmentalism is the movement that seeks to protect the public domain . The term was coined by James Boyle , professor at Duke University and contributor to the Financial Times . [1]
The term stems from Boyle's argument that those who seek to protect the public domain are working towards a similar ends as environmentalists . Boyle's contention is that whereas the environmentalist movement illuminated the effects that social decisions can have upon ecology, cultural environmentalists seek to illuminate the effects that intellectual property laws can have upon culture.
WebPage index: 00190
The Pirate Bay
The Pirate Bay (sometimes abbreviated to TPB ) is an online index of digital content of entertainment media and software, [3] founded in 2003 by Swedish think tank Piratbyrån , where visitors can search, download and contribute magnet links and torrent files, which facilitate peer-to-peer file sharing among users of the BitTorrent protocol.
In April 2009, the website's founders— Peter Sunde , Fredrik Neij and Gottfrid Svartholm —were found guilty in The Pirate Bay trial in Sweden for assisting in copyright infringement , sentenced to serve one year in prison and pay a fine. [4] In some countries, Internet service providers have been ordered to block access to the website. Subsequently, proxy websites have been providing access to it. [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] Founders Svartholm, Neij, and Sunde were all released by 2015 after having served shortened sentences. [10]
The Pirate Bay has sparked controversies and discussion about legal aspects of file sharing , copyright , civil liberties and has become a platform for political initiatives against established intellectual property laws and a central figure in an anti-copyright movement. [11] The website faced several shutdowns and domain seizures, switching to a series of new web addresses to continue operating. [10]

History
The Pirate Bay was established in September 2003 [12] by the Swedish anti-copyright organization Piratbyrån (The Piracy Bureau); it has been run as a separate organization since October 2004. The Pirate Bay was first run by Gottfrid Svartholm and Fredrik Neij , who are known by their nicknames "anakata" and "TiAMO", respectively. They have both been accused of "assisting in making copyrighted content available" by the Motion Picture Association of America . On 31 May 2006, the website's servers in Stockholm were raided and taken away by Swedish police, leading to three days of downtime . [13] The Pirate Bay claims to be a non-profit entity based in the Seychelles , [14] however this is disputed. [15]
The Pirate Bay has been involved in a number of lawsuits, both as plaintiff and as defendant. On 17 April 2009, Peter Sunde , Fredrik Neij, Gottfrid Svartholm and Carl Lundström were found guilty of assistance to copyright infringement and sentenced to one year in prison and payment of a fine of 30 million SEK (approximately 4.2m USD , 2.8m GBP , or 3.1m EUR ), after a trial of nine days. The defendants appealed the verdict and accused the judge of giving in to political pressure. [16] [17] On 26 November 2010, a Swedish appeals court upheld the verdict, decreasing the original prison terms but increasing the fine to 46 million SEK. [18] On 17 May 2010, because of an injunction against their bandwidth provider, the site was taken offline. [19] Access to the website was later restored with a message making fun of the injunction on their front page. On 23 June 2010, the group Piratbyrån disbanded due to the death of Ibi Kopimi Botani , a prominent member and co-founder of the group. [20]
The Pirate Bay was hosted for several years by PRQ , a Sweden-based company, owned by creators of TPB Gottfrid Svartholm and Fredrik Neij. [21] PRQ is said to provide "highly secure, no-questions-asked hosting services to its customers". [22] From May 2011, Serious Tubes Networks started providing network connectivity to The Pirate Bay. [23] On 23 January 2012, The Pirate Bay added the new category Physibles . These are 3D files described as "data objects that are able (and feasible) to become physical" using a 3D printer . [24] In May 2012, as part of Google 's newly inaugurated "Transparency Report", the company reported over 6,000 formal requests to remove Pirate Bay links from the Google Search index; those requests covered over 80,500 URLs, with the five copyright holders having the most requests consisting of: Froytal Services LLC, Bang Bros , Takedown Piracy LLC, Amateur Teen Kingdom, and International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI). [25] On 10 August 2013, The Pirate Bay announced the release of PirateBrowser , a free web browser used to circumvent internet censorship. [26] The site was the most visited torrent directory on the World Wide Web from 2003 until November 2014, when KickassTorrents had more visitors according to Alexa . [27] On 8 December 2014, Google removed most of the Google Play apps from its app store that have "The Pirate Bay" in the title. [28]
On 9 December 2014, The Pirate Bay was raided by the Swedish police , who seized servers, computers, and other equipment. [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] Several other torrent related sites including EZTV , Zoink, Torrage and the Istole tracker were also shut down in addition to The Pirate Bay's forum Suprbay.org. [30] On the second day after the raid EZTV was reported to be showing "signs of life" with uploads to ExtraTorrent and KickassTorrents and supporting proxy sites like eztv-proxy.net via the main website's backend IP addresses. [35] [36] Several copies of The Pirate Bay went online during the next several days, most notably oldpiratebay.org, created by isoHunt . [37] [38]
On 19 May 2015, the .se domain of The Pirate Bay was ordered to be seized following a ruling by a Swedish court. [39] [40] The site reacted by adding six new domains in its place. [41] [42] The judgment was appealed on 26 May 2015. [43] On 12 May 2016 the appeal was struck down and the Court ruled the domains be turned over to the Swedish state. [44] [45] The site returned to using its original .org domain in May 2016. [1] In August 2016, the U.S. government shut down KickassTorrents, which resulted in The Pirate Bay becoming once again the most visited BitTorrent website. [46]

Website

Content
The Pirate Bay allows users to search for Magnet links . These are used to reference resources available for download via peer-to-peer networks which, when opened in a BitTorrent client , begin downloading the desired content. (Originally, [47] the Pirate Bay allowed users to download BitTorrent files (torrents) , small files that contain metadata necessary to download the data files from other users). The torrents are organized into categories: "Audio", "Video", "Applications", "Games", "Porn" and "Other". [48] Registration requires an email address and is free; registered users may upload their own torrents and comment on torrents. According to a study of newly uploaded files during 2013 by TorrentFreak , 44% of uploads were television shows and movies, porn was in second place with 35% of uploads, and audio made up 9% of uploads. [49]
The website features a browse function that enables users to see what is available in broad categories like Audio, Video, and Games, as well as sub-categories like Audio books, High-res Movies, and Comics. Since January 2014, it also features a "Physibles" category for 3D-printable objects. [50] [51] The contents of these categories can be sorted by file name, the number of seeders or leechers, the date posted, etc.
Piratbyrån described The Pirate Bay as a long-running project of performance art . [52] Normally, the front page of The Pirate Bay featured a drawing of a pirate ship with the logo of the 1980s anti-copyright infringement campaign, " Home Taping Is Killing Music ", on its sails. [53]

Technical details
Initially, The Pirate Bay's four Linux servers ran a custom web server called Hypercube. An old version is open source. [54] On 1 June 2005, The Pirate Bay updated its website in an effort to reduce bandwidth usage, which was reported to be at 2 HTTP requests per millisecond on each of the four web servers , [55] as well as to create a more user friendly interface for the front-end of the website. The website now runs Lighttpd and PHP on its dynamic front ends, MySQL at the database back end, Sphinx on the two search systems, memcached for caching SQL queries and PHP-sessions and Varnish in front of Lighttpd for caching static content. As of September 2008 [update] , The Pirate Bay consisted of 31 dedicated servers including nine dynamic web fronts, a database, two search engines, and eight BitTorrent trackers . [56]
On 7 December 2007, The Pirate Bay finished the move from Hypercube to Opentracker as its BitTorrent tracking software, also enabling the use of the UDP tracker protocol for which Hypercube lacked support. [57] This allowed UDP multicast to be used to synchronize the multiple servers with each other much faster than before. [58] Opentracker is free software. [59] [60]
In June 2008, The Pirate Bay announced that their servers would support SSL encryption in response to Sweden's new wiretapping law. [61] [62] On 19 January 2009, The Pirate Bay launched IPv6 support for their tracker system, using an IPv6-only version of Opentracker . [63] On 17 November 2009, The Pirate Bay shut off its tracker service permanently, stating that centralized trackers are no longer needed since distributed hash tables (DHT), peer exchange (PEX), and magnet links allow peers to find each other and content in a decentralized way. [64] [65]
On 20 February 2012, The Pirate Bay announced in a Facebook post that after 29 February the site would no longer offer torrent files , and would instead offer only magnet links . The site commented: "Not having torrents will be a bit cheaper for us but it will also make it harder for our common enemies to stop us." [66] The site added that torrents being shared by fewer than ten people will retain their torrent files, to ensure compatibility with older software that may not support magnet links. [67]

Funding

Early financing
In April 2007, a rumor was confirmed on the Swedish talk show Bert that The Pirate Bay had received financial support from right-wing entrepreneur Carl Lundström . This caused some consternation since Lundström, an heir to the Wasabröd fortune, is known for financing several far-right political parties and movements like Sverigedemokraterna and Bevara Sverige Svenskt ( Keep Sweden Swedish ). During the talk show, Piratbyrån spokesman Tobias Andersson acknowledged that "without Lundström's support, Pirate Bay would not have been able to start" and stated that most of the money went towards acquiring servers and bandwidth. [68] [69]

Donations
From 2004 until 2006, The Pirate Bay had a "Donate" link to a donations page which listed several payment methods, stated that funds supported only the tracker, and offered time-limited benefits to donors such as no advertisements and "VIP" status. [70] After that, the link was removed from the home page, [71] and the donations page only recommended donating "to your local pro-piracy group" for a time, [72] after which it redirected to the site's main page. Billboard claimed that the site in 2009 "appeals for donations to keep its service running". [73] In 2006, Petter Nilsson, a candidate on the Swedish political reality show Toppkandidaterna ( The Top Candidates ), donated 35,000 SEK (US$4,925.83) to The Pirate Bay, which they used to buy new servers. [74] [75]
In 2007, the site ran a fund intended to buy Sealand , a platform with debated micro-nation status. [76] In 2009, the then-convicted principals of TPB requested that users stop trying to donate money for their fines, because they refused to pay them. [77] [78] In 2013, The Pirate Bay published its Bitcoin address on the site front page for donations, [79] as well as Litecoin . [80]

Merchandising
The site links to an online store selling site-related merchandise, first noted in 2006 in Svenska Dagbladet . [81] [82]

Advertising
Since 2006, the website has received financing through advertisements on result pages. According to speculations by Svenska Dagbladet , the advertisements generate about 600,000 SEK (US$84,000) per month. [83] [84] In an investigation in 2006, the police concluded that The Pirate Bay brings in 1.2 million SEK (US$169,000) per year from advertisements. [85] The prosecution estimated in the 2009 trial from emails and screenshots that the advertisements pay over 10 million SEK (US$1.4M) a year, [86] but the indictment used the estimate from the police investigation. [87] The lawyers of the site's administrators counted the 2006 revenue closer to 725,000 SEK (US$102,000). [88] The verdict of the first trial however quoted the estimate from the preliminary investigation. [89]
As of 2008 [update] , IFPI claims that the website is extremely profitable, and that The Pirate Bay is more engaged in making profit than supporting people's rights. [90] The website has insisted that these allegations are not true, stating, "It's not free to operate a Web Site on this scale", and, "If we were making lots of money I, Svartholm , wouldn't be working late at the office tonight, I'd be sitting on a beach somewhere, working on my tan." [91] In response to claims of annual revenue exceeding US$3 million made by the IFPI, the site's spokesman Peter Sunde argues that the website's high bandwidth, power, and hardware costs eliminate the potential for profit. The Pirate Bay, he says, may ultimately be operating at a loss. [90] In the 2009 trial, the defense estimated the site's yearly expenses to be 800,000 SEK (US$110,000). [88]
There have been unintentional advertisers. In 2007, an online ad agency placed Wal-Mart The Simpsons DVD ads "along with search results that included downloads of the series". [92] In 2012, banner ads for Canada's Department of Finance Economic Action Plan were placed atop search results, as part of a larger "media buy", but were pulled "quickly". [93] [94]

Fee
According to the site's usage policy, it reserves the right to charge commercial policy violators "a basic fee of € 5,000 plus bandwidth and other costs that may arise due to the violation". [95] Co-founder Peter Sunde accused Swedish book publishers, who scraped the site for information about copyrighted books, of violating the usage policy, and asserted TPB's copyright on its database. [96]

Projects
The team behind The Pirate Bay has worked on several websites and software projects of varying degrees of permanence. In 2007, BayImg , an image hosting website similar to TinyPic went online in June. [98] [99] Pre-publication images posted to BayImg became part of a legal battle when Conde Nast 's network was later allegedly hacked. [100] [101] In July, "within hours after Ingmar Bergman's death", BergmanBits.com was launched, listing torrents for the director 's films, [98] [102] [103] online until mid-2008. [104] In August, The Pirate Bay relaunched the BitTorrent website Suprnova.org to perform the same functions as The Pirate Bay, with different torrent trackers, but the site languished; the domain was returned to its original owner in August 2010, and it now redirects to TorrentFreak.tv. [105] [106] Suprbay.org was introduced in August as the official forum for ThePirateBay.org and the various sites connected to it. Users can request reseeding of torrents, or report malware within torrent files or illegal material on ThePirateBay.org. [107] [108] BOiNK was announced in October in response to the raid on Oink's Pink Palace , a music-oriented BitTorrent website. [109] A month later Sunde canceled BOiNK , citing the many new music websites created since the downfall of OiNK. [110] A Mac dashboard widget was released in December, listing "top 10 stuff currently on TPB, either per category or the full list". [111] [112] SlopsBox , a disposable e-mail address anti-spam service, also appeared in December, [113] [114] and was reviewed in 2009. [115] [116]
In 2008, Baywords was launched as a free blogging service that lets users of the site blog about anything as long as it does not break any Swedish laws. [117] In December, The Pirate Bay resurrected ShareReactor as a combined eD2k and BitTorrent site. [118] The same month, the Vio mobile video converter was released, designed to convert video files for playback on mobile devices such as iPhone , BlackBerry , Android , many Nokia and Windows Mobile devices. [119]
In 2009, Pastebay , a note sharing service [120] similar to Pastebin , was made available to the public as of 23 March. [121] [122] The Video Bay video streaming/sharing site was announced in June to be "The YouTube Killer", with content viewable in HTML 5 -capable browsers. [123] [124] The site was in an "Extreme Beta" phase; a message on the homepage instructed the user "don't expect anything to work at all". [125] The Video Bay was never completed and As of 28 April 2013 [update] , The Video Bay is inaccessible.
On 18 April 2011, Pirate Bay temporarily changed its name to "Research Bay", collaborating with P2P researchers of the Lund University Cybernorms group in a large poll of P2P users. [126] The researchers published their results online on "The Survey Bay", as a public Creative Commons project in 2013. [127] [128] [129] In January 2012, the site announced The Promo Bay ; "doodles" by selected musicians, artists and others could be rotated onto the site's front page at a future date. [130] [131] Brazilian novelist Paulo Coelho was promoted, offering a collection of his books for free download. [132] By November, 10,000 artists were reported to have signed up. [133] TPB preserves a dated collection of exhibited logos. [134] On 2 December 2012, some ISPs in the UK such as BT , Virgin Media and BE started blocking The Promo Bay [135] but stopped a few days later, when the BPI reversed its position. [136]

Purchases
In January 2007, when the micronation of Sealand was put up for sale, the ACFI and The Pirate Bay tried to buy it. The Sealand government however did not want to be involved with The Pirate Bay, as it was their opinion that file sharing represented "theft of proprietary rights". [137] [138] A new plan was formed to buy an island instead, but this too was never implemented, despite the website having raised US$25,000 (€15,000) in donations for this cause. [139]
The P2P news blog TorrentFreak reported on 12 October 2007 that the Internet domain ifpi.com, which previously belonged to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry , an anti-piracy organisation, had been acquired by The Pirate Bay. When asked about how they got hold of the domain, Sunde told TorrentFreak , "It's not a hack, someone just gave us the domain name. We have no idea how they got it, but it's ours and we're keeping it." The website was renamed "The International Federation of Pirates Interests"" [140] However, the IFPI filed a complaint with the World Intellectual Property Organisation shortly thereafter, which subsequently ordered The Pirate Bay to return the domain name to the IFPI. [141]

Incidents

May 2006 raid
On 31 May 2006, a raid against The Pirate Bay and people involved with the website took place as ordered by judge Tomas Norström, later the presiding judge of the 2009 trial, prompted by allegations of copyright violations. Police officers shut down the website and confiscated its servers, as well as all other servers hosted by The Pirate Bay's Internet service provider , PRQ . The company is owned by two operators of The Pirate Bay. Three people – Gottfrid Svartholm , Mikael Viborg, and Fredrik Neij – were held by the police for questioning, but were released later that evening. [142] All servers in the room were seized, including those running the website of Piratbyrån , an independent organization fighting for file sharing rights, as well as servers unrelated to The Pirate Bay or other file sharing activities. Equipment such as hardware routers, switches, blank CDs, and fax machines were also seized. [143]
The Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) wrote in a press release: "Since filing a criminal complaint in Sweden in November 2004, the film industry has worked vigorously with Swedish and U.S. government officials in Sweden to shut this illegal website down." MPAA CEO Dan Glickman also stated, "Intellectual property theft is a problem for film industries all over the world and we are glad that the local government in Sweden has helped stop The Pirate Bay from continuing to enable rampant copyright theft on the Internet." The MPAA press release set forth its justification for the raid and claimed that there were three arrests; however, the individuals were not actually arrested, only held for questioning. The release also reprinted John G. Malcolm's allegation that The Pirate Bay was making money from the distribution of copyrighted material, a criticism denied by the Pirate Bay. [144]
After the raid, The Pirate Bay displayed a message that confirmed that the Swedish police had executed search warrants for breach of copyright law or assisting such a breach. The closure message initially caused some confusion because on 1 April 2005, April Fool's Day , The Pirate Bay had posted a similar message as a prank , stating that they were unavailable due to a raid by the Swedish Anti-Piracy Bureau and IFPI . Piratbyrån set up a temporary news blog to inform the public about the incident. [145] On 2 June 2006, The Pirate Bay was available once again, with their logo depicting a pirate ship firing cannonballs at the Hollywood Sign . [146] The Pirate Bay has servers in both Belgium and Russia, for future use in case of another raid. [147] According to The Pirate Bay, in the two years following the raid, it grew from 1 million to 2.7 million registered users and from 2.5 million to 12 million peers. [13] The Pirate Bay now claims over 5 million active users. [148]
Sweden's largest technology museum, the Swedish National Museum of Science and Technology , acquired one of the confiscated servers in 2009 and exhibited it for having great symbolic value as a "big problem or a big opportunity". [149]

Autopsy photos
In September 2008, the Swedish media reported that the public preliminary investigation protocols concerning a child murder case known as the Arboga case had been made available through a torrent on The Pirate Bay. In Sweden, preliminary investigations become publicly available the moment a lawsuit is filed and can be ordered from the court by any individual. The document included pictures from the autopsy of the two murdered children, which caused their father Nicklas Jangestig to urge the website to have the pictures removed. [150] The Pirate Bay refused to remove the torrent. The number of downloads increased to about 50,000 a few days later. [151] On 11 September 2008, the website's press contact Peter Sunde participated in the debate program Debatt on the public broadcaster SVT . Sunde had agreed to participate on the condition that the father Nicklas Jangestig would not take part in the debate. Jangestig ultimately did participate in the program by telephone, which made Sunde feel betrayed by SVT. [152] This caused The Pirate Bay to suspend all of its press contacts the following day. [153]
"I don't think it's our job to judge if something is ethical or unethical or what other people want to put out on the internet", said The Pirate Bay's spokesperson Peter Sunde to TV4. [154]

Legal issues
In September 2007, a large number of internal emails were leaked from anti-piracy company MediaDefender by an anonymous hacker. Some of the leaked emails discussed hiring hackers to perform DDOS attacks on The Pirate Bay's servers and trackers. [155] In response to the leak, The Pirate Bay filed charges in Sweden against MediaDefender clients Twentieth Century Fox Sweden AB, EMI Sweden AB, Universal Music Group Sweden AB, Universal Pictures Nordic AB, Paramount Home Entertainment (Sweden) AB, Atari Nordic AB, Activision Nordic, Ubisoft Sweden AB, Sony BMG Music Entertainment (Sweden) AB, and Sony Pictures Home Entertainment Nordic AB, [156] but the charges were not pursued. [155] MediaDefender's stocks fell sharply after this incident, and several media companies withdrew from the service after the company announced the leak had caused $825,000 in losses. [157]
Later, The Pirate Bay co-founder Peter Sunde accused police investigator Jim Keyzer of a conflict of interest when he declined to investigate MediaDefender. Keyzer later accepted a job for MPAA member studio Warner Brothers . [158] The leaked emails revealed that other MPAA member studios hired MediaDefender to pollute The Pirate Bay's torrent database. [159] In an official letter to the Swedish Minister of Justice, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) requested assistance from the Swedish government to prevent The Pirate bay distributing video clips from the Beijing Olympics . The IOC claimed there were more than one million downloads of footage from the Olympics – mostly of the opening ceremony. The Pirate Bay, however, did not take anything down, and temporarily renamed the website to The Beijing Bay. [160]
The trial against the men behind the Pirate Bay started in Sweden on 16 February 2009. They were accused of breaking Swedish copyright law. [161] The defendants, however, continued to be confident about the outcome. [162] Half the charges against the Pirate Bay were dropped on the second day of the trial. [163]
The three operators of the site and their one investor Carl Lundström were convicted in Stockholm district court on 17 April 2009 and sentenced to one year in jail each and a total of 30 million SEK (3.6 million USD , 2.7 million EUR , 2.4 million GBP ) in fines and damages. [164] The defendants' lawyers appealed to the Svea Court of Appeal and requested a retrial in the district court, alleging bias on the part of judge Tomas Norström. [165]
On 13 May 2009, several record companies again sued Neij, Svartholm, Sunde and also The Pirate Bay's main internet service provider Black Internet. They required enforcement for ending The Pirate Bay's accessory to copyright infringement that had not stopped despite the court order in April, and in the complaint listed several pages of works being shared with the help of the site. The suit was joined by several major film companies on 30 July. [166] [167] The Stockholm district court ruled on 21 August that Black Internet must stop making available the specific works mentioned in the judgment, or face a 500,000 SEK fine. [168] The company was notified of the order on 24 August, and they complied with it on the same day by disconnecting The Pirate Bay. [169] Computer Sweden noted that the judgment did not order The Pirate Bay to be disconnected, but the ISP had no other option for stopping the activity on the site. [170] It is the first time in Sweden for an ISP to be forced to stop providing access for a website. [171] [172] [173] A public support fund fronted by the CEO of the ISP was set up to cover the legal fees of an appeal. [174] Pirate Party leader Rickard Falkvinge submitted the case for Parliamentary Ombudsman review, criticising the court's order to make intermediaries responsible for relayed content and to assign active crime prevention tasks to a private party. [175] [176]
On 28 October 2009, the Stockholm District Court ordered a temporary injunction on Neij and Svartholm with a penalty of 500,000 SEK each, forbidding them from participating in the operation of The Pirate Bay's website or trackers. [177] [178]
On 21 May 2010, the Svea Court of Appeal decided not to change the orders on Black Internet or Neij and Svartholm. [179] [180]
On 1 February 2012, the Supreme Court of Sweden refused to hear an appeal in the conviction case, and agreed with the decision of the Svea Court of Appeal, which had upheld the sentences in November 2011. [181]
On 2 September 2012, Pirate Bay co-founder Gottfrid Svartholm Warg was arrested in Cambodia. He was detained in Phnom Penh by officers executing an international warrant issued against him in April after he did not turn up to serve a one-year jail sentence for copyright violations. [182] On 24 December 2012, administrators of TPB changed the homepage to urge users to send Warg, in jail, "gifts and letters". [183]
In March 2013, The Pirate Bay claimed in a blog post that it had moved its servers to North Korea . The incident turned out to be a hoax. [129] In April 2013, within a week The Pirate Bay had moved its servers from Greenland to Iceland to St. Martin , either in response to legal threats or preemptively. [184] In December 2013, the site changed its domain to .ac ( Ascension Island ), following the seizure of the .sx domain. [185] On 12 December, the site moved to .pe ( Peru ), [186] on 18 December to .gy ( Guyana ). [187] Following the site's suspension from the .gy domain, on 19 December The Pirate Bay returned to .se ( Sweden ), which it had previously occupied between February 2012 and April 2013. [188]

Trial
The Pirate Bay trial was a joint criminal and civil prosecution in Sweden of four individuals charged for promoting the copyright infringement of others with The Pirate Bay site. [189] [190] The criminal charges were supported by a consortium of intellectual rights holders led by IFPI , who filed individual civil compensation claims against the owners of The Pirate Bay. [191]
Swedish prosecutors filed charges on 31 January 2008 against Fredrik Neij, Gottfrid Svartholm, and Peter Sunde; and Carl Lundström , a Swedish businessman who through his businesses sold services to the site. The prosecutor claimed the four worked together to administer, host, and develop the site and thereby facilitated other people's breach of copyright law. Some 34 cases of copyright infringements were originally listed, of which 21 were related to music files, 9 to movies, and 4 to games. [190] One case involving music files was later dropped by the copyright holder who made the file available again on The Pirate Bay site. In addition, claims for damages of 117 million kronor (US$13 million, €12.5 million) were filed. [192] The case was decided jointly by a judge and three appointed lay judges . [193] [194] According to Swedish media, the lead judge was involved in one pro-copyright organization, and on the board of another, but denied that his involvement constituted a conflict of interest. [195]
The trial started on 16 February 2009, in the district court ( tingsrätt ) of Stockholm , Sweden. The hearings ended on 3 March 2009 and the verdict was announced at 11:00 AM on Friday 17 April 2009: Peter Sunde, Fredrik Neij, Gottfrid Svartholm and Carl Lundström were all found guilty and sentenced to serve one year in prison and pay a fine of 30 million Swedish krona (app. € 2.7 million or USD 3.5 million). All of the defendants appealed the verdict.
The appeal trial concluded on 15 October 2010, [196] and the verdict was announced on 26 November. The appeal court shortened sentences of three of the defendants who appeared in court that day. Neij's sentence was reduced to 10 months, Sunde's to eight, and Lundström's to four. However, the fine was increased from 32 to 46 million kronor. [197]
On 1 February 2012, the Supreme Court of Sweden refused to hear an appeal in the case, prompting the site to change its official domain name to thepiratebay.se from thepiratebay.org. The move to a .se domain was claimed to prevent susceptibility to US laws from taking control of the site. [198] On 9 April 2013, the site changed its domain name to thepiratebay.gl, under the Greenland TLD , in anticipation of possible seizure by Swedish authorities of its .se domain. [199] The change proved to be short lived, as the site returned to the .se domain on 12 April 2013 after being blocked on the .gl domain by Tele-Post , which administers domains in Greenland. Tele-Post cited a Danish court ruling that the site was in violation of copyright laws. [200]
Founders Svartholm, Neij, and Sunde were all released after having finished serving their sentences by 2015. [10]

Service issues
In May 2007, The Pirate Bay was attacked by a group of hackers . [201] They copied the user database, which included over 1.5 million users. The Pirate Bay claimed to its users that the data was of no value and that passwords and e-mails were encrypted and hashed . Some blogs stated that a group known as the AUH (Arga Unga Hackare, Swedish for "Angry Young Hackers") were suspected of executing the attack, however the AUH stated on the Computer Sweden newspaper that they were not involved and would take revenge on those responsible for the attack. [202] [203]
On 27 April 2009, the website of The Pirate Bay had fiber IPv4 connectivity issues. There was widespread speculation this was a forced outage from the Swedish anti-piracy group, accelerated somewhat by TPB adding contact details for the Swedish anti-piracy group's lawyers to its RIPE database record. [204] [205] The site and its forums were still available via IPv6 at the time. [206]
On 24 August 2009, one of The Pirate Bay's upstream providers was ordered to discontinue service for the website by a Swedish court in response to a civil action brought by several entertainment companies including Disney , Universal , Time Warner , Columbia , Sony , NBC , and Paramount . [138] According to the TPB Blog, this caused a downtime of 3 hours, [207] however some users were unable to access the site immediately following the relocation due to unrelated technical difficulties. The site was fully operational again for everyone within 24 hours. [208]
On 6 October 2009, one of the IP transit providers to The Pirate Bay blocked all Pirate Bay traffic causing an outage for most users around the world. [209] The same day, the site was reportedly back online at an IP address at CyberBunker , located in the Netherlands. [210] It is not known whether The Pirate Bay is actually located at CyberBunker or whether they are using the CyberBunker service that routes Cyberbunker IP addresses to any datacenter around the world. These routes are not visible to the outside world.
CyberBunker was given a court injunction on 17 May 2010, taking the site offline briefly; [19] later that day, hosting was restored by Sweden's Piratpartiet (The Pirate Party). [211] [212] Former spokesman for the Pirate Bay, Peter Sunde, commented that it would now be very difficult to stop the site because it would now be seen as political censorship if anyone tries to shut it down. [213]
On 8 July 2010, a group of Argentine hackers gained access to The Pirate Bay's administration panel through a security breach via the backend of The Pirate Bay website. They were able to delete torrents and expose users' IP-addresses, emails and MD5-hashed passwords. The Pirate Bay was taken offline for upgrades. Users visiting the website were met by the following message: "Upgrading some stuff, database is in use for backups, soon back again. Btw, it's nice weather outside I think." [214] [215] [216]
On 16 May 2012, The Pirate Bay experienced a major DDoS attack, causing the site to be largely inaccessible worldwide for around 24 hours. The Pirate Bay said that it did not know who was behind the attack, although it "had its suspicions". [217]
On 5 May 2015, The Pirate Bay went offline for several hours, apparently as a result of not properly configuring its SSL certificate . [218] [219] [219]

Acquisition discussion
On 30 June 2009, Swedish advertising company Global Gaming Factory X AB announced their intention to buy the site for SEK 60 million (approximately $8.5 million USD ) (30m SEK in cash, 30m SEK in GGF shares). [220] [221]
The Pirate Bay founders stated that the profits from the sale would be placed in an offshore account where it would be used to fund projects pertaining to "freedom of speech, freedom of information, and the openness of the Internet". [220] [221] [222] [223] Assurances were made that "no personal data will be transferred in the eventual sale (since no personal data is kept)." [224] Global Gaming Chief Executive Hans Pandeya commented on the site's future by saying "We would like to introduce models which entail that content providers and copyright owners get paid for content that is downloaded via the site", and announced that users would be charged a monthly fee for access to The Pirate Bay.
Global Gaming Factory's letter of intent expired at the end of September 2009, without the transaction having taken place. This may be due to the company's financial difficulties. "PC World" magazine regarded the deal's future as "doomed". [225]

December 2014 raid
On 9 December 2014, police in Stockholm raided the company's premises and seized servers and other computers and equipment, which resulted in the website going offline. The raid was in response to a complaint from Rights Alliance, a Swedish anti-piracy group. [226] The Pirate Bay was one of many peer-to-peer and torrent-related websites and apps that went down. [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [227] One member of the crew was arrested. TorrentFreak reported that most other torrent sites reported a 5–10% increase in traffic from the displaced users, [228] though the shutdown had little effect on overall piracy levels. [229] [230] In retaliation to the raid, a group of hackers claiming to be part of Anonymous allegedly leaked email log-in details of Swedish government officials. [231] The Pirate Bay co-founder Peter Sunde commented in a blog post that he was happy to see the website shut down, believing his successors have done nothing to improve the site, [232] criticizing in particular the increased use of advertisements. [233] IsoHunt has since copied much of the original TPB database and made it accessible through oldpiratebay.org , a searchable index of old Pirate Bay torrents. [37] [38] [233] IsoHunt also released a tool called The Open Bay , in order to allow users to deploy their own version of the Pirate Bay website. [234] The tool is responsible for around 372 mirror sites. [235] Since 17 December 2014, The Pirate Bay's Facebook page has been unavailable. [230] [236] On 22 December 2014, a website was resumed at the domain thepiratebay.se, showing a flip clock with the length of time in days and hours that the site had been offline, and a waving pirate flag. [237] From this day TPB was hosted for a period in Moldova , [238] on Trabia Network (Moldo-German company) servers. The Pirate Bay then began using the services of CloudFlare , a company which offers reverse proxy services. [239] On 1 January 2015, the website presented a countdown to 1 February 2015. [240] [241] The website returned with a prominent phoenix logo displayed at the domain thepiratebay.se on 31 January 2015. [242]

Censorship and controversies

Anti-copyright movement
The Pirate Bay has sparked controversies and discussion about legal aspects of file sharing , copyright , civil liberties and has become a platform for political initiatives against established intellectual property laws and a central figure in an anti-copyright movement. [11] The website faced several shutdowns and domain seizures which "did little to take the site offline, as it simply switched to a series of new web addresses and continued to operate". [10]

Domain blocking by countries
The Pirate Bay's website has been blocked in some countries, despite the relative ease by which such blocks can be circumvented in most countries. While the URL to the Pirate Bay itself has been blocked in these countries, numerous mirror websites emerged to make the website available at different URLs, routing traffic around the block. [243] [244] [245]
According to Google chairman Eric Schmidt , "government plans to block access to illicit filesharing websites could set a 'disastrous precedent' for freedom of speech" and also expressed that Google would "fight attempts to restrict access to sites such as the Pirate Bay". [246]

Censorship by corporations

Facebook
After The Pirate Bay introduced a feature in March 2009 to easily share links to torrents on the social networking site Facebook , Wired.com found in May that Facebook had started blocking the links. On further inspection, they discovered that all messages containing links to The Pirate Bay in both public and in private messages, regardless of content, were being blocked. Electronic Frontier Foundation lawyers commented that Facebook might be working against the US Electronic Communications Privacy Act by intercepting user messages, but Facebook chief privacy officer Chris Kelly said that they have the right to use blocks on links where there is a "demonstrated disregard for intellectual property rights", following users' agreement on their terms of service. Links to other similar sites have not been blocked. [247] [248] [249]

Microsoft
In March 2012, Microsoft blocked Windows Live Messenger messages if they contain links to The Pirate Bay. When a user sends an instant message that contains a link to The Pirate Bay, Windows Live Messenger prompts a warning and claims "Blocked as it was reported unsafe". "We block instant messages if they contain malicious or spam URLs based on intelligence algorithms, third-party sources, and/or user complaints. Pirate Bay URLs were flagged by one or more of these and were consequently blocked", Microsoft told The Register in an emailed statement. [250] [251]

In media
The Pirate Bay is featured in Steal This Film (2006), a documentary series about society and filesharing, produced by The League of Noble Peers , in the Danish Documentary Good Copy Bad Copy , which explores the issues surrounding file copyright , and the documentary TPB AFK . The Pirate Bay has been a topic on the US-syndicated NPR radio show On the Media . [252] [253]
Björn Ulvaeus , former member of the Swedish pop music group ABBA , criticised copyright infringing activities of The Pirate Bay supporters as "lazy and mean". [254] [255] In contrast, Brazilian bestselling author Paulo Coelho has embraced free sharing online. Coelho supports The Pirate Bay and offered to be a witness in the 2009 trial. He accounts much of his growing sales to his work shared on the Internet and comments that "a person who does not share is not only selfish, but bitter and alone". [256] [257] [258] [259]

See also
WebPage index: 00191
Alexandra Elbakyan
Alexandra Asanovna Elbakyan ( Russian : Алекса́ндра Аса́новна Элбакя́н [1] ) is a Kazakhstani graduate student, [2] computer programmer and the creator of the site Sci-Hub . [3] [4] Nature has listed her in 2016 as the top ten people that mattered in science, [5] and Ars Technica has compared her to Aaron Swartz . [6]

Biography
Elbakyan was born in Almaty , Kazakhstan on 6 November, 1988. [7] [8] She is of Armenian, Slavic and Asian descent. [9] Elbakyan undertook university studies in Astana , where she developed skills in computer hacking . A year working in computer security in Moscow gave her the money to proceed to Freiburg in 2010 to work on a brain-computer interface project, and she developed an interest in transhumanism , which led her to a summer internship at Georgia Institute of Technology in the United States, where she studied "Neuroscience and Consciousness". [10] [11] [12] In 2009 she obtained a Bachelor of Science degree in computer science from the Kazakh National Technical University , specializing in information security . [13] [14]
She began Sci-Hub on her return to Kazakhstan in 2011, characterised by Science as "an awe-inspiring act of altruism or a massive criminal enterprise, depending on whom you ask". [15] Following a lawsuit brought in the US by the publisher Elsevier , Elbakyan is presently in hiding due to the risk of extradition. [16] According to a 2016 interview, her neuroscience research is on hold, but she has enrolled in a history of science master’s program at a “small private university” in an undisclosed location. Her thesis focuses on scientific communication . [15] In December 2016, Nature Publishing Group named Alexandra Elbakyan as one of the 10 people who most mattered in 2016. [17]

See also
