thread-3: Start crawling
WebPage index: 00000
Encyclopedia
An encyclopedia or encyclopaedia is a type of reference work or compendium holding a comprehensive summary of information from either all branches of knowledge or a particular branch of knowledge. [1] Encyclopedias are divided into articles or entries, which are usually arranged alphabetically by article name. [2] Encyclopedia entries are longer and more detailed than those in most dictionaries . [2] Generally speaking, unlike dictionary entries which focus on linguistic information about words , encyclopedia articles focus on factual information concerning the subject for which the article is named. [3] [4] [5] [6]
Encyclopedias have existed for around 2,000 years; the oldest still in existence, Naturalis Historia , was written starting in ca. AD 77 by Pliny the Elder and was not fully revised at the time of his death in AD 79. The modern encyclopedia evolved out of dictionaries around the 17th century. Historically, some encyclopedias were contained in one volume , whereas others, such as the Encyclopædia Britannica , the Enciclopedia Italiana (62 volumes, 56,000 pages) or the world's largest, Enciclopedia universal ilustrada europeo-americana (118 volumes, 105,000 pages), became huge multi-volume works. Some modern encyclopedias, such as Wikipedia , are often electronic and freely available.

Etymology
The word encyclopedia comes from the Koine Greek ἐγκύκλιος παιδεία , [8] transliterated enkyklios paideia , meaning "general education" from enkyklios (ἐγκύκλιος), meaning "circular, recurrent, required regularly, general" [9] and paideia (παιδεία), meaning "education, rearing of a child"; [10] it was reduced to a single word due to an error [11] by copyists of Latin manuscripts. Together, the phrase literally translates as "complete instruction" or "complete knowledge".
Copyists of Latin manuscripts took this phrase to be a single Greek word, enkyklopaidia , with the same meaning, and this spurious Greek word became the New Latin word "encyclopaedia", which in turn came into English. Though the notion of a compendium of knowledge dates back thousands of years, the term was first used in the title of a book in 1517 by Johannes Aventinus : Encyclopedia orbisque doctrinarum, hoc est omnium artium, scientiarum, ipsius philosophiae index ac divisio , and in 1538 by Joachimus Fortius Ringelbergius , Lucubrationes vel potius absolutissima kyklopaideia .
The word encyclopaedia was first used as a noun in the title of his book by the Croatian encyclopedist Pavao Skalić in his Encyclopaedia seu orbis disciplinarum tam sacrarum quam prophanarum epistemon (Encyclopaedia, or Knowledge of the World of Disciplines, Basel, 1559). One of the oldest vernacular uses was by François Rabelais in his Pantagruel in 1532. [12] [13] Several encyclopedias have names that include the suffix -p(a)edia , e.g., Banglapedia (on matters relevant for Bangladesh).
Today in English the word is most commonly spelled encyclopedia , though encyclopaedia ( from encyclopædia ) is also used in Britain. [14]

Characteristics
The modern encyclopedia was developed from the dictionary in the 18th century. Historically, both encyclopedias and dictionaries have been researched and written by well-educated, well-informed content experts , but they are significantly different in structure. A dictionary is a linguistic work which primarily focuses on alphabetical listing of words and their definitions . Synonymous words and those related by the subject matter are to be found scattered around the dictionary, giving no obvious place for in-depth treatment. Thus, a dictionary typically provides limited information , analysis or background for the word defined. While it may offer a definition, it may leave the reader lacking in understanding the meaning, significance or limitations of a term , and how the term relates to a broader field of knowledge. An encyclopedia is, theoretically, not written in order to convince, although one of its goals is indeed to convince its reader of its own veracity.
To address those needs, an encyclopedia article is typically not limited to simple definitions, and is not limited to defining an individual word, but provides a more extensive meaning for a subject or discipline . In addition to defining and listing synonymous terms for the topic, the article is able to treat the topic's more extensive meaning in more depth and convey the most relevant accumulated knowledge on that subject. An encyclopedia article also often includes many maps and illustrations , as well as bibliography and statistics .
Four major elements define an encyclopedia: its subject matter, its scope, its method of organization, and its method of production:
Some works entitled "dictionaries" are actually similar to encyclopedias, especially those concerned with a particular field (such as the Dictionary of the Middle Ages , the Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships , and Black's Law Dictionary ). The Macquarie Dictionary , Australia's national dictionary, became an encyclopedic dictionary after its first edition in recognition of the use of proper nouns in common communication, and the words derived from such proper nouns.
There are some broad differences between encyclopedias and dictionaries. Most noticeably, encyclopedia articles are longer, fuller and more thorough than entries in most general-purpose dictionaries. [2] [15] There are differences in content as well. Generally speaking, dictionaries provide linguistic information about words themselves, while encyclopedias focus more on the thing for which those words stand. [3] [4] [5] [6] Thus, while dictionary entries are inextricably fixed to the word described, encyclopedia articles can be given a different entry name. As such, dictionary entries are not fully translatable into other languages, but encyclopedia articles can be. [3]
In practice, however, the distinction is not concrete, as there is no clear-cut difference between factual, "encyclopedic" information and linguistic information such as appears in dictionaries. [5] [15] [16] Thus encyclopedias may contain material that is also found in dictionaries, and vice versa. [16] In particular, dictionary entries often contain factual information about the thing named by the word. [15] [16]

History
Encyclopedias have progressed from written form in antiquity, to print in modern times. Today they can also be distributed and displayed electronically.

Ancient times
One of the earliest encyclopedic works to have survived to modern times is the Naturalis Historia of Pliny the Elder , a Roman statesman living in the first century AD. He compiled a work of 37 chapters covering natural history, architecture, medicine, geography, geology, and other aspects of the world around him. He stated in the preface that he had compiled 20,000 facts from 2000 works by over 200 authors, and added many others from his own experience. The work was published around AD 77–79, although Pliny probably never finished editing the work before his death in the eruption of Vesuvius in AD 79. [17]

Middle Ages
Isidore of Seville , one of the greatest scholars of the early Middle Ages, is widely recognized for writing the first encyclopedia of the Middle Ages, the Etymologiae ( The Etymologies ) or Origines (around 630), in which he compiled a sizable portion of the learning available at his time, both ancient and contemporary. The work has 448 chapters in 20 volumes, and is valuable because of the quotes and fragments of texts by other authors that would have been lost had he not collected them.
The most popular encyclopedia of the Carolingian Age was the De universo or De rerum naturis by Rabanus Maurus , written about 830; it was based on Etymologiae . [ citation needed ]
The encyclopedia of Suda , a massive 10th-century Byzantine encyclopedia, had 30 000 entries, many drawing from ancient sources that have since been lost, and often derived from medieval Christian compilers. The text was arranged alphabetically with some slight deviations from common vowel order and place in the Greek alphabet.
The early Muslim compilations of knowledge in the Middle Ages included many comprehensive works. Around year 960, the Brethren of Purity of Basra were engaged in their Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity . [18] Notable works include Abu Bakr al-Razi 's encyclopedia of science, the Mutazilite Al-Kindi 's prolific output of 270 books, and Ibn Sina 's medical encyclopedia, which was a standard reference work for centuries. Also notable are works of universal history (or sociology) from Asharites , al-Tabri , al-Masudi , Tabari 's History of the Prophets and Kings , Ibn Rustah , al-Athir , and Ibn Khaldun , whose Muqadimmah contains cautions regarding trust in written records that remain wholly applicable today.
The enormous encyclopedic work in China of the Four Great Books of Song , compiled by the 11th century AD during the early Song dynasty (960–1279), was a massive literary undertaking for the time. The last encyclopedia of the four, the Prime Tortoise of the Record Bureau , amounted to 9.4 million Chinese characters in 1000 written volumes.
In late medieval Europe, several authors had the ambition of compiling the sum of human knowledge in a certain field or overall, for example Bartholomew of England , Vincent of Beauvais , Radulfus Ardens , Sydrac , Brunetto Latini , Giovanni da Sangiminiano, Pierre Bersuire . Some were women, like Hildegard of Bingen and Herrad of Landsberg . The most successful of those publications were the Speculum maius (Great Mirror) of Vincent of Beauvais and the De proprietatibus rerum (On the Properties of Things) by Bartholomew of England . The latter was translated (or adapted) into French, Provençal, Italian, English, Flemish, Anglo-Norman, Spanish, and German during the Middle Ages. Both were written in the middle of the 13th century. No medieval encyclopedia bore the title Encyclopaedia – they were often called On nature (De natura, De naturis rerum) , Mirror (Speculum maius, Speculum universale) , Treasure (Trésor) . [19]

Renaissance
Medieval encyclopedias were all hand-copied and thus available mostly to wealthy patrons or monastic men of learning; they were expensive, and usually written for those extending knowledge rather than those using it. [20]
During the Renaissance , the creation of printing allowed a wider diffusion of encyclopedias and every scholar could have his or her own copy. The De expetendis et fugiendis rebus by Giorgio Valla was posthumously printed in 1501 by Aldo Manuzio in Venice . This work followed the traditional scheme of liberal arts. However, Valla added the translation of ancient Greek works on mathematics (firstly by Archimedes ), newly discovered and translated. The Margarita Philosophica by Gregor Reisch , printed in 1503, was a complete encyclopedia explaining the seven liberal arts .
The term encyclopaedia was coined by 16th-century humanists who misread copies of their texts of Pliny and Quintilian , and combined the two Greek words " enkyklios paideia " into one word, έγκυκλοπαιδεία. [21] The phrase enkyklios paideia (ἐγκύκλιος παιδεία) was used by Plutarch and the Latin word Encyclopedia came from him.
The first work titled in this way was the Encyclopedia orbisque doctrinarum, hoc est omnium artium, scientiarum, ipsius philosophiae index ac divisio written by Johannes Aventinus in 1517. [ citation needed ]
The English physician and philosopher, Sir Thomas Browne used the word 'encyclopaedia' in 1646 in the preface to the reader to define his Pseudodoxia Epidemica , a major work of the 17th-century scientific revolution. Browne structured his encyclopaedia upon the time-honoured scheme of the Renaissance, the so-called 'scale of creation' which ascends through the mineral, vegetable, animal, human, planetary, and cosmological worlds. Pseudodoxia Epidemica was a European best-seller, translated into French, Dutch, and German as well as Latin it went through no fewer than five editions, each revised and augmented, the last edition appearing in 1672.
Financial, commercial, legal, and intellectual factors changed the size of encyclopedias. During the Renaissance , middle classes had more time to read and encyclopedias helped them to learn more. Publishers wanted to increase their output so some countries like Germany started selling books missing alphabetical sections, to publish faster. Also, publishers could not afford all the resources by themselves, so multiple publishers would come together with their resources to create better encyclopedias. When publishing at the same rate became financially impossible, they turned to subscriptions and serial publications. This was risky for publishers because they had to find people that would pay all upfront or make payments. When this worked, capital would rise and there would be a steady income for encyclopedias. Later, rivalry grew, causing copyright to occur due to weak underdeveloped laws. Some publishers would copy another publisher’s work to produce an encyclopedia faster and cheaper so consumers did not have to pay a lot and they would sell more. Encyclopedias made it to where middle-class citizens could basically have a small library in their own house. Europeans were becoming more curious about their society around them causing them to revolt against their government. [22]

18th–19th centuries
The beginnings of the modern idea of the general-purpose, widely distributed printed encyclopedia precede the 18th century encyclopedists. However, Chambers ' Cyclopaedia, or Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences (1728), and the Encyclopédie of Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert (1751 onwards), as well as Encyclopædia Britannica and the Conversations-Lexikon , were the first to realize the form we would recognize today, with a comprehensive scope of topics, discussed in depth and organized in an accessible, systematic method. Chambers, in 1728, followed the earlier lead of John Harris's Lexicon Technicum of 1704 and later editions (see also below); this work was by its title and content "A Universal English Dictionary of Arts and Sciences: Explaining not only the Terms of Art, but the Arts Themselves".
During the 19th and early 20th century, many smaller or less developed languages [ which? ] saw their first encyclopedias, using French, German, and English role models. While encyclopedias in larger languages, having large markets that could support a large editorial staff, churned out new 20-volume works in a few years and new editions with brief intervals, such publication plans often spanned a decade or more in smaller languages. [ citation needed ]

20th century
Popular and affordable encyclopedias such as Harmsworth's Universal Encyclopaedia and the Children's Encyclopaedia appeared in the early 1920s.
In the United States, the 1950s and 1960s saw the introduction of several large popular encyclopedias, often sold on installment plans. The best known of these were World Book and Funk and Wagnalls .
The second half of the 20th century also saw the proliferation of specialized encyclopedias that compiled topics in specific fields. This trend has continued. Encyclopedias of at least one volume in size now exist for most if not all academic disciplines , including such narrow topics such as bioethics .
By the late 20th century, encyclopedias were being published on CD-ROMs for use with personal computers. Microsoft 's Encarta , launched in 1993, was a landmark example as it had no printed equivalent. Articles were supplemented with both video and audio files as well as numerous high-quality images. After sixteen years, Microsoft discontinued the Encarta line of products in 2009. [23]

21st century
In 2001, Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger launched Wikipedia , a multilingual, open-source , free Internet encyclopedia supported by the non-profit Wikimedia Foundation . Unlike commercial online encyclopedias such as Britannica Online , which are written by experts, Wikipedia is collaboratively edited by volunteers. As of 25 May 2017, there are 5,412,452 articles in the English Wikipedia. There are 287 different editions of Wikipedia. As of February 2014, it had 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors each month. [24] Wikipedia has more than 25 million accounts, out of which there were over 118,000 active editors globally, as of August 2015. Wikipedia's accuracy was found by a Nature study to be close to that of Encyclopædia Britannica , [25] with Wikipedia being much larger.
However, critics argue Wikipedia exhibits systemic bias , [26] [27] (such as gender bias and racial bias ) and its group dynamics hinder its goals. [ clarification needed ] Many academics, historians, teachers, and journalists reject Wikipedia as a reliable source of information, primarily for being a mixture of truths, half truths, and some falsehoods, and that as a resource about many controversial topics, is notoriously subject to manipulation and spin. [ citation needed ]
While Wikipedia is by far the largest web-based encyclopedia, it is not the only one in existence. There are several much smaller, usually more specialized, encyclopedias on various themes, sometimes dedicated to a specific geographic region or time period. [28] One example is the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00001
Argentina
Coordinates : 34°S 64°W ﻿ / ﻿ 34°S 64°W ﻿ / -34; -64
Argentina ( i / ˌ ɑːr dʒ ən ˈ t iː n ə / ; Spanish: [aɾxenˈtina] ), officially the Argentine Republic [A] (Spanish: República Argentina ), is a federal republic in the southern portion of South America. Sharing the bulk of the Southern Cone with its neighbor Chile to the west, the country is also bordered by Bolivia and Paraguay to the north, Brazil to the northeast, Uruguay and the South Atlantic Ocean to the east, and the Drake Passage to the south. With a mainland area of 2,780,400 km 2 (1,073,500 sq mi), [B] Argentina is the eighth-largest country in the world, the second largest in Latin America , and the largest Spanish-speaking one. The country is subdivided into twenty-three provinces ( Spanish : provincias , singular provincia ) and one autonomous city ( ciudad autónoma ), Buenos Aires , which is the federal capital of the nation (Spanish: Capital Federal ) as decided by Congress . [11] The provinces and the capital have their own constitutions, but exist under a federal system .
Argentina claims sovereignty over part of Antarctica , the Falkland Islands (Spanish: Islas Malvinas ), and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands . The earliest recorded human presence in the area of modern-day Argentina dates back to the Paleolithic period. [12] The country has its roots in Spanish colonization of the region during the 16th century. [13] Argentina rose as the successor state of the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata , [14] a Spanish overseas viceroyalty founded in 1776. The declaration and fight for independence (1810–1818) was followed by an extended civil war that lasted until 1861, culminating in the country's reorganization as a federation of provinces with Buenos Aires as its capital city. The country thereafter enjoyed relative peace and stability, with massive waves of European immigration radically reshaping its cultural and demographic outlook. The almost-unparalleled increase in prosperity led to Argentina becoming the seventh wealthiest developed nation in the world by the early 20th century. [15] [16]
After 1930, Argentina descended into political instability and periodic economic crises that pushed it back into underdevelopment, [17] though it nevertheless remained among the fifteen richest countries until the mid-20th century. [15] Argentina retains its historic status as a middle power [18] in international affairs, and is a prominent regional power in the Southern Cone and Latin America. [19] [20] Argentina has the second largest economy in South America , the third-largest in Latin America and is a member of the G-15 and G-20 major economies. It is also a founding member of the United Nations , World Bank , World Trade Organization , Mercosur , Union of South American Nations , Community of Latin American and Caribbean States and the Organization of Ibero-American States . It is the country with the second highest Human Development Index in Latin America with a rating of "very high" . [21] Because of its stability, market size and growing high-tech sector, [22] Argentina is classified as a high-income economy . [23]

Name and etymology
The description of the country by the word Argentina has to be found on a Venice map in 1536. [24]
In English the name "Argentina" probably comes from the Spanish language , however the naming itself is not Spanish, but Italian . Argentina ( masculine argentino ) means in Italian "(made) of silver, silver coloured", probably borrowed from the Old French adjective argentine "(made) of silver" > "silver coloured" already mentioned in the 12th century. [25] The French word argentine is the feminine form of argentin and derives of argent "silver" with the suffix -in (same construction as Old French acerin "(made) of steel", from acier "steel" + -in or sapin "(made) of fir wood", from OF sap "fir" + -in ). The Italian naming "Argentina" for the country implies Argentina Terra "land of silver" or Argentina costa "coast of silver". In Italian, the adjective or the proper noun is often used in an autonomous way as a substantive and replaces it and it is said l'Argentina (It cannot be for the proper noun in French for example).
The name Argentina was probably first given by the Venetian and Genoese navigators, such as Giovanni Caboto . In Spanish and Portuguese, the words for "silver" are respectively plata and prata and "(made) of silver" is said plateado and prateado . Argentina was first associated with the silver mountains legend , widespread among the first European explorers of the La Plata Basin . [26]
The first written use of the name in Spanish can be traced to La Argentina , [C] a 1602 poem by Martín del Barco Centenera describing the region and the foundation of Buenos Aires. [27] Although "Argentina" was already in common usage by the 18th century, the country was formally named "Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata" by the Spanish Empire, and "United Provinces of the Río de la Plata" after independence.
The 1826 constitution included the first use of the name "Argentine Republic" in legal documents. [28] The name "Argentine Confederation" was also commonly used and was formalized in the Argentine Constitution of 1853 . [29] In 1860 a presidential decree settled the country's name as "Argentine Republic", [30] and that year's constitutional amendment ruled all the names since 1810 as legally valid. [31] [D]
In the English language the country was traditionally called "the Argentine", mimicking the typical Spanish usage la Argentina [32] and perhaps resulting from a mistaken shortening of the fuller name 'Argentine Republic'. 'The Argentine' fell out of fashion during the mid-to-late 20th century, and now the country is simply referred to as "Argentina".
In the Spanish language "Argentina" is feminine (" La [República] Argentina "), taking the feminine article "La" as the initial syllable of "Argentina" is unstressed . [33]

History

Pre-Columbian era
The earliest traces of human life in the area now known as Argentina are dated from the Paleolithic period, with further traces in the Mesolithic and Neolithic . [12] Until the period of European colonization, Argentina was relatively sparsely populated by a wide number of diverse cultures with different social organizations, [34] which can be divided into three main groups. [35] The first group are basic hunters and food gatherers without development of pottery , such as the Selknam and Yaghan in the extreme south. The second group are advanced hunters and food gatherers which include the Puelche , Querandí and Serranos in the center-east; and the Tehuelche in the south—all of them conquered by the Mapuche spreading from Chile [36] —and the Kom and Wichi in the north. The last group are farmers with pottery, like the Charrúa , Minuane and Guaraní in the northeast, with slash and burn semisedentary existence; [34] the advanced Diaguita sedentary trading culture in the northwest, which was conquered by the Inca Empire around 1480; the Toconoté and Hênîa and Kâmîare in the country's center, and the Huarpe in the center-west, a culture that raised llama cattle and was strongly influenced by the Incas. [34]

Colonial era
Europeans first arrived in the region with the 1502 voyage of Amerigo Vespucci . The Spanish navigators Juan Díaz de Solís and Sebastian Cabot visited the territory that is now Argentina in 1516 and 1526, respectively. [13] In 1536 Pedro de Mendoza founded the small settlement of Buenos Aires , which was abandoned in 1541. [37]
Further colonization efforts came from Paraguay —establishing the Governorate of the Río de la Plata — Peru and Chile. [38] Francisco de Aguirre founded Santiago del Estero in 1553. Londres was founded in 1558; Mendoza , in 1561; San Juan , in 1562; San Miguel de Tucumán , in 1565. [39] Juan de Garay founded Santa Fe in 1573 and the same year Jerónimo Luis de Cabrera set up Córdoba . [40] Garay went further south to re-found Buenos Aires in 1580. [41] San Luis was established in 1596. [39]
The Spanish Empire subordinated the economic potential of the Argentine territory to the immediate wealth of the silver and gold mines in Bolivia and Peru, and as such it became part of the Viceroyalty of Peru until the creation of the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata in 1776 with Buenos Aires as its capital. [42]
Buenos Aires repelled two ill-fated British invasions in 1806 and 1807. [43] The ideas of the Age of Enlightenment and the example of the first Atlantic Revolutions generated criticism of the absolutist monarchy that ruled the country. As in the rest of Spanish America, the overthrow of Ferdinand VII during the Peninsular War created great concern. [44]

Independence and civil wars
Beginning a process from which Argentina was to emerge as successor state to the Viceroyalty, [14] the 1810 May Revolution replaced the viceroy Baltasar Hidalgo de Cisneros with the First Junta , a new government in Buenos Aires composed by locals. [44] In the first clashes of the Independence War the Junta crushed a royalist counter-revolution in Córdoba , [45] but failed to overcome those of the Banda Oriental , Upper Peru and Paraguay , which later became independent states. [46]
Revolutionaries split into two antagonist groups: the Centralists and the Federalists —a move that would define Argentina's first decades of independence. [47] The Assembly of the Year XIII appointed Gervasio Antonio de Posadas as Argentina's first Supreme Director . [47]
In 1816 the Congress of Tucumán formalized the Declaration of Independence . [48] One year later General Martín Miguel de Güemes stopped royalists on the north, and General José de San Martín took an army across the Andes and secured the independence of Chile ; then he led the fight to the Spanish stronghold of Lima and proclaimed the independence of Peru . [49] [E] In 1819 Buenos Aires enacted a centralist constitution that was soon abrogated by federalists. [51]
The 1820 Battle of Cepeda , fought between the Centralists and the Federalists, resulted in the end of the Supreme Director rule . In 1826 Buenos Aires enacted another centralist constitution , with Bernardino Rivadavia being appointed as the first president of the country. However, the interior provinces soon rose against him, forced his resignation and discarded the constitution. [52] Centralists and Federalists resumed the civil war; the latter prevailed and formed the Argentine Confederation in 1831, led by Juan Manuel de Rosas . [53] During his regime he faced a French blockade (1838–1840), the War of the Confederation (1836–1839), and a combined Anglo-French blockade (1845–1850), but remained undefeated and prevented further loss of national territory. [54] His trade restriction policies, however, angered the interior provinces and in 1852 Justo José de Urquiza , another powerful caudillo , beat him out of power . As new president of the Confederation, Urquiza enacted the liberal and federal 1853 Constitution. Buenos Aires seceded but was forced back into the Confederation after being defeated in the 1859 Battle of Cepeda . [55]

Rise of the modern nation
Overpowering Urquiza in the 1861 Battle of Pavón , Bartolomé Mitre secured Buenos Aires predominance and was elected as the first president of the reunified country. He was followed by Domingo Faustino Sarmiento and Nicolás Avellaneda ; these three presidencies set up the bases of the modern Argentine State. [56]
Starting with Julio Argentino Roca in 1880, ten consecutive federal governments emphasized liberal economic policies . The massive wave of European immigration they promoted—second only to the United States'—led to a near-reinvention of Argentine society and economy that by 1908 had placed the country as the seventh wealthiest [15] developed nation [16] in the world. Driven by this immigration wave and decreasing mortality, the Argentine population grew fivefold and the economy 15-fold: [57] from 1870 to 1910 Argentina's wheat exports went from 100,000 to 2,500,000 t (110,000 to 2,760,000 short tons) per year, while frozen beef exports increased from 25,000 to 365,000 t (28,000 to 402,000 short tons) per year, [58] placing Argentina as one of the world's top five exporters. [59] Its railway mileage rose from 503 to 31,104 km (313 to 19,327 mi). [60] Fostered by a new public, compulsory, free and secular education system, literacy skyrocketed from 22% to 65%, a level higher than most Latin American nations would reach even fifty years later. [59] Furthermore, real GDP grew so fast that despite the huge immigration influx, per capita income between 1862 and 1920 went from 67% of developed country levels to 100%: [60] In 1865, Argentina was already one of the top 25 nations by per capita income which by 1908, it had surpassed Denmark, Canada and The Netherlands to reach 7th place—behind Switzerland, New Zealand, Australia, the United States, the United Kingdom and Belgium. Argentina's per capita income was 70% higher than Italy's, 90% higher than Spain's, 180% higher than Japan's and 400% higher than Brazil 's. [15] Despite these unique achievements, the country was slow to meet its original goals of industrialization: [61] after steep development of capital-intensive local industries in the 1920s, a significant part of the manufacture sector remained labor-intensive in the 1930s. [62]
In 1912, President Roque Sáenz Peña enacted universal and secret male suffrage , which allowed Hipólito Yrigoyen , leader of the Radical Civic Union (or UCR), to win the 1916 election . He enacted social and economic reforms and extended assistance to family farmers and small businesses. Argentina stayed neutral during World War I . The second administration of Yrigoyen faced an economic crisis, influenced by the Great Depression . [63]

Infamous Decade
In 1930, Yrigoyen was ousted from power by the military led by José Félix Uriburu . Although Argentina remained among the fifteen richest countries until mid-century, [15] this coup d'état marks the start of the steady economic and social decline that pushed the country back into underdevelopment. [17]
Uriburu ruled for two years; then Agustín Pedro Justo was elected in a fraudulent election , and signed a controversial treaty with the United Kingdom . Argentina stayed neutral during World War II , a decision that had full British support but was rejected by the United States after the attack on Pearl Harbor . A new military coup toppled the government , and Argentina declared war on the Axis Powers a month before the end of World War II in Europe . The minister of welfare, Juan Domingo Perón , was fired and jailed because of his high popularity among workers. His liberation was forced by a massive popular demonstration , and he went on to win the 1946 election . [64]

Peronism
Perón created a political movement known as Peronism. He nationalized strategic industries and services, improved wages and working conditions, paid the full external debt and achieved nearly full employment . The economy, however, began to decline in 1950 because of over-expenditure. His highly popular wife, Eva Perón , played a central political role. She pushed Congress to enact women's suffrage in 1947, [65] and developed an unprecedented social assistance to the most vulnerable sectors of society. [66] However, her declining health did not allow her to run for the vice-presidency in 1951, and she died of cancer the following year. Perón was reelected in 1951 , even surpassing his 1946 performance. In 1955 the Navy bombed the Plaza de Mayo in an ill-fated attempt to kill the President. A few months later, during the self-called Liberating Revolution coup, he resigned and went into exile in Spain. [67]
The new head of State, Pedro Eugenio Aramburu , proscribed Peronism and banned all of its manifestations; nevertheless, Peronists kept organized underground. Arturo Frondizi from the UCR won the following elections . [68] He encouraged investment to achieve energetic and industrial self-sufficiency, reversed a chronic trade deficit and lifted Peronism proscription; yet his efforts to stay in good terms with Peronists and the military earned him the rejection of both and a new coup forced him out. [69] But Senate Chief José María Guido reacted swiftly and applied the anti- power vacuum legislation, becoming president instead; elections were repealed and Peronism proscribed again. Arturo Illia was elected in 1963 and led to an overall increase in prosperity; however his attempts to legalize Peronism resulted in his overthrow in 1966 by the Juan Carlos Onganía -led coup d'état called the Argentine Revolution , a new military government that sought to rule indefinitely. [70]

Dirty War
The "Dirty War" (Spanish: Guerra Sucia ) was the name used by the Argentine Government for a period of state terrorism in Argentina against political dissidents, with military and security forces conducting urban and rural guerrilla violence against left-wing guerrillas, political dissidents, and anyone believed to be associated with socialism. [71] [72] [73] Victims of the violence included an estimated 15,000 to 30,000 left-wing activists and militants, including trade unionists, students, journalists, Marxists , Peronist guerrillas [74] and alleged sympathizers. [75] Some 10,000 of the "disappeared" were believed to be guerrillas of the Montoneros (MPM), and the Marxist People's Revolutionary Army (ERP). [76] [77] [78] The guerrillas were responsible for causing at least 6,000 casualties among the military, police forces and civilian population according to a National Geographic Magazine article in the mid-1980s. [79] The disappeared ones were considered to be a political or ideological threat to the military junta and their disappearances an attempt to silence the opposition and break the determination of the guerillas. [80]
Declassified documents of the Chilean secret police cite an official estimate by the Batallón de Inteligencia 601 of 22,000 killed or "disappeared" between 1975 and mid-1978. During this period, in which it was later revealed 8,625 "disappeared" in the form of PEN ( Poder Ejecutivo Nacional , anglicized as "National Executive Power") detainees who were held in clandestine detention camps throughout Argentina before eventually being freed under diplomatic pressure. [81] The number of people believed to have been killed or "disappeared," depending on the source, range from 9,089 to 30,000 in the period from 1976 to 1983, when the military was forced from power following Argentina's defeat in the Falklands War . [82] [83] The National Commission on the Disappearance of Persons estimates that around 13,000 were disappeared. [84]
After democratic government was restored, Congress passed legislation to provide compensation to victims' families. Some 11,000 Argentines have applied to the relevant authorities and received up to US $200,000 each as monetary compensation for the loss of loved ones during the military dictatorship. [85]
The exact chronology of the repression is still debated, however, as in some senses the long political war started in 1969. Trade unionists were targeted for assassination by the Peronist and Marxist paramilitary as early as 1969, and individual cases of state-sponsored terrorism against Peronism and the left can be traced back to the Bombing of Plaza de Mayo in 1955. The Trelew massacre of 1972, the actions of the Argentine Anticommunist Alliance since 1973, and Isabel Martínez de Perón 's "annihilation decrees" against left-wing guerrillas during Operativo Independencia (translates to Operation of Independence) in 1975, have also been suggested as dates for the beginning of the Dirty War.
Onganía shut down Congress, banned all political parties and dismantled student and worker unions. In 1969, popular discontent led to two massive protests: the Cordobazo and the Rosariazo . The terrorist guerrilla organization Montoneros kidnapped and executed Aramburu. [86] The newly chosen head of government, Alejandro Agustín Lanusse , seeking to ease the growing political pressure, let Héctor José Cámpora be the Peronist candidate instead of Perón. Cámpora won the March 1973 election , issued a pardon for condemned guerrilla members and then secured Perón's return from his exile in Spain. [87]
On the day Perón returned to Argentina, the clash between Peronist internal factions— right-wing union leaders and left-wing youth from Montoneros—resulted in the Ezeiza Massacre . Cámpora resigned, overwhelmed by political violence, and Perón won the September 1973 election with his third wife Isabel as vice-president. He expelled Montoneros from the party [88] and they became once again a clandestine organization. José López Rega organized the Argentine Anticommunist Alliance (AAA) to fight against them and the People's Revolutionary Army (ERP). Perón died in July 1974 and was succeeded by his wife, who signed a secret decree empowering the military and the police to "annihilate" the left-wing subversion, [89] stopping ERP's attempt to start a rural insurgence in Tucumán province. [90] Isabel Perón was ousted one year later by a junta of the three armed forces, led by army general Jorge Rafael Videla . They initiated the National Reorganization Process , often shortened to Proceso . [91]
The Proceso shut down Congress, removed the judges of the Supreme Court, banned political parties and unions, and resorted to the forced disappearance of suspected guerrilla members and of anyone believed to be associated with the left-wing. By the end of 1976 Montoneros had lost near 2,000 members; by 1977, the ERP was completely defeated. A severely weakened Montoneros launched a counterattack in 1979, which was quickly annihilated, ending the guerrilla threat. Nevertheless, the junta stayed in power. Then head of state General Leopoldo Galtieri launched Operation Rosario , which escalated into the Falklands War (Spanish: Guerra de Malvinas ); within two months Argentina was defeated by the United Kingdom. Reynaldo Bignone replaced Galtieri and began to organize the transition to democratic rule. [92]

Contemporary era
Raúl Alfonsín won the 1983 elections campaigning for the prosecution of those responsible for human rights violations during the Proceso : the Trial of the Juntas and other martial courts sentenced all the coup's leaders but, under military pressure, he also enacted the Full Stop and Due Obedience laws, [93] [94] which halted prosecutions further down the chain of command . The worsening economic crisis and hyperinflation reduced his popular support and the Peronist Carlos Menem won the 1989 election . Soon after, riots forced Alfonsín to an early resignation . [95]
Menem embraced neo-liberal policies: [96] a fixed exchange rate , business deregulation , privatizations and dismantling of protectionist barriers normalized the economy for a while. He pardoned the officers who had been sentenced during Alfonsín's government. The 1994 Constitutional Amendment allowed Menem to be elected for a second term . The economy began to decline in 1995, with increasing unemployment and recession; [97] led by Fernando de la Rúa , the UCR returned to the presidency in the 1999 elections . [98]
De la Rúa kept Menem's economic plan despite the worsening crisis, which led to growing social discontent. [97] A massive capital flight was responded to with a freezing of bank accounts , generating further turmoil. The December 2001 riots forced him to resign. [99] Congress appointed Eduardo Duhalde as acting president, who abrogated the fixed exchange rate established by Menem. [100] By the late 2002 the economic crisis began to recess, but the assassination of two piqueteros by the police caused political commotion, prompting Duhalde to move elections forward. [101] Néstor Kirchner was elected as the new president . [102]
Boosting the neo-Keynesian economic policies [101] laid by Duhalde, Kirchner ended the economic crisis attaining significant fiscal and trade surpluses, and steep GDP growth. [103] Under his administration Argentina restructured its defaulted debt with an unprecedented discount of about 70% on most bonds, paid off debts with the International Monetary Fund , [104] purged the military of officers with doubtful human rights records, [105] nullified and voided the Full Stop and Due Obedience laws, [106] [F] ruled them as unconstitutional, and resumed legal prosecution of the Juntas' crimes. He did not run for reelection, promoting instead the candidacy of his wife, senator Cristina Fernández de Kirchner , who was elected in 2007 [108] and reelected in 2011 .
On 22 November 2015, after a tie in the first round of presidential elections on 25 October , Mauricio Macri won the first ballotage in Argentina's history, beating Front for Victory candidate Daniel Scioli and becoming president-elect. Macri is the first democratically elected non- radical or peronist president since 1916, although he had the support of the first mentioned. [ clarification needed ] [109] He took office on 10 December 2015. In April 2016, the Macri Government introduced austerity measures intended to tackle inflation and public deficits. [110]

Geography
With a mainland surface area of 2,780,400 km 2 (1,073,518 sq mi), [B] Argentina is located in southern South America , sharing land borders with Chile across the Andes to the west; [112] Bolivia and Paraguay to the north; Brazil to the northeast, Uruguay and the South Atlantic Ocean to the east; [113] and the Drake Passage to the south; [114] for an overall land border length of 9,376 km (5,826 mi). Its coastal border over the Río de la Plata and South Atlantic Ocean is 5,117 km (3,180 mi) long. [113]
Argentina's highest point is Aconcagua in the Mendoza province (6,959 m (22,831 ft) above sea level), [115] also the highest point in the Southern and Western Hemispheres . [116] The lowest point is Laguna del Carbón in the San Julián Great Depression Santa Cruz province (−105 m (−344 ft) below sea level, [115] also the lowest point in the Southern and Western Hemispheres, and the seventh lowest point on Earth) [117]
The northernmost point is at the confluence of the Grande de San Juan and Río Mojinete rivers in Jujuy province ; the southernmost is Cape San Pío in Tierra del Fuego province ; the easternmost is northeast of Bernardo de Irigoyen, Misiones and the westernmost is within Los Glaciares National Park in Santa Cruz province. [113] The maximum north–south distance is 3,694 km (2,295 mi), while the maximum east–west one is 1,423 km (884 mi). [113]
Some of the major rivers are the Paraná , Uruguay —which join to form the Río de la Plata, Paraguay , Salado , Negro , Santa Cruz , Pilcomayo , Bermejo and Colorado . [118] These rivers are discharged into the Argentine Sea , the shallow area of the Atlantic Ocean over the Argentine Shelf , an unusually wide continental platform . [119] Its waters are influenced by two major ocean currents: the warm Brazil Current and the cold Falklands Current . [120]

Regions
Argentina is divided into seven geographical regions: [G]

Biodiversity
Argentina is a megadiverse country [127] hosting one of the greatest ecosystem varieties in the world: 15 continental zones, 3 oceanic zones, and the Antarctic region are all represented in its territory. [127] This huge ecosystem variety has led to a biological diversity that is among the world's largest: [127] [128]

Climate
Although the most populated areas are generally temperate , Argentina has an exceptional amount of climate diversity, [129] ranging from subtropical in the north to subpolar in the far south. [130] The average annual precipitation ranges from 150 millimetres (6 in) in the driest parts of Patagonia to over 2,000 millimetres (79 in) in the westernmost parts of Patagonia and the northeastern parts of the country. [129] Mean annual temperatures range from 5 °C (41 °F) in the far south to 25 °C (77 °F) in the north. [129]
Major wind currents include the cool Pampero Winds blowing on the flat plains of Patagonia and the Pampas; following the cold front, warm currents blow from the north in middle and late winter, creating mild conditions. [131] The Sudestada usually moderates cold temperatures but brings very heavy rains, rough seas and coastal flooding. It is most common in late autumn and winter along the central coast and in the Río de la Plata estuary. [131] The Zonda , a hot dry wind , affects Cuyo and the central Pampas. Squeezed of all moisture during the 6,000 m (19,685 ft) descent from the Andes, Zonda winds can blow for hours with gusts up to 120 km/h (75 mph), fueling wildfires and causing damage; between June and November, when the Zonda blows, snowstorms and blizzard ( viento blanco ) conditions usually affect higher elevations. [132]

Politics

Government
Argentina is a federal constitutional republic and representative democracy . [133] The government is regulated by a system of checks and balances defined by the Constitution of Argentina , the country's supreme legal document. The seat of government is the city of Buenos Aires , as designated by Congress . [11] Suffrage is universal , equal , secret and mandatory . [134] [K]
The federal government is composed of three branches:
The Legislative branch consists of the bicameral Congress, made up of the Senate and Deputy chambers, which makes federal law , declares war , approves treaties and has the power of the purse and of impeachment , by which it can remove sitting members of the government. [136] The Chamber of Deputies represents the people and has 257 voting members elected to a four-year term. Seats are apportioned among the provinces by population every tenth year. [137] As of 2014 [update] ten provinces have just five deputies while the Buenos Aires Province , being the most populous one, has 70. The Chamber of Senators represents the provinces, has 72 members elected at-large to six-year terms, with each province having three seats; one third of Senate seats are up for election every other year. [138] At least one-third of the candidates presented by the parties must be women.
In the Executive branch, the President is the commander-in-chief of the military, can veto legislative bills before they become law—subject to Congressional override—and appoints the members of the Cabinet and other officers, who administer and enforce federal laws and policies. [139] The President is elected directly by the vote of the people, serves a four-year term and may be elected to office no more than twice in a row. [140]
The Judicial branch includes the Supreme Court and lower federal courts interpret laws and overturn those they find unconstitutional . [141] The Judicial is independent of the Executive and the Legislative. The Supreme Court has seven members appointed by the President—subject to Senate approval—who serve for life. The lower courts' judges are proposed by the Council of Magistrates (a secretariat composed of representatives of judges, lawyers, researchers, the Executive and the Legislative), and appointed by the President on Senate approval. [142]

Provinces
Argentina is a federation of twenty-three provinces and one autonomous city , Buenos Aires. Provinces are divided for administration purposes into departments and municipalities , except for Buenos Aires Province, which is divided into partidos . The City of Buenos Aires is divided into communes .
Provinces hold all the power that they chose not to delegate to the federal government; [143] they must be representative republics and must not contradict the Constitution. [144] Beyond this they are fully autonomous: they enact their own constitutions, [145] freely organize their local governments, [146] and own and manage their natural and financial resources. [147] Some provinces have bicameral legislatures, while others have unicameral ones. [L]
During the War of Independence the main cities and their surrounding countrysides became provinces though the intervention of their cabildos . The Anarchy of the Year XX completed this process, shaping the original thirteen provinces. Jujuy seceded from Salta in 1834, and the thirteen provinces became fourteen. After seceding for a decade, Buenos Aires accepted the 1853 Constitution of Argentina in 1861, and was made a federal territory in 1880. [149]
An 1862 law designated as national territories those under federal control but outside the frontiers of the provinces. In 1884 they served as bases for the establishment of the governorates of Misiones, Formosa, Chaco, La Pampa, Neuquén, Río Negro, Chubut, Santa Cruz and Tierra del Fuego. [150] The agreement about a frontier dispute with Chile in 1900 created the National Territory of Los Andes ; its lands were incorporated into Jujuy, Salta and Catamarca in 1943. [149] La Pampa and Chaco became provinces in 1951. Misiones did so in 1953, and Formosa , Neuquén , Río Negro , Chubut and Santa Cruz, in 1955. The last national territory, Tierra del Fuego, became the Tierra del Fuego, Antártida e Islas del Atlántico Sur Province in 1990. [149]

Foreign relations
Foreign policy is officially handled by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, International Trade and Worship , which answers to the President .
An historical and current middle power , [18] Argentina bases its foreign policies on the guiding principles of non-intervention , [151] human rights, self-determination , international cooperation , disarmament and peaceful settlement of conflicts . [152] The country is one of the G-15 and G-20 major economies of the world, and a founding member of the UN , WBG , WTO and OAS . In 2012 Argentina was elected again to a two-year non-permanent position on the United Nations Security Council and is participating in major peacekeeping operations in Haiti , Cyprus , Western Sahara and the Middle East . [153]
A prominent Latin American [19] and Southern Cone [20] regional power , Argentina co-founded OEI , CELAC and UNASUR , of which the former president Néstor Kirchner was first Secretary General . It is also a founding member of the Mercosur block, having Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay and Venezuela as partners. Since 2002 the country has emphasized its key role in Latin American integration , and the block—which has some supranational legislative functions—is its first international priority. [154]
Argentina claims 965,597 km 2 (372,819 sq mi) in Antarctica , where it has the world's oldest continuous state presence , since 1904. [155] This overlaps claims by Chile and the United Kingdom , though all such claims fall under the provisions of the 1961 Antarctic Treaty , of which Argentina is a founding signatory and permanent consulting member, with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat being based in Buenos Aires. [156]
Argentina disputes sovereignty over the Falkland Islands (Spanish: Islas Malvinas ), and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands , [157] which are administered by the United Kingdom as Overseas Territories .

Armed forces
The President holds the title of commander-in-chief of the Argentine Armed Forces, as part of a legal framework that imposes a strict separation between national defense and internal security systems: [158] [159]
The National Defense System , an exclusive responsibility of the federal government, [160] coordinated by the Ministry of Defense , and comprising the Army , the Navy and the Air Force . [161] Ruled and monitored by Congress [162] through the Houses' Defense Committees, [163] it is organized on the essential principle of legitimate self-defense: the repelling of any external military aggression in order to guarantee freedom of the people, national sovereignty, and territorial integrity. [163] Its secondary missions include committing to multinational operations within the framework of the United Nations, participating in internal support missions, assisting friendly countries, and establishing a sub-regional defense system. [163]
Military service is voluntary, with enlistment age between 18 and 24 years old and no conscription . [165] Argentina's defense has historically been one of the best equipped in the region, even managing its own weapon research facilities, shipyards, ordnance, tank and plane factories . [166] However, real military expenditures declined steadily after 1981 and the defense budget in 2011 was about 0.74% of GDP, a historical minimum, [167] below the Latin American average.
The Interior Security System , jointly administered by the federal and subscribing provincial governments. [159] At the federal level it is coordinated by the Interior, Security and Justice ministries, and monitored by Congress. [159] It is enforced by the Federal Police ; the Prefecture , which fulfills coast guard duties; the Gendarmerie , which serves border guard tasks; and the Airport Security Police . [168] At the provincial level it is coordinated by the respective internal security ministries and enforced by local police agencies. [159]
Argentina was the only South American country to send warships and cargo planes in 1991 to the Gulf War under UN mandate and has remained involved in peacekeeping efforts in multiple locations like UNPROFOR in Croatia / Bosnia , Gulf of Fonseca , UNFICYP in Cyprus (where among Army and Marines troops the Air Force provided the UN Air contingent since 1994) and MINUSTAH in Haiti . Argentina is the only Latin American country to maintain troops in Kosovo during SFOR (and later EUFOR ) operations where combat engineers of the Argentine Armed Forces are embedded in an Italian brigade .
In 2007, an Argentine contingent including helicopters, boats and water purification plants was sent to help Bolivia against their worst floods in decades. [169] In 2010 the Armed Forces were also involved in Haiti and Chile humanitarian responses after their respective earthquakes.

Economy
Benefiting from rich natural resources , a highly literate population, a diversified industrial base, and an export-oriented agricultural sector, the economy of Argentina is Latin America's third-largest, [176] and the second largest in South America . [177] It has a "very high" rating on the Human Development Index [178] and a relatively high GDP per capita , [179] with a considerable internal market size and a growing share of the high-tech sector. [22]
A middle emerging economy and one of the world's top developing nations, [180] [M] Argentina is a member of the G-20 major economies . Historically, however, its economic performance has been very uneven, with high economic growth alternating with severe recessions, income maldistribution and—in the recent decades—increasing poverty. Early in the 20th century Argentina achieved development, [16] and became the world's seventh richest country. [15] Although managing to keep a place among the top fifteen economies until mid-century, [15] it suffered a long and steady decline and now it's just an upper middle-income country. [181]
High inflation —a weakness of the Argentine economy for decades—has become a trouble once again, with rates in 2013 between the official 10.2% and the privately estimated 25%, causing heated public debate over manipulated statistics. [182] [183] Income distribution , having improved since 2002, is classified as "medium", still considerably unequal. [9]
Argentina ranks 107th out of 175 countries in the Transparency International 's 2014 Corruption Perceptions Index . [184] While the country has settled most of its debts, it faces a technical debt crisis since 31 July 2014. A New York judge blocked Argentina's payments to 93% of its bonds unless it pays to " Vulture funds " the full value of the defaulted bonds they bought after its 2001 default. Argentina vowed not to capitulate to what it considered the ransom tactics of the funds. [185]

Industry
In 2012 [update] manufacturing accounted for 20.3% of GDP—the largest goods-producing sector in the nation's economy. [187] Well-integrated into Argentine agriculture, half of the industrial exports have rural origin. [187]
With a 6.5% production growth rate in 2011 [update] , [188] the diversified manufacturing sector rests on a steadily growing network of industrial parks (314 as of 2013 [update] ) [189] [190]
In 2012 [update] the leading sectors by volume were: food processing, beverages and tobacco products; motor vehicles and auto parts; textiles and leather; refinery products and biodiesel ; chemicals and pharmaceuticals; steel, aluminum and iron; industrial and farm machinery; home appliances and furniture; plastics and tires; glass and cement; and recording and print media. [187] In addition, Argentina has since long been one of the top five wine-producing countries in the world. [187] However, it has also been classified as one of the 74 countries where instances of child labor and forced labor have been observed and mentioned in a 2014 report published by the Bureau of International Labor Affairs . [191] The ILAB's List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor shows that many of the goods produced by child labor and/or forced labor comes from the agricultural sector . [191]
Córdoba is Argentina's major industrial center, hosting metalworking, motor vehicle and auto parts manufactures. Next in importance are the Greater Buenos Aires area (food processing, metallurgy, motor vehicles and auto parts, chemicals and petrochemicals, consumer durables, textiles and printing); Rosario (food processing, metallurgy, farm machinery, oil refining, chemicals, and tanning); San Miguel de Tucumán (sugar refining); San Lorenzo (chemicals and pharmaceuticals); San Nicolás de los Arroyos (steel milling and metallurgy); and Ushuaia and Bahía Blanca (oil refining). [192] Other manufacturing enterprises are located in the provinces of Santa Fe (zinc and copper smelting, and flour milling); Mendoza and Neuquén (wineries and fruit processing); Chaco (textiles and sawmills); and Santa Cruz, Salta and Chubut (oil refining) [192]
The electric output of Argentina in 2009 [update] totaled over 122 TWh (440 PJ ), of which about 37% was consumed by industrial activities. [193]

Transport
Argentina has the largest railway system in Latin America, with 36,966 km (22,970 mi) of operating lines in 2008 [update] , out of a full network of almost 48,000 km (29,826 mi). [195] This system links all 23 provinces plus Buenos Aires City, and connects with all neighboring countries. [196] There are four incompatible gauges in use; this forces virtually all interregional freight traffic to pass through Buenos Aires. [196] The system has been in decline since the 1940s: regularly running up large budgetary deficits, by 1991 it was transporting 1,400 times less goods than it did in 1973. [196] However, in recent years the system has experienced a greater degree of investment from the state, in both commuter rail lines and long distance lines, renewing rolling stock and infrastructure. [197] [198] In April 2015, by overwhelming majority the Argentine Senate passed a law which re-created Ferrocarriles Argentinos (2015) , effectively re-nationalising the country's railways, a move which saw support from all major political parties on both sides of the political spectrum. [199] [200] [201]
By 2004 [update] Buenos Aires, all provincial capitals except Ushuaia, and all medium-sized towns were interconnected by 69,412 km (43,131 mi) of paved roads, out of a total road network of 231,374 km (143,769 mi). [203] Most important cities are linked by a growing number of expressways , including Buenos Aires–La Plata , Rosario–Córdoba , Córdoba–Villa Carlos Paz, Villa Mercedes–Mendoza, National Route 14 General José Gervasio Artigas and Provincial Route 2 Juan Manuel Fangio , among others. Nevertheless, this road infrastructure is still inadequate and cannot handle the sharply growing demand caused by deterioration of the railway system. [196]
In 2012 [update] there were about 11,000 km (6,835 mi) of waterways , [204] mostly comprising the La Plata, Paraná, Paraguay and Uruguay rivers, with Buenos Aires, Zárate , Campana , Rosario, San Lorenzo, Santa Fe, Barranqueras and San Nicolas de los Arroyos as the main fluvial ports . Some of the largest sea ports are La Plata – Ensenada , Bahía Blanca, Mar del Plata , Quequén – Necochea , Comodoro Rivadavia , Puerto Deseado , Puerto Madryn , Ushuaia and San Antonio Oeste . Buenos Aires has historically been the most important port; however since the 1990s the Up-River port region has become dominant: stretching along 67 km (42 mi) of the Paraná river shore in Santa Fe province, it includes 17 ports and in 2013 [update] accounted for 50% of all exports.
In 2013 [update] there were 161 airports with paved runways [205] out of more than a thousand. [196] The Ezeiza International Airport , about 35 km (22 mi) from downtown Buenos Aires, [206] is the largest in the country, followed by Cataratas del Iguazú in Misiones, and El Plumerillo in Mendoza. [196] Aeroparque , in the city of Buenos Aires, is the most important domestic airport. [207]

Media and communications
Print media industry is highly developed in Argentina, with more than two hundred newspapers. The major national ones include Clarín (centrist, Latin America's best-seller and the second most widely circulated in the Spanish-speaking world), La Nación (center-right, published since 1870), Página/12 (leftist, founded in 1987), the Buenos Aires Herald (Latin America's most prestigious English language daily, liberal, dating back to 1876), La Voz del Interior (center, founded in 1904), [208] and the Argentinisches Tageblatt (German weekly, liberal, published since 1878) [209]
Argentina began the world's first regular radio broadcasting on 27 August 1920, when Richard Wagner 's Parsifal was aired by a team of medical students led by Enrique Telémaco Susini in Buenos Aires' Teatro Coliseo . [210] [211] By 2002 [update] there were 260 AM and 1150 FM registered radio stations in the country. [212]
The Argentine television industry is large, diverse and popular across Latin America, with many productions and TV formats having been exported abroad. Since 1999 Argentines enjoy the highest availability of cable and satellite television in Latin America, [213] as of 2014 [update] totaling 87.4% of the country's households, a rate similar to those in the United States, Canada and Europe. [214]
By 2011 [update] Argentina also had the highest coverage of networked telecommunications among Latin American powers: about 67% of its population had internet access and 137.2%, mobile phone subscriptions. [215]

Science and technology
Argentines have three Nobel Prizes laureates in the Sciences. Bernardo Houssay , the first Latin American among them, discovered the role of pituitary hormones in regulating glucose in animals. César Milstein did extensive research in antibodies . Luis Leloir discovered how organisms store energy converting glucose into glycogen and the compounds which are fundamental in metabolizing carbohydrates . Argentine research has led to the treatment of heart diseases and several forms of cancer. Domingo Liotta designed and developed the first artificial heart successfully implanted in a human being in 1969. René Favaloro developed the techniques and performed the world's first ever coronary bypass surgery .
Argentina's nuclear programme has been highly successful. In 1957 Argentina was the first country in Latin America to design and build a research reactor with homegrown technology, the RA-1 Enrico Fermi . This reliance in the development of own nuclear related technologies, instead of simply buying them abroad, was a constant of Argentina's nuclear programme conducted by the civilian National Atomic Energy Commission (CNEA). Nuclear facilities with Argentine technology have been built in Peru, Algeria, Australia and Egypt. In 1983, the country admitted having the capability of producing weapon-grade uranium , a major step needed to assemble nuclear weapons ; since then, however, Argentina has pledged to use nuclear power only for peaceful purposes. [216] As a member of the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency , Argentina has been a strong voice in support of nuclear non-proliferation efforts [217] and is highly committed to global nuclear security. [218] In 1974 it was the first country in Latin America to put in-line a commercial nuclear power plant, Atucha I . Although the Argentine built parts for that station amounted to 10% of the total, the nuclear fuel it uses are since entirely built in the country. Later nuclear power stations employed a higher percentage of Argentine built components; Embalse , finished in 1983, a 30% and the 2011 Atucha II reactor a 40%. [219]
Despite its modest budget and numerous setbacks, academics and the sciences in Argentina have enjoyed an international respect since the turn of the 1900s, when Dr. Luis Agote devised the first safe and effective means of blood transfusion as well as René Favaloro , who was a pioneer in the improvement of the coronary artery bypass surgery . Argentine scientists are still on the cutting edge in fields such as nanotechnology , physics , computer sciences , molecular biology, oncology, ecology, and cardiology. Juan Maldacena , an Argentine-American scientist, is a leading figure in string theory .
Space research has also become increasingly active in Argentina. Argentine built satellites include LUSAT-1 (1990), Víctor-1 (1996), PEHUENSAT-1 (2007), [221] and those developed by CONAE , the Argentine space agency, of the SAC series. [222] Argentina has its own satellite programme, nuclear power station designs (4th generation) and public nuclear energy company INVAP , which provides several countries with nuclear reactors. [223] Established in 1991, the CONAE has since launched two satellites successfully and, [224] in June 2009, secured an agreement with the European Space Agency for the installation of a 35-m diameter antenna and other mission support facilities at the Pierre Auger Observatory , the world's foremost cosmic ray observatory. [225] The facility will contribute to numerous ESA space probes, as well as CONAE's own, domestic research projects. Chosen from 20 potential sites and one of only three such ESA installations in the world, the new antenna will create a triangulation which will allow the ESA to ensure mission coverage around the clock [226]

Tourism
Tourism in Argentina is characterized by its cultural offerings and its ample and varied natural assets. The country had 5.57 million visitors in 2013, ranking in terms of the international tourist arrivals as the top destination in South America , and second in Latin America after Mexico. [227] Revenues from international tourists reached US$4.41 billion in 2013, down from US$4.89 billion in 2012. [227] The country's capital city, Buenos Aires , is the most visited city in South America . [228] There are 30 National Parks of Argentina including many World Heritage Sites in Argentina .

Water supply and sanitation
The tariffs for water supply and sanitation in Argentina are relatively low, the service quality reasonable. However, according to the WHO , 21% of the total population remains without access to house connections and 52% of the urban population do not have access to sewerage .
Between 1991 and 1999, as part of one of the world's largest privatization programs, water and sanitation concessions with the private sector were signed. After the 2001 economic crisis, many concessions were renegotiated.
Most service providers barely recover operation and maintenance costs and have no capacity to self-finance investments. While private operators were able to achieve higher levels of cost recovery, since the Argentine financial crisis in 2002 tariffs have been frozen and the self-financing capacity of utilities has disappeared.

Demographics
In the 2001 census [ INDEC ] , Argentina had a population of 36,260,130, and preliminary results from the 2010 census were of 40,091,359 inhabitants. [230] [231] Argentina ranks third in South America in total population and 33rd globally. Population density is of 15 persons per square kilometer of land area, well below the world average of 50 persons. The population growth rate in 2010 was an estimated 1.03% annually, with a birth rate of 17.7 live births per 1,000 inhabitants and a mortality rate of 7.4 deaths per 1,000 inhabitants. The net migration rate has ranged from zero to four immigrants per 1,000 inhabitants per year. [232]
The proportion of people under 15 is 25.6%, a little below the world average of 28%, and the proportion of people 65 and older is relatively high at 10.8%. In Latin America this is second only to Uruguay and well above the world average, which is currently 7%. Argentina has one of Latin America's lowest population growth rates , recently about 1% a year, as well as a comparatively low infant mortality rate . Its birth rate of 2.3 children per woman is still nearly twice as high as that in Spain or Italy, compared here as they have similar religious practices and proportions. [233] [234] The median age is approximately 30 years and life expectancy at birth is 77.14 years. [232]
Argentina became in 2010 the first country in Latin America and the second in the Americas to allow same-sex marriage nationwide. [235] It was the tenth country to allow same-sex marriage . [236]

Ethnography
As with other areas of new settlement such as the United States , Canada , Australia , New Zealand , Brazil and Uruguay , Argentina is considered a country of immigrants. [237] [238] [239] Argentines usually refer to the country as a crisol de razas (crucible of races, or melting pot ).
Between 1857 and 1950 Argentina was the country with the second biggest immigration wave in the world, with 6.6 million, second only to the United States in the numbers of immigrants received (27 million) and ahead of such other areas of new settlement like Canada, Brazil and Australia. [240] [241]
Strikingly, at those times, the national population doubled every two decades. This belief is endured in the popular saying "los argentinos descienden de los barcos" (Argentines descend from the ships). Therefore, most Argentines are descended from the 19th- and 20th-century immigrants of the great immigration wave to Argentina (1850–1955), [242] [243] with a great majority of these immigrants coming from diverse European countries. The majority of these European immigrants came from Italy and Spain. [244] The majority of Argentines descend from multiple European ethnic groups, primarily of Italian and Spanish descent (over 25 million individuals in Argentina, almost 60% of the population have some partial Italian origins), [245] while 17% of the population also have partial French origins, [246] and a sizeable number of Germans .
Argentina is home to a significant population of Arab and partial Arab background, mostly of Syrian and Lebanese origin (in Argentina they are considered among the white people , just like in the United States Census), The majority of Arab Argentines are Christians who belong to the Maronite Church , Roman Catholic , Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Rite Catholic Churches . A scant number are Muslims of Middle Eastern origins. The Asian population in the country numbers at around 180,000 individuals, most of whom are of Chinese [247] and Korean descent, although an older Japanese community that traces back to the early 20th century still exists. [ citation needed ]
A study conducted on 218 individuals in 2010 by the Argentine geneticist Daniel Corach , has established that the genetic map of Argentina is composed by 79% from different European ethnicities (mainly Spanish and Italian ethnicities), 18% of different indigenous ethnicities, and 4.3% of African ethnic groups, in which 63.6% of the tested group had at least one ancestor who was Indigenous . [248] [249]
From the 1970s, immigration has mostly been coming from Bolivia , Paraguay and Peru , with smaller numbers from Dominican Republic , Ecuador and Romania . [250] The Argentine government estimates that 750,000 inhabitants lack official documents and has launched a program [251] to encourage illegal immigrants to declare their status in return for two-year residence visas—so far over 670,000 applications have been processed under the program. [252]

Languages
The de facto [N] official language is Spanish , spoken by almost all Argentines. [253] The country is the largest Spanish-speaking society that universally employs voseo , the use of the pronoun vos instead of tú ("you"), which imposes the use of alternate verb forms as well. Due to the extensive Argentine geography, Spanish has a strong variation among regions, although the prevalent dialect is Rioplatense , primarily spoken in the La Plata Basin and accented similarly to the Neapolitan language . [254] Italian and other European immigrants influenced Lunfardo —the regional slang—permeating the vernacular vocabulary of other Latin American countries as well.
There are several second-languages in widespread use among the Argentine population:

Religion
The Constitution guarantees freedom of religion . [258] Although it enforces neither an official nor a state faith, [259] it gives Roman Catholicism a differential status. [260] [R]
According to a CONICET poll, Argentines are 76.5% Catholic , 11.3% Agnostics and Atheists , 9% Evangelical Protestants , 1.2% Jehovah's Witnesses , 0.9% Mormons ; 1.2% follow other religions, including Islam , Judaism and Buddhism . [262]
The country is home to both the largest Muslim [261] and largest Jewish communities in Latin America, the latter being the 7th most populous in the world. [263] Argentina is a member of the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance . [261]
Argentines show high individualization and de-institutionalization of religious beliefs; [264] 23.8% of them claim to always attend religious services; 49.1%, to seldom do and 26.8%, to never do. [265]
On 13 March 2013, Argentine Jorge Mario Bergoglio , the Cardinal Archbishop of Buenos Aires , was elected Bishop of Rome and Supreme Pontiff of the Catholic Church . He took the name " Francis ", and he became the first Pope from either the Americas or from the Southern Hemisphere . He is the first Pope born outside of Europe since the election of Pope Gregory III (who was Syrian ) in 741. He is also the first Jesuit Pope. [266]

Urbanization
Argentina is highly urbanized, with 92% of its population living in cities: [267] the ten largest metropolitan areas account for half of the population. About 3 million people live in the city of Buenos Aires, and including the Greater Buenos Aires metropolitan area it totals around 13 million, making it one of the largest urban areas in the world. [268]
The metropolitan areas of Córdoba and Rosario have around 1.3 million inhabitants each. [268] Mendoza, San Miguel de Tucumán, La Plata, Mar del Plata, Salta and Santa Fe have at least half a million people each. [268]
The population is unequally distributed: about 60% live in the Pampas region (21% of the total area), including 15 million people in Buenos Aires province. The provinces of Córdoba and Santa Fe, and the city of Buenos Aires have 3 million each. Seven other provinces have over one million people each: Mendoza, Tucumán, Entre Ríos, Salta, Chaco, Corrientes and Misiones. With 64.3 inhabitants per square kilometre (167/sq mi), Tucumán is the only Argentine province more densely populated than the world average; by contrast, the southern province of Santa Cruz has around 1.1/km 2 (2.8/sq mi). [269]

Education
The Argentine education system consists of four levels: [271]
The Argentine state guarantees universal, secular and free-of-charge public education for all levels. [T] Responsibility for educational supervision is organized at the federal and individual provincial states. In the last decades the role of the private sector has grown across all educational stages.

Health care
Health care is provided through a combination of employer and labor union-sponsored plans ( Obras Sociales ), government insurance plans, public hospitals and clinics and through private health insurance plans. Health care cooperatives number over 300 (of which 200 are related to labor unions ) and provide health care for half the population; the national INSSJP (popularly known as PAMI) covers nearly all of the five million senior citizens. [277]
There are more than 153,000 hospital beds, 121,000 physicians and 37,000 dentists (ratios comparable to developed nations ). [278] [279] The relatively high access to medical care has historically resulted in mortality patterns and trends similar to developed nations': from 1953 to 2005, deaths from cardiovascular disease increased from 20% to 23% of the total, those from tumors from 14% to 20%, respiratory problems from 7% to 14%, digestive maladies (non-infectious) from 7% to 11%, strokes a steady 7%, injuries, 6%, and infectious diseases, 4%. Causes related to senility led to many of the rest. Infant deaths have fallen from 19% of all deaths in 1953 to 3% in 2005. [278] [280]
The availability of health care has also reduced infant mortality from 70 per 1000 live births in 1948 [281] to 12.1 in 2009 [278] and raised life expectancy at birth from 60 years to 76. [281] Though these figures compare favorably with global averages, they fall short of levels in developed nations and in 2006, Argentina ranked fourth in Latin America. [279]

Culture
Argentina is a multicultural country with significant European influences. Modern Argentine culture has been largely influenced by Italian , Spanish and other European immigration like France, United Kingdom , Germany among others. Its cities are largely characterized by both the prevalence of people of European descent, and of conscious imitation of European styles in fashion, architecture and design. [283] Museums, cinemas, and galleries are abundant in all the large urban centers, as well as traditional establishments such as literary bars, or bars offering live music of a variety of genres although there are lesser elements of Amerindian and African influences, particularly in the fields of music and art. [284] The other big influence is the gauchos and their traditional country lifestyle of self-reliance. [285] Finally, indigenous American traditions have been absorbed into the general cultural milieu. Argentine writer Ernesto Sabato has reflected on the nature of the culture of Argentina as follows:

Literature
Although Argentina's rich literary history began around 1550, [287] it reached full independence with Esteban Echeverría 's El Matadero , a romantic landmark that played a significant role in the development of 19th century's Argentine narrative, [288] split by the ideological divide between the popular, federalist epic of José Hernández ' Martín Fierro and the elitist and cultured discourse of Sarmiento 's masterpiece, Facundo . [289]
The Modernist movement advanced into the 20th century including exponents such as Leopoldo Lugones and poet Alfonsina Storni ; [290] it was followed by Vanguardism , with Ricardo Güiraldes 's Don Segundo Sombra as an important reference. [291]
Jorge Luis Borges , Argentina's most acclaimed writer and one of the foremost figures in the history of literature , [292] found new ways of looking at the modern world in metaphor and philosophical debate and his influence has extended to authors all over the globe. Short stories such as Ficciones and The Aleph are among his most famous books. He was a friend and collaborator with Adolfo Bioy Casares , who wrote one of the most praised science fiction novels , The Invention of Morel . [293] Julio Cortázar , one of the leading members of the Latin American Boom and a major name in 20th century literature, [294] influenced an entire generation of writers in the Americas and Europe. [295]
Other highly regarded Argentine writers, poets and essayists include Estanislao del Campo , Eugenio Cambaceres , Pedro Bonifacio Palacios , Hugo Wast , Benito Lynch , Enrique Banchs , Oliverio Girondo , Ezequiel Martínez Estrada , Victoria Ocampo , Leopoldo Marechal , Silvina Ocampo , Roberto Arlt , Eduardo Mallea , Manuel Mujica Láinez , Ernesto Sábato , Silvina Bullrich , Rodolfo Walsh , María Elena Walsh , Tomás Eloy Martínez , Manuel Puig , Alejandra Pizarnik , and Osvaldo Soriano . [296]

Music
Tango , a Rioplatense musical genre with European and African influences, [297] is one of Argentina's international cultural symbols. [298] The golden age of tango (1930 to mid-1950s) mirrored that of jazz and swing in the United States, featuring large orchestras like those of Osvaldo Pugliese , Aníbal Troilo , Francisco Canaro , Julio de Caro and Juan d'Arienzo . [299] After 1955, virtuoso Astor Piazzolla popularized Nuevo tango , a subtler and more intellectual trend for the genre. [299] Tango enjoys worldwide popularity nowadays with groups like Gotan Project , Bajofondo and Tanghetto .
Argentina developed strong classical music and dance scenes that gave rise to renowned artists such as Alberto Ginastera , composer; Alberto Lysy , violinist; Martha Argerich and Eduardo Delgado , pianists; Daniel Barenboim , pianist and symphonic orchestra director; José Cura and Marcelo Álvarez , tenors; and to ballet dancers Jorge Donn , José Neglia , Norma Fontenla , Maximiliano Guerra , Paloma Herrera , Marianela Núñez , Iñaki Urlezaga and Julio Bocca . [299]
A national Argentine folk style emerged in the 1930s from dozens of regional musical genres and went to influence the entirety of Latin American music . Some of its interpreters, like Atahualpa Yupanqui and Mercedes Sosa , achieved worldwide acclaim.
The romantic ballad genre included singers of international fame such as Sandro de América .
Argentine rock developed as a distinct musical style in the mid-1960s, when Buenos Aires and Rosario became cradles of aspiring musicians. Founding bands like Los Gatos , Sui Generis , Almendra and Manal were followed by Seru Giran , Los Abuelos de la Nada , Soda Stereo and Patricio Rey y sus Redonditos de Ricota , with prominent artists including Gustavo Cerati , Litto Nebbia , Andrés Calamaro , Luis Alberto Spinetta , Charly García , Fito Páez and León Gieco . [299]
Tenor saxophonist Leandro "Gato" Barbieri and composer and big band conductor Lalo Schifrin are among the most internationally successful Argentine jazz musicians.

Theatre
Buenos Aires is one of the great theater capitals of the world, [302] [303] with a scene of international caliber centered on Corrientes Avenue , "the street that never sleeps", sometimes referred to as an intellectual Broadway in Buenos Aires. [304] Teatro Colón is a global landmark for opera and classical performances; its acoustics are considered among the world's top five. [305] [U] Other important theatrical venues include Teatro General San Martín , Cervantes , both in Buenos Aires City; Argentino in La Plata, El Círculo in Rosario, Independencia in Mendoza, and Libertador in Córdoba. Griselda Gambaro , Copi , Roberto Cossa , Marco Denevi , Carlos Gorostiza , and Alberto Vaccarezza are a few of the most prominent Argentine playwrights.
Argentine theatre traces its origins to Viceroy Juan José de Vértiz y Salcedo 's creation of the colony's first theatre, La Ranchería , in 1783. In this stage, in 1786, a tragedy entitled Siripo had its premiere. Siripo is now a lost work (only the second act is conserved), and can be considered the first Argentine stage play, because it was written by Buenos Aires poet Manuel José de Lavardén, it was premiered in Buenos Aires, and its plot was inspired by an historical episode of the early colonization of the Río de la Plata Basin : the destruction of Sancti Spiritu colony by aboriginals in 1529. La Ranchería theatre operated until its destruction in a fire in 1792. The second theatre stage in Buenos Aires was Teatro Coliseo , opened in 1804 during the term of Viceroy Rafael de Sobremonte . It was the nation's longest-continuously operating stage. The musical creator of the Argentine National Anthem, Blas Parera , earned fame as a theatre score writer during the early 19th century. The genre suffered during the regime of Juan Manuel de Rosas , though it flourished alongside the economy later in the century. The national government gave Argentine theatre its initial impulse with the establishment of the Colón Theatre , in 1857, which hosted classical and operatic, as well as stage performances. Antonio Petalardo's successful 1871 gambit on the opening of the Teatro Opera , inspired others to fund the growing art in Argentina.

Cinema
The Argentine film industry has historically been one of the three most developed in Latin American cinema , along with those produced in Mexico and Brazil . [306] [307] Started in 1896; by the early 1930s it had already become Latin America's leading film producer, a place it kept until the early 1950s. [308] The world's first animated feature films were made and released in Argentina, by cartoonist Quirino Cristiani , in 1917 and 1918. [309]
Argentine films have achieved worldwide recognition: the country has won two Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film , with The Official Story (1985) and The Secret in Their Eyes (2009) with seven nominations:
In addition, Argentine composers Luis Enrique Bacalov and Gustavo Santaolalla have been honored with Academy Award for Best Original Score in 2006 and 2007 nods and Armando Bo and Nicolás Giacobone have been honored with Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay in 2015. Also, the Argentine French actress Berenice Bejo received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress in 2011 and won the César Award for Best Actress and won the Best Actress award in the Cannes Film Festival for her role in the film The Past . [310]
Argentina also has won seventeen Goya Awards for Best Spanish Language Foreign Film with A King and His Movie (1986), A Place in the World (1992), Gatica, el mono (1993), Autumn Sun (1996), Ashes of Paradise (1997), The Lighthouse (1998), Burnt Money (2000), The Escape (2001), Intimate Stories (2003), Blessed by Fire (2005), The Hands (2006), XXY (2007), The Secret in Their Eyes (2009), Chinese Take-Away (2011), Wild Tales (2014), The Clan (2015) and The Distinguished Citizen (2016) being by far the most awarded in Latin America with twenty four nominations.
Many other Argentine films have been acclaimed by the international critique: Camila (1984), Man Facing Southeast (1986), A Place in the World (1992), Pizza, Beer, and Cigarettes (1997), Nine Queens (2000), A Red Bear (2002), The Motorcycle Diaries (2004), The Aura (2005), Chinese Take-Away (2011) and Wild Tales (2014) being some of them.
In 2013 [update] about 100 full-length motion pictures were being created annually. [311]

Visual arts
Some of the best-known Argentine painters are Cándido López and Florencio Molina Campos ( Naïve style ); Ernesto de la Cárcova and Eduardo Sívori ( Realism ); Fernando Fader ( Impressionism ); Pío Collivadino , Atilio Malinverno and Cesáreo Bernaldo de Quirós ( Postimpressionism ); Emilio Pettoruti ( Cubism ); Julio Barragán ( Concretism and Cubism) Antonio Berni ( Neofigurativism ); Roberto Aizenberg and Xul Solar ( Surrealism ); Gyula Košice ( Constructivism ); Eduardo Mac Entyre ( Generative art ); Luis Seoane , Carlos Torrallardona , Luis Aquino , and Alfredo Gramajo Gutiérrez ( Modernism ); Lucio Fontana ( Spatialism ); Tomás Maldonado and Guillermo Kuitca ( Abstract art ); León Ferrari and Marta Minujín ( Conceptual art ); and Gustavo Cabral ( Fantasy art ).
In 1946 Gyula Košice and others created The Madí Movement in Argentina, which then spread to Europe and United States, where it had a significant impact. [312] Tomás Maldonado was one of the main theorists of the Ulm Model of design education, still highly influential globally.
Other Argentine artists of worldwide fame include Adolfo Bellocq , whose lithographs have been influential since the 1920s, and Benito Quinquela Martín , the quintessential port painter, inspired by the immigrant-bound La Boca neighborhood.
Internationally laureate sculptors Erminio Blotta , Lola Mora and Rogelio Yrurtia authored many of the classical evocative monuments of the Argentine cityscape.

Architecture
The colonization brought the Spanish Baroque architecture , which can still be appreciated in its simpler Rioplatense style in the reduction of San Ignacio Miní , the Cathedral of Córdoba , and the Cabildo of Luján. Italian and French influences increased at the beginning of the 19th century with strong eclectic overtones that gave the local architecture a unique feeling. [313]
Numerous Argentine architects have enriched their own country's cityscape and those around the world: Juan Antonio Buschiazzo helped popularize Beaux-Arts architecture and Francisco Gianotti combined Art Nouveau with Italianate styles, each adding flair to Argentine cities during the early 20th century. Francisco Salamone and Viktor Sulčič left an Art Deco legacy, and Alejandro Bustillo created a prolific body of Neoclassical and Rationalist architecture . Alberto Prebisch and Amancio Williams were highly influenced by Le Corbusier , while Clorindo Testa introduced Brutalist architecture locally. César Pelli 's and Patricio Pouchulu 's Futurist creations have graced cities worldwide: Pelli's 1980s throwbacks to the Art Deco glory of the 1920s made him one of the world's most prestigious architects, with the Norwest Center and the Petronas Towers among his most celebrated creations.

Sport
Pato is the national sport , [314] an ancient horseback game locally originated in the early 1600s and predecessor of horseball . [315] [316] The most popular sport is Football . Along with France , the men's national team is the only to have won the most important international triplet: World Cup , Confederations Cup , and Olympic Gold Medal . It has also won 14 Copas América , 6 Pan American Gold Medals , and many other trophies. [317] Alfredo Di Stéfano , Diego Maradona , and Lionel Messi are among the best players in the game's history. [318]
The country's women's field hockey team Las Leonas is one of the world's most successful, with four Olympic medals , two World Cups , a World League and seven Champions Trophy . [319] Luciana Aymar is recognized as the best female player in the history of the sport, [320] being the only player to have received the FIH Player of the Year Award eight times. [321]
Basketball is a very popular sport. The men's national team is the only one in the FIBA Americas zone that has won the quintuplet crown: World Championship , Olympic Gold Medal , Diamond Ball , Americas Championship , and Pan American Gold Medal . It has also conquered 13 South American Championships , and many other tournaments. [322] Emanuel Ginóbili , Luis Scola , Andrés Nocioni , Fabricio Oberto , Pablo Prigioni , Carlos Delfino and Juan Ignacio Sánchez are a few of the country's most acclaimed players, all of them part of the NBA . [319] Argentina hosted the Basketball World Cup in 1950 and 1990.
Rugby is another popular sport in Argentina. As of 2014 [update] the men's national team , known as 'Los Pumas' has competed at the Rugby World Cup each time it has been held, achieving their highest ever result in 2007 when they came third. Since 2012 the Los Pumas have competed against Australia , New Zealand & South Africa in The Rugby Championship , the premier international Rugby competition in the Southern Hemisphere. Since 2009 the men's national 'A' team known as the 'Jaguares' has competed against the USA & Canada 'A' teams along with Uruguay in the Americas Rugby Championship , The Los Jaguares have won every year the competition has been competed.
Argentina has produced some of the most formidable champions for Boxing , including Carlos Monzón , the best middleweight in history; [323] Pascual Pérez , one of the most decorated flyweight boxers of all times; Víctor Galíndez , as of 2009 [update] record holder for consecutive world light heavyweight title defenses; and Nicolino Locche , nicknamed "The Untouchable" for his masterful defense; they are all inductees into the International Boxing Hall of Fame . [324]
Tennis has been quite popular among people of all ages. Guillermo Vilas is the greatest Latin American player of the Open Era , [325] while Gabriela Sabatini is the most accomplished Argentine female player of all time—having reached #3 in the WTA Ranking , [326] are both inductees into the International Tennis Hall of Fame . [327]
Argentina reigns undisputed in Polo , having won more international championships than any other country and been seldom beaten since the 1930s. [328] The Argentine Polo Championship is the sport's most important international team trophy. The country is home to most of the world's top players, among them Adolfo Cambiaso , the best in Polo history. [329]
Historically, Argentina has had a strong showing within Auto racing . Juan Manuel Fangio was five times Formula One world champion under four different teams, winning 102 of his 184 international races, and is widely ranked as the greatest driver of all time. [330] Other distinguished racers were Oscar Alfredo Gálvez , Juan Gálvez , José Froilán González , and Carlos Reutemann . [331]

Cuisine
Besides many of the pasta, sausage and dessert dishes common to continental Europe, Argentines enjoy a wide variety of Indigenous and Criollo creations, including empanadas (a small stuffed pastry), locro (a mixture of corn, beans, meat, bacon, onion, and gourd), humita and mate . [332]
The country has the highest consumption of red meat in the world, [333] traditionally prepared as asado , the Argentine barbecue. It is made with various types of meats, often including chorizo , sweetbread , chitterlings , and blood sausage . [334]
Common desserts include facturas ( Viennese-style pastry), cakes and pancakes filled with dulce de leche (a sort of milk caramel jam), alfajores (shortbread cookies sandwiched together with chocolate, dulce de leche or a fruit paste), and tortas fritas (fried cakes) [335]
Argentine wine , one of the world's finest, [336] is an integral part of the local menu. Malbec , Torrontés , Cabernet Sauvignon , Syrah and Chardonnay are some of the most sought-after varieties . [337]

National symbols
Some of Argentina's national symbols are defined by law, while others are traditions lacking formal designation. [338] The Flag of Argentina consists of three horizontal stripes equal in width and colored light blue, white and light blue, with the Sun of May in the center of the middle white stripe. [339] The flag was designed by Manuel Belgrano in 1812; it was adopted as a national symbol on 20 July 1816. [340] The Coat of Arms , which represents the union of the provinces, came into use in 1813 as the seal for official documents. [341] The Argentine National Anthem was written by Vicente López y Planes with music by Blas Parera , and was adopted in 1813. [341] The National Cockade was first used during the May Revolution of 1810 and was made official two years later. [342] The Virgin of Luján is Argentina's patron saint . [343]
The hornero , living across most of the national territory, was chosen as the national bird in 1928 after a lower school survey. [344] The ceibo is the national floral emblem and national tree , [338] [345] while the quebracho colorado is the national forest tree. [346] Rhodochrosite is known as the national gemstone. [347] The national sport is pato , an equestrian game that was popular among gauchos. [314]
Argentine wine is the national liquor , and mate , the national infusion . [348] [349] Asado and locro are considered the national dishes . [350] [351]

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00002
U.S. Route 113
WebPage index: 00003
Toronto
Toronto ( i / t ə ˈ r ɒ n t oʊ , - t ə / , [10] [11] local i / t ə ˈ r ɒ n oʊ , ˈ t r ɒ - / ) is the most populous city in Canada and the provincial capital of Ontario . [12] [13] With a population of 2,731,571, [6] [12] it is the fourth most populous city in North America after Mexico City , New York City , and Los Angeles . Toronto is the centre of the Greater Toronto Area (GTA), the most populous metropolitan area in Canada, [14] and anchors the Golden Horseshoe , a heavily urbanized region that is home to 9.2 million people, [15] or over 26% of the population of Canada . [16] A global city , [17] Toronto is an international centre of business, finance, arts, and culture, [18] [19] and is recognized as one of the most multicultural and cosmopolitan cities in the world. [20] [21] [22] [23] [24]
Aboriginal peoples have inhabited the area now known as Toronto for thousands of years. The city itself is situated on the southern terminus of an ancient Aboriginal trail leading north to Lake Simcoe , used by the Wyandot , Iroquois , and the Mississauga . [25] Permanent European settlement began in the 1790s, after the broadly disputed Toronto Purchase of 1787, when the Mississaugas surrendered the area to the British Crown . [26] The British established the town of York , and later designated it as the capital of Upper Canada . [27] During the War of 1812 , the town was the site of the Battle of York and suffered heavy damage by U.S. troops . [28] York was renamed and incorporated as the city of Toronto in 1834, and became the capital of the province of Ontario during Canadian Confederation in 1867. [29] The city proper has since expanded past its original borders through amalgamation with surrounding municipalities at various times in its history to its current area of 630.2 km 2 (243.3 sq mi).
Located in Southern Ontario on the northwestern shore of Lake Ontario , Toronto is situated on a broad sloping plateau intersected by an extensive network of rivers, deep ravines, and urban forest , [30] with 140 independently unique and clearly defined official neighbourhoods making up the city. [31] The diverse population of Toronto reflects its current and historical role as an important destination for immigrants to Canada , [32] [33] with nearly 50% of residents belonging to a visible minority population group, [34] and over 200 distinct ethnic origins represented among its inhabitants. [35] While the majority of Torontonians speak English as their primary language, there are over 160 different languages spoken in the city. [36]
Toronto is a prominent centre for music, [37] theatre, [38] motion picture production, [39] and television production, [40] and is home to the headquarters of Canada's major national broadcast networks and media outlets. [41] Its varied cultural institutions , [42] which include numerous museums and galleries , festivals and public events , entertainment districts, national historic sites , and sports activities , [43] attract over 25 million tourists each year. [44] [45] Toronto is known for its many skyscrapers and high-rise buildings , [46] in particular the tallest free-standing structure in the Western Hemisphere , the CN Tower . [47] As Canada's commercial capital, the city is home to the Toronto Stock Exchange , the headquarters of Canada's five largest banks , [48] and the headquarters of many large Canadian and multinational corporations. [49] Its economy is highly diversified with strengths in technology, design, financial services, life sciences, education, arts, fashion, business services, environmental innovation, food services, and tourism. [50] [51] [52]

History

Before 1800
When Europeans first arrived at the site of present-day Toronto, the vicinity was inhabited by the Iroquois , [53] who by then had displaced the Wyandot (Huron) people who had occupied the region for centuries before c. 1500. [54] The name Toronto is likely derived from the Iroquois word tkaronto , meaning "place where trees stand in the water". [55] This refers to the northern end of what is now Lake Simcoe , where the Huron had planted tree saplings to corral fish. However, the word "Toronto", meaning "plenty" also appears in a French lexicon of the Huron language in 1632, [56] and appeared on French maps referring to various locations, including Georgian Bay, Lake Simcoe, and several rivers. [57] A portage route from Lake Ontario to Lake Huron running through this point, the Toronto Carrying-Place Trail , led to widespread use of the name. In the 1660s, the Iroquois established two villages within what is today Toronto, Ganatsekwyagon on the banks of the Rouge River and Teiaiagonon the banks of the Humber River . By 1701, the Mississauga had displaced the Iroquois, who abandoned the Toronto area at the end of the Beaver Wars . [58]
French traders founded Fort Rouillé on the current Exhibition grounds in 1750, but abandoned it in 1759. [59] During the American Revolutionary War , the region saw an influx of British settlers as United Empire Loyalists fled for the British-controlled lands north of Lake Ontario. The new province of Upper Canada was in the process of creation and needed a capital. In 1787, the British Lord Dorchester arranged for the Toronto Purchase with the Mississaugas of the New Credit First Nation, thereby securing more than a quarter of a million acres (1000 km 2 ) of land in the Toronto area. [60] Dorchester intended the location to be named Toronto. [57]
In 1793, Governor John Graves Simcoe established the town of York on the Toronto Purchase lands, instead naming it after Prince Frederick, Duke of York and Albany . Simcoe decided to move the Upper Canada capital from Newark (Niagara-on-the-Lake) to York, [61] believing that the new site would be less vulnerable to attack by the United States. [62] The York garrison was constructed at the entrance of the town's natural harbour, sheltered by a long sandbar peninsula. The town's settlement formed at the eastern end of the harbour behind the peninsula, near the present-day intersection of Parliament Street and Front Street (in the " Old Town " area).

1800–1945
In 1813, as part of the War of 1812 , the Battle of York ended in the town's capture and plunder by US forces. [63] The surrender of the town was negotiated by John Strachan . US soldiers destroyed much of the garrison and set fire to the parliament buildings during their five-day occupation. The sacking of York was a primary motivation for the Burning of Washington by British troops later in the war. York was incorporated as the City of Toronto on March 6, 1834, reverting to its original native name.
The population of only 9,000 included escaped African American slaves, some of whom were brought by the Loyalists, including Mohawk leader Joseph Brant . [64] Torontonians integrated people of colour into their society. In the 1840s an eating house at Frederick and King Streets, a place of mercantile prosperity in early Toronto, was operated by a man of colour named Bloxom. [65] Slavery was banned outright in Upper Canada in 1834. Reformist politician William Lyon Mackenzie became the first Mayor of Toronto and led the unsuccessful Upper Canada Rebellion of 1837 against the British colonial government. As a major destination for immigrants to Canada, the city grew rapidly through the remainder of the 19th century. The first significant population influx occurred when the Great Irish Famine brought a large number of Irish to the city, some of them transient, and most of them Catholic . By 1851, the Irish-born population had become the largest single ethnic group in the city. Smaller numbers of Protestant Irish immigrants were welcomed by the existing Scottish and English population, giving the Orange Order significant and long-lasting influence over Toronto society.
For brief periods Toronto was twice the capital of the united Province of Canada : first from 1849 to 1852, following unrest in Montreal, and later 1856–1858, after which Quebec became the capital until 1866 (one year before Confederation ). Since then, the capital of Canada has remained Ottawa . [66] Toronto became the capital of the province of Ontario after its official creation in 1867, the seat of government located at the Ontario Legislature located at Queen's Park . Because of its provincial capital status, the city was also the location of Government House , the residence of the viceregal representative of the Crown in right of Ontario .
Long before the Royal Military College of Canada was established in 1876, there were proposals for military colleges in Canada. Staffed by British Regulars, adult male students underwent a three-month long military course at the School of Military Instruction in Toronto. Established by Militia General Order in 1864, the school enabled officers of militia or candidates for commission or promotion in the Militia to learn military duties, drill and discipline, to command a company at Battalion Drill, to drill a company at Company Drill, the internal economy of a company, and the duties of a company's officer. [67] The school was retained at Confederation, in 1867. In 1868, Schools of cavalry and artillery instruction were formed in Toronto. [68]
In the 19th century, an extensive sewage system was built, and streets became illuminated with gas lighting as a regular service. Long-distance railway lines were constructed, including a route completed in 1854 linking Toronto with the Upper Great Lakes. The Grand Trunk Railway and the Northern Railway of Canada joined in the building of the first Union Station in downtown. The advent of the railway dramatically increased the numbers of immigrants arriving, commerce and industry, as had the Lake Ontario steamers and schooners entering port before. These enabled Toronto to become a major gateway linking the world to the interior of the North American continent.
Toronto became the largest alcohol distillation (in particular, spirits ) centre in North America; the Gooderham and Worts Distillery operations became the world's largest whiskey factory by the 1860s. A preserved section of this once dominant local industry remains in the Distillery District . The harbour allowed for sure access to grain and sugar imports used in processing. Expanding port and rail facilities brought in northern timber for export and imported Pennsylvania coal. Industry dominated the waterfront for the next 100 years.
Horse-drawn streetcars gave way to electric streetcars in 1891, when the city granted the operation of the transit franchise to the Toronto Railway Company . The public transit system passed into public ownership in 1921 as the Toronto Transportation Commission , later renamed the Toronto Transit Commission . The system now has the third-highest ridership of any city public transportation system in North America. [69]
The Great Toronto Fire of 1904 destroyed a large section of downtown Toronto, but the city was quickly rebuilt. The fire caused more than $10 million in damage, and resulted in more stringent fire safety laws and expansion of the city's fire department.
The city received new immigrant groups beginning in the late 19th century into the early 20th century, particularly Germans, French, Italians, and Jews from various parts of Eastern Europe. They were soon followed by Chinese, Russians, Poles, and immigrants from other Eastern European nations. As the Irish before them, many of these new migrants lived in overcrowded shanty-type slums, such as " the Ward " which was centred on Bay Street , now the heart of the country's financial district. Despite its fast-paced growth, by the 1920s, Toronto's population and economic importance in Canada remained second to the much longer established Montreal . However, by 1934, the Toronto Stock Exchange had become the largest in the country.

Since 1945
Following the Second World War, refugees from war-torn Europe and Chinese job-seekers arrived, as well as construction labourers, particularly from Italy and Portugal. Following the elimination of racially based immigration policies by the late 1960s, immigration began from all parts of the world. Toronto's population grew to more than one million in 1951 when large-scale suburbanization began, and doubled to two million by 1971. By the 1980s, Toronto had surpassed Montreal as Canada's most populous city and the chief economic hub. During this time, in part owing to the political uncertainty raised by the resurgence of the Quebec sovereignty movement , many national and multinational corporations moved their head offices from Montreal to Toronto and Western Canadian cities. [70]
In 1954, the City of Toronto and 12 surrounding municipalities were federated into a regional government known as Metropolitan Toronto . [71] The postwar boom had resulted in rapid suburban development and it was believed that a coordinated land use strategy and shared services would provide greater efficiency for the region. The metropolitan government began to manage services that crossed municipal boundaries, including highways, police services, water and public transit . In that year, a half-century after the Great Fire of 1904, disaster struck the city again when Hurricane Hazel brought intense winds and flash flooding. In the Toronto area, 81 people were killed, nearly 1,900 families were left homeless, and the hurricane caused more than $25 million in damage. [72]
In 1967, the seven smallest municipalities of Metropolitan Toronto were merged into their larger neighbours, resulting in a six-municipality configuration that included the old City of Toronto and the surrounding municipalities of East York , Etobicoke , North York , Scarborough , and York . In 1998, the Conservative provincial government led by Mike Harris dissolved the metropolitan government despite vigorous opposition from the component municipalities and overwhelming rejection in a municipal plebiscite. All six municipalities were amalgamated into a single municipality, creating the current City of Toronto, successor of the old City of Toronto. North York mayor Mel Lastman became the first "megacity" mayor and the 62nd Mayor of Toronto . John Tory is the current mayor.
On March 6, 2009, the city celebrated the 175th anniversary of its inception as the City of Toronto in 1834. Toronto hosted the 4th G20 summit during June 26–27, 2010. This included the largest security operation in Canadian history and, following large-scale protests and rioting, resulted in the largest mass arrest (more than a thousand people) in Canadian history. [73]
On July 8, 2013, severe flash flooding hit Toronto after an afternoon of slow moving, intense thunderstorms. Toronto Hydro estimated that 450,000 people were without power after the storm and Toronto Pearson International Airport reported that 126 mm (5 in) of rain had fallen over five hours, more than during Hurricane Hazel. [74] Within six months, December 20, 2013, Toronto was brought to a halt by the worst ice storm in the city's history rivaling the severity of the 1998 Ice Storm . Toronto went on to host WorldPride in June 2014 [75] and the Pan American Games in 2015 . [76]

Geography
Toronto covers an area of 630 square kilometres (243 sq mi), [77] with a maximum north-south distance of 21 kilometres (13 mi) and a maximum east-west distance of 43 km (27 mi). It has a 46-kilometre (29 mi) long waterfront shoreline, on the northwestern shore of Lake Ontario. The Toronto Islands and Port Lands extend out into the lake, allowing for a somewhat sheltered Toronto Harbour south of the downtown core. [78] The city's borders are formed by Lake Ontario to the south, Etobicoke Creek and Highway 427 to the west, Steeles Avenue to the north and the Rouge River and the Scarborough-Pickering Townline to the east.

Topography
The city is mostly flat or gentle hills and the land gently slopes upward away from the lake. The flat land is interrupted by numerous ravines cut by numerous creeks and the valleys of the three rivers in Toronto: the Humber River in the west end and the Don River east of downtown at opposite ends of the Toronto Harbour , and the Rouge River at the city's eastern limits. Most of the ravines and valley lands in Toronto today are park lands, and recreational trails are laid out along the ravines and valleys. The original town was laid out in a grid plan on the flat plain north of the harbour, and this plan was extended outwards as the city grew. The width and depth of several of the ravines and valleys are such that several grid streets such as Finch Avenue , Leslie Street , Lawrence Avenue , and St. Clair Avenue , terminate on one side of a ravine or valley and continue on the other side. Toronto has many bridges spanning the ravines. Large bridges such as the Prince Edward Viaduct were built to span wide river valleys.
Despite its deep ravines, Toronto is not remarkably hilly, but its elevation does increase steadily away from the lake. Elevation differences range from 75 metres (246 ft) above sea level at the Lake Ontario shore to 209 m (686 ft) ASL near the York University grounds in the city's north end at the intersection of Keele Street and Steeles Avenue . [79] There are occasional hilly areas; in particular, midtown Toronto has a number of sharply sloping hills. Lake Ontario remains occasionally visible from the peaks of these ridges as far north as Eglinton Avenue , 7 to 8 kilometres (4.3 to 5.0 mi) inland.
The other major geographical feature of Toronto is its escarpments. During the last ice age , the lower part of Toronto was beneath Glacial Lake Iroquois . Today, a series of escarpments mark the lake's former boundary, known as the "Iroquois Shoreline". The escarpments are most prominent from Victoria Park Avenue to the mouth of Highland Creek where they form the Scarborough Bluffs . Other observable sections include the area near St. Clair Avenue West between Bathurst Street and the Don River, and north of Davenport Road from Caledonia to Spadina Road ; the Casa Loma grounds sit above this escarpment.
The geography of the lake shore is greatly changed since the first settlement of Toronto. Much of the land on the north shore of the harbour is landfill, filled in during the late 19th century. Until then, the lakefront docks (then known as wharves) were set back farther inland than today. Much of the adjacent Port Lands on the east side of the harbour was a wetland filled in early in the 20th century. The shoreline from the harbour west to the Humber River has been extended into the lake. Further west, landfill has created extensions of land such as Humber Bay Park.
The Toronto Islands were a natural peninsula until a storm in 1858 severed their connection to the mainland, creating a channel to the harbour. The peninsula was formed by longshore drift taking the sediments deposited along the Scarborough Bluffs shore and transporting them to the Islands area. The other source of sediment for the Port Lands wetland and the peninsula was the deposition of the Don River, which carved a wide valley through the sedimentary land of Toronto and deposited it in the harbour, which is quite shallow. The harbour and the channel of the Don River have been dredged numerous times for shipping. The lower section of the Don River was straightened and channelled in the 19th century. The former mouth drained into a wetland; today the Don drains into the harbour through a concrete waterway, the Keating Channel.

Climate
The city of Toronto has a humid continental climate ( Köppen : Dfa), with warm, humid summers and cold winters. [80] The city experiences four distinct seasons, with considerable variance in length. [81] Some parts of the north and east of the city such as Scarborough and the suburbs, have a climate classified as humid continental climate ( Köppen : Dfb). As a result of the rapid passage of weather systems (such as high- and low-pressure systems), the weather is variable from day to day in all seasons. [81] Owing to urbanization and its proximity to water, Toronto has a fairly low diurnal temperature range . The denser urban scape makes for warmer nights year around; the average nighttime temperature is about 3.0 °C (5.40 °F) warmer in the city than in rural areas in all months. [82] However, it can be noticeably cooler on many spring and early summer afternoons under the influence of a lake breeze since Lake Ontario is cool, relative to the air during these seasons. [82] These lake breezes mostly occur in summer, bringing relief on hot days. [82] Other low-scale maritime effects on the climate include lake-effect snow , fog, and delaying of spring- and fall-like conditions, known as seasonal lag . [82]
Winters are cold with frequent snow. [83] During the winter months, temperatures are usually below 0 °C (32 °F). [83] Toronto winters sometimes feature cold snaps when maximum temperatures remain below −10 °C (14 °F), often made to feel colder by wind chill . Occasionally, they can drop below −25 °C (−13 °F). [83] Snowstorms, sometimes mixed with ice and rain, can disrupt work and travel schedules, while accumulating snow can fall anytime from November until mid-April. However, mild stretches also occur in most winters, melting accumulated snow. The summer months are characterized by very warm temperatures. [83] Daytime temperatures are usually above 20 °C (68 °F), and often rise above 30 °C (86 °F). [83] However, they can occasionally surpass 35 °C (95 °F) accompanied by high humidity. Spring and autumn are transitional seasons with generally mild or cool temperatures with alternating dry and wet periods. [82] Daytime temperatures average around 10 to 12 °C (50 to 54 °F) during these seasons. [83]
Precipitation is fairly evenly distributed throughout the year, but summer is usually the wettest season, the bulk falling during thunderstorms. There can be periods of dry weather, but drought -like conditions are rare. [ citation needed ] The average yearly precipitation is about 831 mm (32.7 in), with an average annual snowfall of about 122 cm (48 in). [84] Toronto experiences an average of 2,066 sunshine hours, or 45% of daylight hours, varying between a low of 28% in December to 60% in July. [84]
According to the classification applied by Natural Resources Canada , Toronto is located in plant hardiness zone 7a. [85]

Cityscape

Architecture
Lawrence Richards, a member of the Faculty of Architecture at the University of Toronto , has said: "Toronto is a new, brash, rag-tag place—a big mix of periods and styles." [92] Toronto's buildings vary in design and age with many structures dating back to the mid-19th-century, while other prominent buildings were just newly built in the first decade of the 21st century. Bay-and-gable houses, mainly found in Old Toronto, are a distinct architectural feature of the city. Defining the Toronto skyline is the CN Tower , a telecommunications and tourism hub. Completed in 1976 at a height of 553.33 metres (1,815 ft 5 in), it was the world's tallest [93] freestanding structure until 2007 when it was surpassed by Burj Khalifa . [94]
Toronto is a city of high-rises, having 1,800 buildings over 30 metres (98 ft). [95]
Through the 1960s and 1970s, significant pieces of Toronto's architectural heritage were demolished to make way for redevelopment or parking. In contrast, since the 2000s, Toronto has experienced a period of architectural revival, with several buildings by world-renowned architects having opened during the late 2000s. Daniel Libeskind 's Royal Ontario Museum addition, Frank Gehry 's remake of the Art Gallery of Ontario , and Will Alsop 's distinctive Ontario College of Art & Design expansion are among the city's new showpieces. [96] The historic Distillery District , located on the eastern edge of downtown has been redeveloped into a pedestrian-oriented arts, culture and entertainment neighbourhood. [97]

Neighbourhoods
Toronto encompasses a geographical area formerly administered by many separate municipalities. These municipalities have each developed a distinct history and identity over the years, and their names remain in common use among Torontonians. Former municipalities include East York, Etobicoke, Forest Hill, Mimico, North York, Parkdale, Scarborough, Swansea, Weston and York. Throughout the city there exist hundreds of small neighbourhoods and some larger neighbourhoods covering a few square kilometres.
The many residential communities of Toronto express a character distinct from that of the skyscrapers in the commercial core. Victorian and Edwardian-era residential buildings can be found in enclaves such as Rosedale , Cabbagetown , The Annex , and Yorkville . The Wychwood Park neighbourhood, historically significant for the architecture of its homes, and for being one of Toronto's earliest planned communities, was designated as an Ontario Heritage Conservation district in 1985. [98] The Casa Loma neighbourhood is named after Casa Loma , a castle built in 1911 by Sir Henry Pellat, complete with gardens, turrets, stables, an elevator, secret passages, and a bowling alley. [99] Spadina House is a 19th-century manor that is now a museum. [100]

Old Toronto
The pre-amalgamation City of Toronto covers the area generally known as downtown , but also older neighbourhoods to the east, west, and north of downtown. It includes the core of Toronto and remains the most densely populated part of the city. The Financial District contains the First Canadian Place , Toronto-Dominion Centre , Scotia Plaza , Royal Bank Plaza , Commerce Court and Brookfield Place . This area includes, among others, the neighbourhoods of St. James Town , Garden District , St. Lawrence , Corktown , and Church and Wellesley . From that point, the Toronto skyline extends northward along Yonge Street.
Old Toronto is also home to many historically wealthy residential enclaves, such as Yorkville , Rosedale , The Annex , Forest Hill , Lawrence Park , Lytton Park , Deer Park , Moore Park , and Casa Loma , most stretching away from downtown to the north. East and west of Downtown, neighbourhoods such as Kensington Market , Chinatown , Leslieville , Cabbagetown and Riverdale are home to bustling commercial and cultural areas as well as communities of artists with studio lofts, with many middle- and upper-class professionals. Other neighbourhoods in the central city retain an ethnic identity, including two smaller Chinatowns, the Greektown area, Little Italy , Portugal Village , and Little India , along with others.

Suburbs
The inner suburbs are contained within the former municipalities of York and East York . These are mature and traditionally working-class areas, consisting primarily of post–World War I small, single-family homes and small apartment blocks. Neighbourhoods such as Crescent Town , Thorncliffe Park , Weston , and Oakwood–Vaughan consist mainly of high-rise apartments, which are home to many new immigrant families. During the 2000s, many neighbourhoods have become ethnically diverse and have undergone gentrification as a result of increasing population, and a housing boom during the late 1990s and first two decades of the 21st century. The first neighbourhoods affected were Leaside and North Toronto , gradually progressing into the western neighbourhoods in York. Some of the area's housing is in the process of being replaced or remodelled.
The outer suburbs comprising the former municipalities of Etobicoke (west), Scarborough (east) and North York (north) largely retain the grid plan laid before post-war development. Sections were long established and quickly growing towns before the suburban housing boom began and the emergence of metropolitan government, existing towns or villages such as Mimico , Islington and New Toronto in Etobicoke; Willowdale , Newtonbrook and Downsview in North York; Agincourt , Wexford and West Hill in Scarborough where suburban development boomed around or between these and other towns beginning in the late 1940s. Upscale neighbourhoods were built such as the Bridle Path in North York, the area surrounding the Scarborough Bluffs in Guildwood , and most of central Etobicoke, such as Humber Valley Village , and The Kingsway . One of largest and earliest "planned communities" was Don Mills , parts of which were first built in the 1950s. [101] Phased development, mixing single-detached housing with higher-density apartment blocks, became more popular as a suburban model of development. Over the late 20th century and early 21st century, North York City Centre , Etobicoke City Centre and Scarborough City Centre have emerged as secondary business districts outside Downtown Toronto. High-rise development in these areas has given the former municipalities distinguishable skylines of their own with high-density transit corridors serving them.

Industrial
In the 1800s, a thriving industrial area developed around Toronto Harbour and lower Don River mouth, linked by rail and water to Canada and the United States. Examples included the Gooderham and Worts Distillery , Canadian Malting Company, the Toronto Rolling Mills, the Union Stockyards and the Davies pork processing facility (the inspiration for the "Hogtown" nickname). This industrial area expanded west along the harbour and rail lines and was supplemented by the infilling of the marshlands on the east side of the harbour to create the Port Lands . A garment industry developed along lower Spadina Avenue, the " Fashion District ". Beginning in the late 19th century, industrial areas were set up on the outskirts, such as West Toronto/The Junction , where the Stockyards relocated in 1903. The Great Fire of 1904 destroyed a large amount of industry in the downtown. Some of the companies moved west along King Street, some as far west as Dufferin Street; where the large Massey-Harris farm equipment manufacturing complex was located. Over time, pockets of industrial land mostly followed rail lines and later highway corridors as the city grew outwards. This trend continues to this day, the largest factories and distribution warehouses are located in the suburban environs of Peel and York Regions; but also within the current city: Etobicoke (concentrated around Pearson Airport ), North York, and Scarborough.
Many of Toronto's former industrial sites close to (or in) Downtown have been redeveloped including parts of the Toronto waterfront , the rail yards west of downtown, and Liberty Village , the Massey-Harris district and large-scale development is underway in the West Don Lands . The Gooderham & Worts Distillery produced spirits until 1990, and is preserved today as the " Distillery District ," the largest and best-preserved collection of Victorian industrial architecture in North America. The District is a national heritage site; it was listed by National Geographic magazine as a "top pick" in Canada for travellers. Some industry remains in the area, including the Redpath Sugar Refinery . Similar areas that still retain their post-industrial character, but are now largely residential are the Fashion District, Corktown , and parts of South Riverdale and Leslieville . Toronto still has some active older industrial areas, such as Brockton Village , Mimico and New Toronto . In the west end of Old Toronto and York, the Weston / Mount Dennis and The Junction areas still contain factories, meat-packing facilities and railyards close to medium-density residential, although the Union Stockyards moved out in the late 20th Century.
The "brownfield" industrial area of the Port Lands , on the east side of the harbour, is one area planned for redevelopment. [102] Formerly a marsh that was filled in to create industrial space, it was never intensely developed, its land unsuitable for large-scale development, because of flooding and unstable soil. [103] It still contains numerous industrial uses, such as the Portlands Energy Centre power plant, some port facilities, some movie and TV production studios, a concrete processing facility and various low-density industrial facilities. The Waterfront Toronto agency has developed plans for a naturalized mouth to the Don River and to create a flood barrier around the Don, making more of the land on the harbour suitable for higher-value residential and commercial development. [104] A former chemicals plant site along the Don River is slated to become a large commercial complex and transportation hub.

Public spaces
Toronto has a diverse array of public spaces, from city squares to public parks overlooking ravines . Nathan Phillips Square is the city's main square in downtown, and forms the entrance to City Hall . Yonge-Dundas Square , near City Hall, has also gained attention in recent years as one of the busiest gathering spots in the city. Other squares include Harbourfront Square , on the Toronto waterfront , and the civic squares at the former city halls of the defunct Metropolitan Toronto, most notably Mel Lastman Square in North York. The Toronto Public Space Committee is an advocacy group concerned with the city's public spaces. In recent years, Nathan Phillips Square has been refurbished with new facilities, and the central waterfront along Queen's Quay West has been updated recently with a new street architecture and a new square next to Harbourfront Centre.
There are many large downtown parks, which include Allan Gardens , Christie Pits , Grange Park , Little Norway Park , Moss Park , Queen's Park , Riverdale Park and Trinity Bellwoods Park . An almost hidden park is the compact Cloud Gardens , [105] which has both open areas and a glassed-in greenhouse, near Queen and Yonge. South of downtown are two large parks on the waterfront: Tommy Thompson Park on the Leslie Street Spit , which has a nature preserve, is open on weekends; and the Toronto Islands , accessible from downtown by ferry. Large parks in the outer areas include High Park , Humber Bay Park , Centennial Park , Downsview Park , Guild Park and Gardens , Morningside Park and Rouge Park . Toronto also operates several public golf courses. Most ravine lands and river bank floodplains in Toronto are public parklands. After Hurricane Hazel in 1954, construction of buildings on floodplains was outlawed, and private lands were bought for conservation. In 1999, Downsview Park, a former military base in North York, initiated an international design competition to realize its vision of creating Canada's first national urban park . The winner, "Tree City", was announced in May 2000. Approximately 8,000 hectares (20,000 acres), or 12.5% of Toronto's land base is maintained parkland. [106] Toronto's largest park is Morningside Park, which is 241.46 hectares (596.7 acres) in size. [106]
In the winter, Nathan Phillips Square, Harbourfront Centre, and Mel Lastman Square feature popular rinks for public ice-skating. Etobicoke's Colonel Sam Smith Trail opened in 2011 and is Toronto's first skating trail. Centennial Park and Earl Bales Park offer outdoor skiing and snowboarding slopes with a chairlift , rental facilities, and lessons. Several parks have marked cross-country skiing trails.

Culture
Toronto theatre and performing arts scene has more than fifty ballet and dance companies, six opera companies, two symphony orchestras and a host of theatres. The city is home to the National Ballet of Canada , the Canadian Opera Company , the Toronto Symphony Orchestra , the Canadian Electronic Ensemble , and the Canadian Stage Company . Notable performance venues include the Four Seasons Centre for the Performing Arts , Roy Thomson Hall , the Princess of Wales Theatre , the Royal Alexandra Theatre , Massey Hall , the Toronto Centre for the Arts , the Elgin and Winter Garden Theatres and the Sony Centre for the Performing Arts (originally the "O'Keefe Centre" and formerly the "Hummingbird Centre").
Ontario Place features the world's first permanent IMAX movie theatre, the Cinesphere , [107] as well as the Budweiser Stage , an open-air venue for music concerts. In spring 2012, Ontario Place closed after a decline in attendance over the years. Although the Molson Amphitheatre and harbour still operate, the park and Cinesphere are no longer in use. There are plans to revitalise Ontario Place. [108]
Each summer, the Canadian Stage Company presents an outdoor Shakespeare production in Toronto's High Park called "Dream in High Park". Canada's Walk of Fame acknowledges the achievements of successful Canadians, with a series of stars on designated blocks of sidewalks along King Street and Simcoe Street .
The production of domestic and foreign film and television is a major local industry. Toronto as of 2011 [update] ranks as the third largest production centre for film and television after Los Angeles and New York City , [109] sharing the nickname " Hollywood North " with Vancouver. [110] [111] [112] The Toronto International Film Festival is an annual event celebrating the international film industry. Another prestigious film festival is the Toronto Student Film Festival , that screens the works of students ages 12–18 from many different countries across the globe.
Toronto's Scotiabank Caribbean Carnival (also known as Caribana) takes place from mid-July to early August of every summer. [113] Primarily based on the Trinidad and Tobago Carnival , the first Caribana took place in 1967 when the city's Caribbean community celebrated Canada's Centennial . More than forty years later, it has grown to attract one million people to Toronto's Lake Shore Boulevard annually. Tourism for the festival is in the hundred thousands, and each year, the event generates over $400 million in revenue into Ontario's economy. [114]
One of the largest events in the city, Pride Week takes place in late June, and is one of the largest LGBT festivals in the world.

Tourism
The Royal Ontario Museum (ROM) is a museum of world culture and natural history . The Toronto Zoo , [116] [117] is home to over 5,000 animals representing over 460 distinct species. The Art Gallery of Ontario contains a large collection of Canadian, European, African and contemporary artwork , and also plays host to exhibits from museums and galleries all over the world. The Gardiner Museum of ceramic art is the only museum in Canada entirely devoted to ceramics, and the Museum's collection contains more than 2,900 ceramic works from Asia, the Americas, and Europe. The city also hosts the Ontario Science Centre , the Bata Shoe Museum , and Textile Museum of Canada . Other prominent art galleries and museums include the Design Exchange , the Museum of Inuit Art , the TIFF Bell Lightbox , the Museum of Contemporary Canadian Art , the Institute for Contemporary Culture , the Toronto Sculpture Garden , the CBC Museum , the Redpath Sugar Museum , the University of Toronto Art Centre , Hart House , the TD Gallery of Inuit Art and the Aga Khan Museum . The city also runs its own museums, which include the Spadina House .
The Don Valley Brick Works is a former industrial site that opened in 1889, and was partly restored as a park and heritage site in 1996, with further restoration and reuse being completed in stages since then. The Canadian National Exhibition ("The Ex") is held annually at Exhibition Place , and it is the oldest annual fair in the world. The Ex has an average attendance of 1.25 million. [118]
City shopping areas include the Yorkville neighbourhood, Queen West , Harbourfront , the Entertainment District , the Financial District , and the St. Lawrence Market neighbourhood. The Eaton Centre is Toronto's most popular tourist attraction with over 52 million visitors annually. [119]
Greektown on the Danforth is home to the annual " Taste of the Danforth " festival which attracts over one million people in 2½ days. [120] Toronto is also home to Casa Loma , the former estate of Sir Henry Pellatt , a prominent Toronto financier, industrialist and military man. Other notable neighbourhoods and attractions include The Beaches , the Toronto Islands , Kensington Market , Fort York , and the Hockey Hall of Fame .

Sports
Toronto is represented in six major league sports , with teams in the National Hockey League , Major League Baseball , National Basketball Association , Canadian Football League , Major League Soccer and Canadian Women's Hockey League . It was formerly represented in a seventh, the USL W-League , until that announced on November 6, 2015 that it would cease operation ahead of 2016 season. [121] [122] The city's major sports venues include the Air Canada Centre , Rogers Centre (formerly SkyDome), Ricoh Coliseum , and BMO Field .

Professional sports
Toronto is home to the Toronto Maple Leafs , one of the National Hockey League 's Original Six clubs, and has also served as home to the Hockey Hall of Fame since 1958. The city had a rich history of ice hockey championships. Along with the Maple Leafs' 13 Stanley Cup titles, the Toronto Marlboros and St. Michael's College School -based Ontario Hockey League teams, combined, have won a record 12 Memorial Cup titles. The Toronto Marlies of the American Hockey League also play in Toronto at Ricoh Coliseum and are the farm team for the Maple Leafs.
The city is home to the Toronto Blue Jays professional baseball team of the Major League Baseball (MLB). The team has won two World Series titles ( 1992 , 1993 ). The Blue Jays play their home games at the Rogers Centre , in the downtown core. Toronto has a long history of minor-league professional baseball dating back to the 1800s, culminating in the baseball Maple Leafs, whose owner first proposed a MLB team for Toronto.
The Toronto Raptors entered the National Basketball Association in 1995, and have since earned seven playoff spots and three Atlantic Division titles in 20 seasons. The Raptors are the only NBA team with their own television channel, NBA TV Canada . They and the Maple Leafs play their home games at the Air Canada Centre . In 2016, Toronto hosted the 65th NBA All-Star game, the first to be held outside the United States. [123]
The city is represented in the Canadian Football League by the Toronto Argonauts , who have won 16 Grey Cup titles. Toronto played host to the 95th Grey Cup in 2007, the first held in the city since 1992. Later in 2012, while hosting and participating in the 100th Grey Cup, they won the game to the delight of the home fans.
Toronto is represented in Major League Soccer by the Toronto FC , who have won four Canadian Championship titles. They share BMO Field with the Toronto Argonauts. Toronto has a high level of participation in soccer across the city at several smaller stadiums and fields. Toronto FC entered the league as an expansion team.
The Toronto Wolfpack became Canada's first professional rugby league team and the world's first transatlantic professional sports team when they began play in the Rugby Football League 's League One competition in 2017. [124]
The Toronto Rock are the city's National Lacrosse League team. They won five Champion's Cup titles in seven years in the late 1990s and early first decade of the 21st century, appearing in an NLL record five straight championship games from 1999 to 2003, and are currently first all-time in the number of Champion's Cups won. The Rock share the Air Canada Centre with the Maple Leafs and the Raptors.
Toronto has hosted several National Football League exhibition games at the Rogers Centre . Ted Rogers leased the Buffalo Bills from Ralph Wilson for the purposes of having the Bills play eight home games in the city between 2008 and 2013. Toronto was home to the International Bowl , an NCAA sanctioned post-season football game that pitted a Mid-American Conference team against a Big East Conference team. From 2007 to 2010, the game was played at Rogers Centre annually in January.
Toronto is home to the Toronto Rush , a semi-professional ultimate team that competes in the American Ultimate Disc League (AUDL). [125] [126] Ultimate (disc) , in Canada, has its beginning roots in Toronto, with 3300 players competing annually in the Toronto Ultimate Club (League). [127]

Tournaments, events and amateur sports
Toronto, along with Montreal , hosts an annual tennis tournament called the Canadian Open (not to be confused with the identically named golf tournament ) between the months of July and August. In odd-numbered years, the men's tournament is held in Montreal, while the women's tournament is held in Toronto, and vice versa in even-numbered years.
The city hosts the annual Honda Indy Toronto car race, part of the IndyCar Series schedule, held on a street circuit at Exhibition Place . It was known previously as the Champ Car 's Molson Indy Toronto from 1986 to 2007. Both thoroughbred and standardbred horse racing events are conducted at Woodbine Racetrack in Rexdale .
Toronto hosted the 2015 Pan American Games in July 2015, and the 2015 Parapan American Games in August 2015. It beat the cities of Lima , Peru and Bogotá , Colombia, to win the rights to stage the games. [128] The games were the largest multi-sport event ever to be held in Canada (in terms of athletes competing), double the size of the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver . [129]
Toronto was a candidate city for the 1996 and 2008 Summer Olympics , which were awarded to Atlanta and Beijing respectively. [130]
Historic sports clubs of Toronto include the Granite Club (established in 1836), the Royal Canadian Yacht Club (established in 1852), the Toronto Cricket Skating and Curling Club (established before 1827), the Argonaut Rowing Club (established in 1872), the Toronto Lawn Tennis Club (established in 1881), and the Badminton and Racquet Club (established in 1924).

Media
Toronto is Canada's largest media market, [131] and has four conventional dailies, two alt-weeklies , and three free commuter papers in a greater metropolitan area of about 6 million inhabitants. The Toronto Star and the Toronto Sun are the prominent daily city newspapers, while national dailies The Globe and Mail and the National Post are also headquartered in the city. The Toronto Star , The Globe and Mail , and National Post are broadsheet newspapers. Metro and 24 Hours are distributed as free commuter newspapers. Several magazines and local newspapers cover Toronto, including Now and Toronto Life , while numerous magazines are produced in Toronto, such as Canadian Business , Chatelaine , Flare and Maclean's .
Toronto contains the headquarters of the major English-language Canadian television networks CBC , CTV , City , Global , The Sports Network (TSN) and Sportsnet . Much (formerly MuchMusic) , M3 (formerly MuchMore) and MTV Canada are the main music television channels based in the city, though they no longer primarily show music videos as a result of channel drift .

Economy
Toronto is an international centre for business and finance. Generally considered the financial capital of Canada, Toronto has a high concentration of banks and brokerage firms on Bay Street , in the Financial District . The Toronto Stock Exchange is the world's seventh-largest stock exchange by market capitalization. [132] The five largest financial institutions of Canada, collectively known as the Big Five , have national offices in Toronto. [50]
The city is an important centre for the media, publishing, telecommunication, information technology and film production industries; it is home to Bell Media , Rogers Communications , and Torstar . Other prominent Canadian corporations in the Greater Toronto Area include Magna International , Celestica , Manulife , Sun Life Financial , the Hudson's Bay Company , and major hotel companies and operators, such as Four Seasons Hotels and Fairmont Hotels and Resorts .
Although much of the region's manufacturing activities take place outside the city limits, Toronto continues to be a wholesale and distribution point for the industrial sector. The city's strategic position along the Quebec City–Windsor Corridor and its road and rail connections help support the nearby production of motor vehicles, iron, steel, food, machinery, chemicals and paper. The completion of the Saint Lawrence Seaway in 1959 gave ships access to the Great Lakes from the Atlantic Ocean.
Toronto's unemployment rate was 6.7% as of July 2016. [133] According to the website Nimbeo Toronto's cost of living index ranked it tenth in Canada in 2016. [134]

Demographics
The city's population grew by 4% (96,073 residents) between 1996 and 2001, 1% (21,787 residents) between 2001 and 2006, and 4.3% (111,779 residents) between 2006 and 2011. Persons aged 14 years and under made up 17.5% of the population, and those aged 65 years and over made up 13.6%. The median age was 36.9 years. Foreign-born people made up 49.9% of the population. [136] The city's gender population is 48% male and 52% female. [137] Women outnumber men in all age groups over 20. [138] In 2011, 49.1% of the residents of the city proper belonged to a visible minority group, [34] and visible minorities are projected to comprise a majority in the Toronto CMA by 2017. [139] In 1981, Toronto's visible minority population was 13.6%. [140]
According to the United Nations Development Programme , Toronto has the second-highest percentage of constant foreign-born population among world cities, after Miami, Florida . While Miami's foreign-born population has traditionally consisted primarily of Cubans and other Latin Americans, no single nationality or culture dominates Toronto's immigrant population, placing it among the most diverse cities in the world. [136] Visible minorities are projected to increase to 63% of the city's population by 2031. [141] Over 100,000 immigrants arrive in the Greater Toronto Area annually. [142]
In the 2011 Canadian census , the most common ethnic origins in the city of Toronto were as follows:
Toronto has a racially diverse population. In 2011 its population defined itself thus: [34]
This diversity is reflected in Toronto's ethnic neighbourhoods, which include Chinatown , Corso Italia , Greektown , Kensington Market (alternative/counterculture), Koreatown , Little India , Little Italy , Little Jamaica , Little Portugal and Roncesvalles (Polish community). [144]
In 2011, the most commonly reported religion in Toronto was Christianity , adhered to by 54.1% of the population. A plurality, 28.2%, of the city's population was Catholic , followed by Protestants (11.9%), Christian Orthodox (4.3%), and members of other Christian denominations (9.7%). With the city's significant number of Methodist Christians, Toronto was historically referred to as the Methodist Rome .
Other religions significantly practised in the city are Islam (8.2%), Hinduism (5.6%), Judaism (3.8%), Buddhism (2.7%), and Sikhism (0.8%). Those with no religious affiliation made up 24.2% of Toronto's population. [34]
While English is the predominant language spoken by Torontonians, many other languages have considerable numbers of local speakers. [145] The varieties of Chinese and Italian are the second and third most widely spoken languages at work. [146] [147] Despite Canada's official bilingualism , while 9.7% of Ontario's Francophones live in Toronto, only 0.6% of the population reported French as a singular language spoken most often at home; meanwhile 64% reported speaking predominantly English only and 28.3% primarily used a non-official language; 7.1% reported commonly speaking multiple languages at home. [148] [149] The city's 9-1-1 emergency services are equipped to respond in over 150 languages. [150]

Government
Toronto is a single-tier municipality governed by a mayor–council system . The structure of the municipal government is stipulated by the City of Toronto Act . The Mayor of Toronto is elected by direct popular vote to serve as the chief executive of the city. The Toronto City Council is a unicameral legislative body, comprising 44 councillors representing geographical wards throughout the city. [151] The mayor and members of the city council serve four-year terms without term limits . (Until the 2006 municipal election , the mayor and city councillors served three-year terms.) However, on November 18, 2013, council voted to modify the city's government by transferring many executive powers from the mayor to the deputy mayor, and itself. [152]
As of 2016, the city council has twelve standing committees, each consisting of a Chairman, (some have a vice-chair), and a number of councillors. [153] The Mayor names the committee chairs and the remaining membership of the committees is appointed by City Council. An executive committee is formed by the chairs of each of standing committee, along with the mayor, the deputy mayor and four other councillors. Councillors are also appointed to oversee the Toronto Transit Commission and the Toronto Police Services Board .
The city has four community councils that consider local matters. City Council has delegated final decision-making authority on local, routine matters, while others—like planning and zoning issues—are recommended to the city council. Each city councillor serves as a member on a community council. [153]
There are about 40 subcommittees and advisory committees appointed by the city council. These bodies are made up of city councillors and private citizen volunteers. Examples include the Pedestrian Committee, Waste Diversion Task Force 2010, and the Task Force to Bring Back the Don . [154]
Toronto had an operating budget of C$ 7.6 billion in 2006. [155] The city receives funding from the Government of Ontario in addition to tax revenues and user fees, spending 36% on provincially mandated programmes, 53% on major municipal purposes such as the Toronto Public Library and the Toronto Zoo , and 11% on capital financing and non-programme expenditures. [156]

Crime
The low crime rate in Toronto has resulted in the city having a reputation as one of the safest major cities in North America. [157] [158] [159] For instance, in 2007, the homicide rate for Toronto was 3.3 per 100,000 people, compared with Atlanta (19.7), Boston (10.3), Los Angeles (10.0), New York City (6.3), Vancouver (3.1), and Montreal (2.6). Toronto's robbery rate also ranks low, with 207.1 robberies per 100,000 people, compared with Los Angeles (348.5), Vancouver (266.2), New York City (265.9), and Montreal (235.3). [160] [161] [162] [163] [164] [165] Toronto has a comparable rate of car theft to various U.S. cities, although it is not among the highest in Canada. [157]
Toronto recorded its largest number of homicides in 1991 with 89, a rate of 3.9 per 100,000. [166] [167] In 2005, Toronto media coined the term "Year of the Gun", because of a record number of gun-related homicides, 52, out of 80 homicides in total. [159] [168] The total number of homicides dropped to 70 in 2006, that year, nearly 2,000 people in Toronto were victims of a violent gun-related crime, about one-quarter of the national total. [169] 84 homicides were committed in 2007, roughly half of which involved guns. Gang-related incidents have also been on the rise; between the years of 1997 and 2005, over 300 gang-related homicides have occurred. As a result, the Ontario government developed an anti-gun strategy. [170] In 2011, Toronto's murder rate plummeted to 45 murders—nearly a 26% drop from the previous year. The 45 homicides were the lowest number the city has recorded since 1986. [171] While subsequent years did see a return to higher rates, the nearly flat line of 56 homicides in 2012 and 57 in both 2013 and 2014 continued to be a significant improvement over the previous decade; and the year-to-date figure of 47 murders at November 23, 2015 continued that overall trend of improvement. [172]

Education
Toronto has a number of post-secondary academic institutions. The University of Toronto , established in 1827, is Canada's largest university and has two satellite campuses, one of which is located in the city's eastern district of Scarborough while the other is located in the neighbouring city of Mississauga . York University , Canada's third-largest university, founded in 1959, is located in the northwest part of the city. Toronto is also home to Ryerson University , OCAD University , and the University of Guelph-Humber .
There are four diploma- and degree-granting colleges in Toronto. These are Seneca College , Humber College , Centennial College and George Brown College . The city is also home to a satellite campus of the francophone Collège Boréal .
The Royal Conservatory of Music , which includes the Glenn Gould School , is a school of music located downtown. The Canadian Film Centre is a film, television and new media training institute founded by filmmaker Norman Jewison . Tyndale University College and Seminary is a Christian post-secondary institution and Canada's largest seminary.
The Toronto District School Board (TDSB) operates 588 public schools. Of these, 451 are elementary and 116 are secondary (high) schools. [173] Additionally, the Toronto Catholic District School Board manages the city's publicly funded Roman Catholic schools, while the Conseil scolaire de district du Centre-Sud-Ouest and the Conseil scolaire de district catholique Centre-Sud manage public and Roman Catholic French-language schools, respectively. There are also numerous private university-preparatory schools including the University of Toronto Schools , the Upper Canada College and Havergal College .
The Toronto Public Library [174] consists of 100 [175] branches with more than 11 million items in its collection. [176]

Infrastructure

Health and medicine
Toronto is home to 20 public hospitals, including: the Hospital for Sick Children , Mount Sinai Hospital , St. Michael's Hospital , North York General Hospital , Toronto General Hospital , Toronto Western Hospital , St. Joseph's Health Centre , Rouge Valley Health System , The Scarborough Hospital , Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre , Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH), and Princess Margaret Cancer Centre , as well as the University of Toronto Faculty of Medicine .
In 2007, Toronto was reported as having some of the longer average ER wait times in Ontario. Toronto hospitals at the time employed a system of triage to ensure life-threatening injuries receive rapid treatment. [177] After initial screening, initial assessments by physicians were completed within the waiting rooms themselves for greater efficiency, within a median of 1.2 hours. Tests, consultations, and initial treatments were also provided within waiting rooms. 50% of patients waited 4 hours before being transferred from the emergency room to another room. [177] The least-urgent 10% of cases wait over 12 hours. [177] The extended waiting-room times experienced by some patients were attributed to an overall shortage of acute care beds. [177]
Toronto's Discovery District [178] is a centre of research in biomedicine . It is located on a 2.5-square-kilometre (620-acre) research park that is integrated into Toronto's downtown core. It is also home to the Medical and Related Sciences Centre (MaRS) , [179] which was created in 2000 to capitalize on the research and innovation strength of the Province of Ontario. Another institute is the McLaughlin Centre for Molecular Medicine (MCMM). [180]
Toronto also has some specialized hospitals located outside of the downtown core. These hospitals include Baycrest for geriatric care and Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital for children with disabilities.
Toronto is also host to a wide variety of health-focused non-profit organizations that work to address specific illnesses for Toronto, Ontario and Canadian residents. Organizations include: The Crohn's and Colitis Foundation of Canada , the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada , the Canadian Cancer Society , the Alzheimer Society of Canada , Alzheimer Society of Ontario and Alzheimer Society of Toronto , all situated in the same office at Yonge and Eglinton , the Leukemia & Lymphoma Society of Canada , the Canadian Breast Cancer Foundation , the Canadian Foundation for AIDS Research , Cystic Fibrosis Canada , the Canadian Mental Health Association , the ALS Society of Canada , and many others. These organizations work to help people within the GTA, Ontario or Canada who are affected by these illnesses. As well, most engage in fundraising to promote research, services, and public awareness.

Transportation
Toronto is a central transportation hub for road, rail and air networks in Southern Ontario . There are many forms of transport in the city of Toronto, including highways and public transit . Toronto also has an extensive network of bicycle lanes and multi-use trails and paths.

Public transportation
Toronto's main public transportation system is operated by the Toronto Transit Commission (TTC). [69] The backbone of its public transport network is the Toronto subway system, which includes three heavy-rail rapid transit lines and a light metro line exclusively serving the eastern district of Scarborough . The TTC also operates an extensive network of buses and streetcars . There have been numerous plans to extend the subway and implement light-rail lines, but many efforts have been thwarted by budgetary concerns. Since July 2011, the only subway-related work is the Spadina subway (line 1) extension north of Downsview Station to Vaughan Metropolitan Centre. By November 2011, construction on Line 5 Eglinton began. Line 5 is scheduled to finish by 2021. [181] [182] In 2015, the Ontario government promised to fund the Finch West LRT (line 7) which is to be completed by 2021. [183]
Toronto's public transit network also connects to other municipal networks such as York Region Transit , Viva , Durham Region Transit , and MiWay .
The Government of Ontario also operates a commuter rail and bus transit system called GO Transit in the Greater Toronto Area. GO Transit carries over 250,000 passengers every weekday (2013) and 57 million annually, with a majority of them travelling to or from Union Station . [184] [185] GO Transit is implementing RER (Regional Express Rail) into its system. [186]

Airports
Canada's busiest airport, Toronto Pearson International Airport ( IATA : YYZ), straddles the city's western boundary with the suburban city of Mississauga . Limited commercial and passenger service is also offered from the Billy Bishop Toronto City Airport (IATA: YTZ) on the Toronto Islands , southwest of downtown. Toronto/Buttonville Municipal Airport (IATA: YKZ) in Markham provides general aviation facilities. Toronto/Downsview Airport (IATA: YZD), near the city's north end, is owned by de Havilland Canada and serves the Bombardier Aerospace aircraft factory.
The Union Pearson Express is a train service that provides a direct link between Pearson International and Union Station. It began carrying passengers in June 2015.

Road system
The grid of major city streets was laid out by a concession road system, in which major arterial roads are 6,600 ft (2.0 km) apart (with some exceptions, particularly in Scarborough and Etobicoke, as they were originally separate townships). Major east-west arterial roads are generally parallel with the Lake Ontario shoreline, and major north-south arterial roads are roughly perpendicular to the shoreline, though slightly angled north of Eglinton Avenue. This arrangement is sometimes broken by geographical accidents, most notably the Don River ravines.
Toronto's grid north is approximately 18.5° to the west of true north.
There are a number of municipal expressways and provincial highways that serve Toronto and the Greater Toronto Area. In particular, Highway 401 bisects the city from west to east, bypassing the downtown core. It is the busiest road in North America, [187] and one of the busiest highways in the world. [188] [189] The main municipal expressways in Toronto include the Gardiner Expressway , the Don Valley Parkway , and to some extent, Allen Road . The Greater Toronto Area suffers from chronic traffic congestion problems, and Toronto has the second worst traffic congestion in Canada after Vancouver . [190]

Notable people

International relations

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00004
Witch-hunt
A witch-hunt is a search for people labelled "witches" or evidence of witchcraft , often involving moral panic [1] or mass hysteria . [2] The classical period of witchhunts in Early Modern Europe and Colonial North America falls into the Early Modern period or about 1450 to 1750, spanning the upheavals of the Reformation and the Thirty Years' War , resulting in an estimated 35,000 to 100,000 executions. [3] [4] Including illegal and summary executions it is estimated 200,000 or more witches were tortured, burnt or hanged in the Western world from 1500 until around 1800. The last executions of people convicted as witches in Europe took place in the 18th century. In other regions, like Africa , Asia and Australia , contemporary witch-hunts have been reported from Sub-Saharan Africa and Papua New Guinea and official legislation against witchcraft is still found in Saudi Arabia and Cameroon today.

Anthropological causes
The wide distribution of the practice of witch-hunts in geographically and culturally separated societies (Europe, Africa, India, New Guinea) since the 1960s has triggered interest in the anthropological background of this behaviour. The belief in magic and divination , and attempts to use magic to influence personal well-being (to increase life, win love, etc.) are human cultural universals .
Belief in witchcraft has been shown to have similarities in societies throughout the world. It presents a framework to explain the occurrence of otherwise random misfortunes such as sickness or death, and the witch sorcerer provides an image of evil. [5] Reports on indigenous practices in the Americas, Asia and Africa collected during the early modern age of exploration have been taken to suggest that not just the belief in witchcraft but also the periodic outbreak of witch-hunts are a human cultural universal. [6]
One study finds that witchcraft beliefs are associated with antisocial attitudes: lower levels of trust, charitable giving and group participation. [7] Another study finds that income shocks (caused by extreme rainfall) lead to a large increase in the murder of "witches" in Tanzania. [8]

History

Ancient Near East
Punishment for malevolent sorcery is addressed in the earliest law codes preserved; both in ancient Egypt and in Babylonia it played a conspicuous part. The Code of Hammurabi (18th century BC short chronology ) prescribes that

Classical antiquity
In Classical Athens, no laws concerning magic survive. [11] However, cases concerning the harmful effects of pharmaka – an ambiguous term that might mean "poison", "medicine", or "magical drug" – do survive, especially those where the drug caused injury or death. [12] Antiphon 's speech Against the Stepmother for Poisoning tells of the case of a woman accused of plotting to murder her husband with a pharmakon ; a slave had previously been executed for the crime, but the son of the victim claimed that the death had been arranged by his stepmother. [13] The most detailed account of a trial for witchcraft in Classical Greece is the story of Theoris of Lemnos , who was executed along with her children some time before 338 BC, supposedly for casting incantations and using harmful drugs. [14]
In 451 BC, the Twelve Tables of Roman law had provisions against evil incantations and spells intended to damage cereal crops. In 331 BC, 170 women were executed as witches in the context of an epidemic illness . Livy emphasizes that this was a scale of persecution without precedent in Rome.
In 186 BC, the Roman senate issued a decree severely restricting the Bacchanals, ecstatic rites celebrated in honor of Dionysus. Livy records that this persecution was because " there was nothing wicked, nothing flagitious, that had not been practiced among them " [15] Consequent to the ban, in 184 BC, about 2,000 people were executed for witchcraft ( veneficium ), and in 182–180 BC another 3,000 executions took place, [16] again triggered by the outbreak of an epidemic. There is no way to verify the figures reported by Roman historians, but if they are taken at face value, [ citation needed ] the scale of the witch-hunts in the Roman Republic in relation to the population of Italy at the time far exceeded anything that took place during the "classical" witch-craze in Early Modern Europe. [ citation needed ] Persecution of witches continued in the Roman Empire until the late 4th century AD and abated only after the introduction of Christianity as the Roman state religion in the 390s. [17]
The Lex Cornelia de sicariis et veneficiis promulgated by Lucius Cornelius Sulla in 81 B.C. became an important source of late medieval and early modern European law on witchcraft. This law banned the trading and possession of harmful drugs and poisons, possession of magical books and other occult paraphernalia. Strabo , Gaius Maecenas and Cassius Dio all reiterate the traditional Roman opposition against sorcery and divination, and Tacitus used the term religio-superstitio to class these outlawed observances. Emperor Augustus strengthened legislation aimed at curbing these practices, for instance in 31 B.C., by burning over 2,000 magical books in Rome, except for certain portions of the hallowed Sibylline Books . [18] [19] In A.D. 354, whilst Tiberius Claudius was emperor, 45 men and 85 women, who were all suspected of sorcery, were executed. [20]
The Hebrew Bible condemns sorcery. Deuteronomy 18:10–12 states "No one shall be found among you who makes a son or daughter pass through fire, who practices divination, or is a soothsayer, or an augur , or a sorcerer , or one that casts spells, or who consults ghosts or spirits, or who seeks oracles from the dead. For whoever does these things is abhorrent to the Lord;" and Exodus 22:18 prescribes "thou shalt not suffer a witch to live"; [21] tales like that of 1 Samuel 28, reporting how Saul "hath cut off those that have familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land" [22] suggest that in practice sorcery could at least lead to exile.
In the Judaean Second Temple period , Rabbi Simeon ben Shetach in the 1st century BC is reported to have sentenced to death eighty women who had been charged with witchcraft on a single day in Ashkelon . Later the women's relatives took revenge by bringing (reportedly) false witnesses against Simeon's son and causing him to be executed in turn. [ citation needed ]

Late antiquity
The 6th century AD Getica of Jordanes records a persecution and expulsion of witches among the Goths in a mythical account of the origin of the Huns . The ancient fabled King Filimer is said to have

Middle Ages

Christianisation and Early Middle Ages
The Councils of Elvira (306), Ancyra (314), and Trullo (692) imposed certain ecclesiastical penances for devil-worship. This mild approach represented the view of the Church for many centuries. The general desire of the Catholic Church 's clergy to check fanaticism about witchcraft and necromancy is shown in the decrees of the Council of Paderborn , which, in 785, explicitly outlawed condemning people as witches and condemned to death anyone who burnt a witch. The Lombard code of 643 states:
This conforms to the teachings of the Canon Episcopi of circa 900 AD (alleged to date from 314 AD), which, following the thoughts of Augustine of Hippo , stated that witchcraft did not exist and that to teach that it was a reality was, itself, false and heterodox teaching. The Council of Frankfurt in 794, called by Charlemagne , was also very explicit in condemning "the persecution of alleged witches and wizards", calling the belief in witchcraft "superstitious", and ordering the death penalty for those who presumed to burn witches. [25] Other examples include an Irish synod in 800, [26] and a sermon by Agobard of Lyons (810). [27]
King Kálmán (Coloman) of Hungary , in Decree 57 of his First Legislative Book (published in 1100), banned witch hunting because he said, "witches do not exist". [28] The "Decretum" of Burchard, Bishop of Worms (about 1020), and especially its 19th book, often known separately as the "Corrector", is another work of great importance. Burchard was writing against the superstitious belief in magical potions, for instance, that may produce impotence or abortion. These were also condemned by several Church Fathers. [29] But he altogether rejected the possibility of many of the alleged powers with which witches were popularly credited. Such, for example, were nocturnal riding through the air, the changing of a person's disposition from love to hate, the control of thunder, rain, and sunshine, the transformation of a man into an animal, the intercourse of incubi and succubi with human beings and other such superstitions. Not only the attempt to practice such things, but the very belief in their possibility, is treated by Burchard as false and superstitious.
Pope Gregory VII , in 1080, wrote to King Harald III of Denmark forbidding witches to be put to death upon presumption of their having caused storms or failure of crops or pestilence. Neither were these the only examples of an effort to prevent unjust suspicion to which such poor creatures might be exposed. [note 1] On many different occasions, ecclesiastics who spoke with authority did their best to disabuse the people of their superstitious belief in witchcraft. This, for instance, is the general purport of the book, Contra insulsam vulgi opinionem de grandine et tonitruis ("Against the foolish belief of the common sort concerning hail and thunder"), written by Agobard (d. 841), Archbishop of Lyons . [30] A comparable situation in Russia is suggested in a sermon by Serapion of Vladimir (written in 1274/5), where the popular superstition of witches causing crop failures is denounced. [31]
Early secular laws against witchcraft include those promulgated by King Athelstan (924–939):
In some prosecutions for witchcraft, torture (permitted by the Roman civil law ) apparently took place. However, Pope Nicholas I (866), prohibited the use of torture altogether, and a similar decree may be found in the Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals . [9]

Later Middle Ages
The manuals of the Roman Catholic Inquisition remained highly skeptical of witch accusations, although there was sometimes an overlap between accusations of heresy and of witchcraft, particularly when, in the 13th century, the newly formed Inquisition was commissioned to deal with the Cathars of Southern France, whose teachings were charged with containing an admixture of witchcraft and magic. Although it has been proposed that the witch-hunt developed in Europe from the early 14th century, after the Cathars and the Templar Knights were suppressed, this hypothesis has been rejected independently by two historians (Cohn 1975; Kieckhefer 1976).
In 1258, Pope Alexander IV declared a canon that alleged witchcraft was not to be investigated by the Church. [33] Although Pope John XXII had later authorized the Inquisition to prosecute sorcerers in 1320, [34] inquisitorial courts rarely dealt with witchcraft save incidentally when investigating heterodoxy.
In the case of the Madonna Oriente , the Inquisition of Milan was not sure what to do with two women who in 1384 confessed to have participated the society around Signora Oriente or Diana . Through their confessions, both of them conveyed the traditional folk beliefs of white magic. The women were accused again in 1390, and condemned by the inquisitor. They were eventually executed by the secular arm. [35]
In a notorious case in 1425, Hermann II, Count of Celje accused his daughter in law Veronika of Desenice of witchcraft – and, though she was acquitted by the court, he had her drowned. The accusations of witchcraft are, in this case, considered to have been a pretext for Hermann to get rid of an "unsuitable match", Veronika being born into the lower nobility and thus "unworthy" of his son.
A Catholic figure who preached against witchcraft was popular Franciscan preacher, Bernardino of Siena (1380–1444). Bernardino's sermons reveal both a phenomenon of superstitious practices and an over-reaction against them by the common people. [36] However, it is clear that Bernardino had in mind not merely the use of spells and enchantments and such like fooleries but much more serious crimes, chiefly murder and infanticide. This is clear from his much-quoted sermon of 1427, in which he says:

Transition to the early modern witch-hunts
The resurgence of witch-hunts at the end of the medieval period, taking place with at least partial support or at least tolerance on the part of the Church, was accompanied with a number of developments in Christian doctrine, for example the recognition of the existence of witchcraft as a form of Satanic influence and its classification as a heresy. As Renaissance occultism gained traction among the educated classes, the belief in witchcraft, which in the medieval period had been part of the folk religion of the uneducated rural population at best, was incorporated into an increasingly comprehensive theology of Satan as the ultimate source of all maleficium . [37] [38] These doctrinal shifts were completed in the mid 15th century, specifically in the wake of the Council of Basel and centered on the Duchy of Savoy in the western Alps, [39] leading to an early series of witch trials by both secular and ecclesiastical courts in the second half of the 15th century. [40]
In 1484, Pope Innocent VIII issued Summis desiderantes affectibus , a Papal bull authorizing the "correcting, imprisoning, punishing and chastising" of devil-worshippers who have "slain infants", among other crimes. He did so at the request of two inquisitors, Heinrich Kramer and Jacob Sprenger , members of the Dominican Order , who had been refused permission by the local bishops in Germany to investigate. [41] However, historians such as Ludwig von Pastor insist that the bull neither allowed anything new nor was necessarily binding on Catholic consciences. [42] Three years later in 1487, Kramer and Sprenger published the notorious Malleus Maleficarum (the 'Hammer against the Witches') which, because of the newly invented printing presses, enjoyed a wide readership. The book was soon banned by the Church in 1490, and Kramer and Sprenger censured, but it was nevertheless reprinted in 14 editions by 1520 and became unduly influential in the secular courts. In 1538, the Spanish Inquisition cautioned its members not to believe what the Malleus said, even when it presented apparently firm evidence. [43]

Early Modern Europe
The witch trials in Early Modern Europe came in waves and then subsided. There were trials in the 15th and early 16th centuries, but then the witch scare went into decline, before becoming a major issue again and peaking in the 17th century. What had previously been a belief that some people possessed supernatural abilities (which were sometimes used to protect the people) now became a sign of a pact between the people with supernatural abilities and the devil. To justify the killings, Protestant Christianity and its proxy secular institutions deemed witchcraft as being associated to wild Satanic ritual parties in which there was much naked dancing and cannibalistic infanticide . [44] It was also seen as heresy for going against the first of the ten commandments (You shall have no other gods before me) or as violating majesty , in this case referring to the divine majesty, not the worldly. [45] Further, scripture specifically decreed that "thou shalt not suffer a witch to live" (Exodus 22:18), which many believed.
Witch-hunts were seen across early modern Europe, but the most significant area of witch-hunting in modern Europe is often considered to be central and southern Germany. [46] Germany was a late starter in terms of the numbers of trials, compared to other regions of Europe. Witch-hunts first appeared in large numbers in southern France and Switzerland during the 14th and 15th centuries. The peak years of witch-hunts in southwest Germany were from 1561 to 1670. [47] The first major persecution in Europe, when witches were caught, tried, convicted, and burned in the imperial lordship of Wiesensteig in southwestern Germany, is recorded in 1563 in a pamphlet called "True and Horrifying Deeds of 63 Witches". [48] Witchcraft persecution spread to all areas of Europe, including Scotland and the northernmost periphery of Europe in Northern Norway. Learned European ideas about witchcraft, demonological ideas, strongly influenced the hunt of witches in the North. [49]
In Denmark, the burning of witches increased following the reformation of 1536. Christian IV of Denmark , in particular, encouraged this practice, and hundreds of people were convicted of witchcraft and burnt. In the district of Finnmark, Northern Norway, severe witchcraft trials took place during the period 1600-1692. [50] A memorial of international format, Steilneset Memorial , has been built to commemorate the victims of the Finnmark witchcraft trials. [51] In England, the Witchcraft Act of 1542 regulated the penalties for witchcraft. In the North Berwick witch trials in Scotland, over 70 people were accused of witchcraft on account of bad weather when James VI of Scotland , who shared the Danish king's interest in witch trials, sailed to Denmark in 1590 to meet his betrothed Anne of Denmark . The Pendle witch trials of 1612 are among the most famous witch trials in English history. [52]
In England, witch-hunting would reach its apex in 1644 to 1647 due to the work of Matthew Hopkins . Although operating without an official Parliament commission, Hopkins (calling himself Witchfinder General) and his accomplices charged hefty fees to towns during the English Civil War . Hopkins' witch hunting spree was brief but significant: 300 convictions and deaths are attributed to his work. [53] Hopkins wrote a book on his methods, describing his fortuitous beginnings as a witch hunter, the methods used to extract confessions, and the tests he employed to test the accused: stripping them naked to find the Witches' mark , the "swimming" test , and pricking the skin . The swimming test, which included throwing a witch into water strapped to a chair to see if she floated, was discontinued in 1645 due to a legal challenge. The 1647 book, The Discovery of Witches , was soon influential in legal texts. The book was used in the American colonies as early as May 1647, when Margaret Jones was executed for witchcraft in Connecticut , [54] the first of 17 people executed for witchcraft in the Colonies from 1647 to 1663. [55]
Witch-hunts in North America began about the time of Hopkins. In 1645, forty-six years before the notorious Salem witch trials , Springfield, Massachusetts experienced America's first accusations of witchcraft when husband and wife Hugh and Mary Parsons accused each other of witchcraft. At America's first witch trial, Hugh was found innocent, while Mary was acquitted of witchcraft but sentenced to be hanged for the death of her child. She died in prison. [56] About eighty people throughout England's Massachusetts Bay Colony were accused of practicing witchcraft; thirteen women and two men were executed in a witch-hunt that lasted throughout New England from 1645–1663. [55] The Salem witch trials followed in 1692–93.
Once a case was brought to trial, the prosecutors hunted for accomplices. Magic was not considered to be wrong because it failed, but because it worked effectively for the wrong reasons. Witchcraft was a normal part of everyday life. Witches were often called for, along with religious ministers, to help the ill or to deliver a baby. They held positions of spiritual power in their communities. When something went wrong, no one questioned the ministers or the power of the witchcraft. Instead, they questioned whether the witch intended to inflict harm or not. [57]
Current scholarly estimates of the number of people executed for witchcraft vary between about 40,000 and 100,000. [58] The total number of witch trials in Europe which are known to have ended in executions is around 12,000. [59] Prominent contemporaneous critics of witch hunts included Gianfrancesco Ponzinibio (fl. 1520), Johannes Wier (1515–1588), Reginald Scot (1538–1599), Cornelius Loos (1546–1595), Anton Praetorius (1560–1613), Alonso Salazar y Frías (1564–1636), Friedrich Spee (1591–1635), and Balthasar Bekker (1634–1698). [60]

Execution statistics
Modern scholarly estimates place the total number of executions for witchcraft in the 300-year period of European witch-hunts in the five digits, mostly at roughly between 40,000 and 50,000 (see table below for details), [3] but some estimate there were 200,000 to 500,000 executed for witchcraft, and others estimated 1,000,000 or more. [4] [61] [62] [63] The majority of those accused were from the lower economic classes in European society, although in rarer cases high-ranking individuals were accused as well. On the basis of this evidence, Scarre and Callow asserted that the "typical witch was the wife or widow of an agricultural labourer or small tenant farmer, and she was well known for a quarrelsome and aggressive nature."
While it appears to be the case that the clear majority of victims in Germany were women, in other parts of Europe the witch-hunts targeted primarily men, thus in Iceland 92% of the accused were men, in Estonia 60%, and in Moscow two-thirds of those accused were male.
At one point during the Würzburg trials of 1629, children made up 60% of those accused, although this had declined to 17% by the end of the year. [64] The claim that "millions of witches" (often: " nine million witches ") were killed in Europe occasionally found in popular literature is spurious, and ultimately due to a 1791 pamphlet by Gottfried Christian Voigt . [65]

End of European witch hunts in the 18th century
In England and Scotland between 1542 and 1735, a series of Witchcraft Acts enshrined into law the punishment (often with death, sometimes with incarceration ) of individuals practising or claiming to practice witchcraft and magic. [67] The last executions for witchcraft in England had taken place in 1682, when Temperance Lloyd, Mary Trembles, and Susanna Edwards were executed at Exeter. In 1711, Joseph Addison published an article in the highly respected The Spectator journal (No. 117) criticizing the irrationality and social injustice in treating elderly and feeble women (dubbed Moll White) as witches. [68] Jane Wenham was among the last subjects of a typical witch trial in England in 1712, but was pardoned after her conviction and set free. Kate Nevin was hunted for three weeks and eventually suffered death by Faggot and Fire at Monzie in Perthshire , Scotland in 1715. [69] [70] Janet Horne was executed for witchcraft in Scotland in 1727. The final Act of 1735 led to prosecution for fraud rather than witchcraft since it was no longer believed that the individuals had actual supernatural powers or traffic with Satan . The 1735 Act continued to be used until the 1940s to prosecute individuals such as spiritualists and Gypsies . The act was finally repealed in 1951. [67]
The last execution of a witch in the Dutch Republic was probably in 1613. [71] In Denmark, this took place in 1693 with the execution of Anna Palles . [72] In other parts of Europe, the practice died down later. In France the last person to be executed for witchcraft was Louis Debaraz in 1745. [73] In Germany the last death sentence was that of Anna Schwegelin in Kempten in 1775 (although not carried out). [74] The last known official witch-trial was the Doruchów witch trial in Poland in 1783. Two unnamed women were executed in Poznań , Poland, in 1793, in proceedings of dubious legitimacy. [75]
Anna Göldi was executed in Glarus , Switzerland in 1782 [76] and Barbara Zdunk in Prussia in 1811. Both women have been identified as the last person executed for witchcraft in Europe, but in both cases, the official verdict did not mention witchcraft, as this had ceased to be recognized as a criminal offense.

Modern cases
Witch hunts still occur today in societies where belief in magic is prevalent. In most cases, these are instances of lynching and burnings, reported with some regularity from much of Sub-Saharan Africa , from rural North India and from Papua New Guinea. In addition, there are some countries that have legislation against the practice of sorcery. The only country where witchcraft remains legally punishable by death is Saudi Arabia.
Witch hunts in modern times are continuously reported by the UNHCR of the UNO as a massive violation of human rights. Most of the accused are women and children but can also be elderly people or marginalised groups of the community such as albinos and the HIV -infected. [78] These victims are often considered burdens to the community, and as a result are often driven out, starved to death, or killed violently, sometimes by their own families in acts of social cleansing . [79] The causes of witch hunts include poverty, epidemics, social crises and lack of education. The leader of the witch hunt, often a prominent figure in the community or a "witch doctor", may also gain economic benefit by charging for an exorcism or by selling body parts of the murdered. [80] [81]

Sub-Saharan Africa
In many societies of Sub-Saharan Africa , the fear of witches drives periodic witch-hunts during which specialist witch-finders identify suspects, with death by mob often the result. [82] Countries particularly affected by this phenomenon include South Africa , [83] Cameroon , the Democratic Republic of the Congo , the Gambia , Ghana , Kenya , Sierra Leone , Tanzania , and Zambia . [84]
Witch-hunts against children were reported by the BBC in 1999 in the Congo [85] and in Tanzania, where the government responded to attacks on women accused of being witches for having red eyes. [86] A lawsuit was launched in 2001 in Ghana, where witch-hunts are also common, by a woman accused of being a witch. [86] Witch-hunts in Africa are often led by relatives seeking the property of the accused victim.
Audrey I. Richards , in the journal Africa , relates in 1935 an instance when a new wave of witchfinders, the Bamucapi , appeared in the villages of the Bemba people of Zambia. [87] They dressed in European clothing, and would summon the headman to prepare a ritual meal for the village. When the villagers arrived they would view them all in a mirror , and claimed they could identify witches with this method. These witches would then have to "yield up his horns"; i.e. give over the horn containers for curses and evil potions to the witch-finders. The bamucapi then made all drink a potion called kucapa which would cause a witch to die and swell up if he ever tried such things again.
The villagers related that the witch-finders were always right because the witches they found were always the people whom the village had feared all along. The bamucapi utilised a mixture of Christian and native religious traditions to account for their powers and said that God (not specifying which God) helped them to prepare their medicine. In addition, all witches who did not attend the meal to be identified would be called to account later on by their master, who had risen from the dead, and who would force the witches by means of drums to go to the graveyard, where they would die. Richards noted that the bamucapi created the sense of danger in the villages by rounding up all the horns in the village, whether they were used for anti-witchcraft charms, potions, snuff or were indeed receptacles of black magic.
The Bemba people believed misfortunes such as wartings , hauntings and famines to be just actions sanctioned by the High-God Lesa. The only agency which caused unjust harm was a witch, who had enormous powers and was hard to detect. After white rule of Africa, beliefs in sorcery and witchcraft grew, possibly because of the social strain caused by new ideas, customs and laws, and also because the courts no longer allowed witches to be tried. [ citation needed ]
Amongst the Bantu tribes of Southern Africa, the witch smellers were responsible for detecting witches. In parts of Southern Africa, several hundred people have been killed in witch hunts since 1990. [88]
Cameroon has re-established witchcraft-accusations in courts after its independence in 1967. [89]
It was reported on 21 May 2008 that in Kenya a mob had burnt to death at least 11 people accused of witchcraft. [90]
In March 2009, Amnesty International reported that up to 1,000 people in the Gambia had been abducted by government-sponsored "witch doctors" on charges of witchcraft, and taken to detention centers where they were forced to drink poisonous concoctions. [91] On 21 May 2009, The New York Times reported that the alleged witch-hunting campaign had been sparked by the Gambian President, Yahya Jammeh . [92]
In Sierra Leone, the witch-hunt is an occasion for a sermon by the kɛmamɔi (native Mende witch-finder) on social ethics : "Witchcraft ... takes hold in people’s lives when people are less than fully open-hearted. All wickedness is ultimately because people hate each other or are jealous or suspicious or afraid. These emotions and motivations cause people to act antisocially". [93] The response by the populace to the kɛmamɔi is that "they valued his work and would learn the lessons he came to teach them, about social responsibility and cooperation." [94]

South-Central Asia
In India , labeling a woman as a witch is a common ploy to grab land, settle scores or even to punish her for turning down sexual advances. In a majority of the cases, it is difficult for the accused woman to reach out for help and she is forced to either abandon her home and family or driven to commit suicide. Most cases are not documented because it is difficult for poor and illiterate women to travel from isolated regions to file police reports. Less than 2% of those accused of witch-hunting are actually convicted, according to a study by the Free Legal Aid Committee, a group that works with victims in the state of Jharkhand. [95]
A 2010 estimate places the number of women killed as witches in India at between 150 and 200 per year, or a total of 2,500 in the period of 1995 to 2009. [96] [97] The lynchings are particularly common in the poor northern states of Jharkhand , [98] Bihar and the central state of Chhattisgarh . Witch hunts are also taking place among the tea garden workers in Jalpaiguri, West Bengal India. [99] The witch hunts in Jalpaiguri are less known, but are motivated by the stress in the tea industry on the lives of the adivasi workers. [100]
Witch hunts in Nepal are common, and are targeted especially against low-caste women. [101] [102] The main causes of witchcraft related violence include widespread belief in superstition, lack of education, lack of public awareness, illiteracy, caste system, male domination, and economic dependency of women on men. The victims of this form of violence are often beaten, tortured, publicly humiliated, and murdered. Sometimes, the family members of the accused are also assaulted. [102] In 2010, Sarwa Dev Prasad Ojha, minister for women and social welfare, said, "Superstitions are deeply rooted in our society, and the belief in witchcraft is one of the worst forms of this." [103]

Papua New Guinea
Though the practice of "white" magic (such as faith healing ) is legal in Papua New Guinea, the 1976 Sorcery Act imposed a penalty of up to 2 years in prison for the practice of "black" magic , until the Act was repealed in 2013. In 2009, the government reports that extrajudicial torture and murder of alleged witches – usually lone women – are spreading from the highland areas to cities as villagers migrate to urban areas. [104] For example, in June 2013, four women were accused of witchcraft because the family "had a 'permanent house' made of wood, and the family had tertiary educations and high social standing". [105] All of the women were tortured and Helen Rumbali was beheaded. [105] Helen Hakena, chairwoman of the North Bougainville Human Rights Committee, said that the accusations started because of economic jealousy born of a mining boom. [105]
Reports by U.N. agencies, Amnesty International, Oxfam and anthropologists show that "attacks on accused sorcerers and witches – sometimes men, but most commonly women – are frequent, ferocious and often fatal." [106] It’s estimated about 150 cases of violence and killings are occurring each year in just the province of Simbu in Papua New Guinea alone. [ citation needed ] Reports indicate this practice of witch hunting has in some places evolved into "something more malignant, sadistic and voyeuristic." [106] One woman who was attacked by young men from a nearby village "had her genitals burned and fused beyond functional repair by the repeated intrusions of red-hot irons." [106] Few incidents are ever reported, according to the 2012 Law Reform Commission which concluded that they have increased since the 1980s.

Saudi Arabia
Witchcraft or sorcery remains a criminal offense in Saudi Arabia , although the precise nature of the crime is undefined. [107]
The frequency of prosecutions for this in the country as whole is unknown. However, in November 2009, it was reported that 118 persons had been arrested in the province of Makkah that year for practising magic and "using the Book of Allah in a derogatory manner", 74% of them being female. [108] According to Human Rights Watch in 2009, prosecutions for witchcraft and sorcery are proliferating and "Saudi courts are sanctioning a literal witch hunt by the religious police." [109]
In 2006, an illiterate Saudi woman, Fawza Falih , was convicted of practising witchcraft, including casting an impotence spell, and sentenced to death by beheading, after allegedly being beaten and forced to fingerprint a false confession that had not been read to her. [110] After an appeal court had cast doubt on the validity of the death sentence because the confession had been retracted, the lower court reaffirmed the same sentence on a different basis. [111]
In 2007, Mustafa Ibrahim, an Egyptian national, was executed, having been convicted of using sorcery in an attempt to separate a married couple, as well as of adultery and of desecrating the Quran. [112]
Also in 2007, Abdul Hamid Bin Hussain Bin Moustafa al-Fakki, a Sudanese national, was sentenced to death after being convicted of producing a spell that would lead to the reconciliation of a divorced couple. [113]
In 2009, Ali Sibat , a Lebanese television presenter who had been arrested whilst on a pilgrimage in Saudi Arabia, was sentenced to death for witchcraft arising out of his fortune-telling on an Arab satellite channel. [114] His appeal was accepted by one court, but a second in Medina upheld his death sentence again in March 2010, stating that he deserved it as he had publicly practised sorcery in front of millions of viewers for several years. [115] In November 2010, the Supreme Court refused to ratify the death sentence, stating that there was insufficient evidence that his actions had harmed others. [116]
On 12 December 2011, Amina bint Abdulhalim Nassar was beheaded in Al Jawf Province after being convicted of practicing witchcraft and sorcery. [117] Another very similar situation occurred to Muree bin Ali bin Issa al-Asiri and he was beheaded on 19 June 2012 in the Najran Province . [118]

ISIS (Islamic State)
On 29 and 30 June 2015, militants of the Salafi jihadist extremist group Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL or ISIS) beheaded two women with their husbands on accusations of sorcery and using "magic for medicine" in Deir ez-Zor province of the self-proclaimed Islamic State. [119] Earlier on, the ISIL militants beheaded several "magicians" and street illusionists in Syria, Iraq and Libya. [120] [121]

List

See also
WebPage index: 00005
Papal conclave, March 1605
The papal conclave of March 1605 was convened on the death of Pope Clement VIII and ended in the election of Alessandro Ottaviano de' Medici as Pope Leo XI . It was the first of two papal conclaves in 1605 , with Leo dying on 27 April 1605, twenty-six days after he was elected. The conclave was dominated by conflict as to whether Cesare Baronius should be elected pope, and it saw Philip III of Spain exclude both Baronius and the eventually successful candidate, Medici.

Background
In 1596 Clement VIII had accepted Henry IV of France 's decision to convert to the Catholic Church, removed the excommunication under which Sixtus V had placed him, and annulled his marriage to Marguerite of Valois . Clement also assisted in arranging Henry's marriage to Marie de' Medici , which established a Catholic succession. [1] Clement worked to decrease the influence of Spanish cardinals in the College of Cardinals . He created five French cardinals, and the Italian cardinals he created were considered neutral. Clement wanted the French cardinals that he created to be present in Rome and to take part in the governance of the Church. Henry IV also demanded that three French cardinals go to Rome, and they were there at Clement's death on 3 March 1605. [2]

Conclave
Cesare Baronius was the favourite candidate, whose odds of being elected were 10:100 according to Roman bookmakers, who took bets on the election despite the prohibition of the practice by Gregory XIV . Baronius received 23 votes during the first scrutiny , which was considered good because many electors who supported him had cast their first ballots for friends. [2] Baronius was the candidate favoured by France, and had the backing of the French cardinals. [3] He was also the first choice candidate of Pietro Aldobrandini , the nephew of Clement VIII. [2]
After the results of the first scrutiny, Cardinal Avila, Philip III of Spain 's representative at the conclave, announced that Philip had vetoed Baronius. This led to a clash with Aldobrandi, with both cardinals yelling at the other that they would be willing to make the conclave last over a year in order to elect their respective candidates. Avila and Aldobrandi fought a second time, which led to shouting and pushing; the crowds outside took this as a sign of election by acclamation, and caused them to open the doors of the conclave while it was still continuing. [4]
Baronius came within 9 votes of election, with 32 of the electors supporting him, but he refused to advocate his own election or accept election by acclamation. Aldabrandi was unable to convince some members of his faction to vote for Baronius because they viewed him as too strict, and by 30 March he had resigned himself to look for other candidates. [5]
The election was further complicated by the factional struggles between the Aldabrandi and Montalto factions, whose approximately equal numbers cancelled each other out. [6] Aldabrandi supported Laudivio Zacchia , but eventually transferred his support to Alessandro Ottaviano de' Medici. Medici was related to the French queen, and Henry IV of France had spent significant money on his candidacy. [3]
The Montalto faction transferred their support to Medici on 1 April, securing his election. After the vote, Avila revealed that Philip III had excluded Medici as well, and protested so loudly that he could be heard on the street. Despite this, the cardinals elected Medici and he chose the name Leo XI, in honour of his great-uncle Leo X . His election made Leo the fourth cardinal to be elected pope that had been created by Sixtus V in his consistory in 1583. [5]
WebPage index: 00006
Marawi crisis
The Marawi crisis , also known as Marawi clash [8] [9] and Battle of Marawi , is an ongoing armed conflict in Marawi , Lanao del Sur between Philippine government security forces and militants of the Maute and Abu Sayyaf groups that started on 23 May 2017. [10]
The Philippine government claims that the clashes began when they launched an offensive in the city to capture Isnilon Hapilon of the Abu Sayyaf group, after receiving reports that Hapilon was in the city, possibly to meet with militants of the Maute group . [11] [12] A deadly firefight erupted when Hapilon's forces opened fire at the combined Army and police teams and called for reinforcements from the Maute, an armed group that has pledged allegiance to the Islamic State group and who are believed to be responsible for the 2016 Davao City bombing , according to military spokesmen. [13]
Maute Group militants attacked Camp Ranao and occupied several buildings in the city, including Marawi City Hall, the Mindanao State University , a hospital and the city jail. [13] The group also occupied the main street and torched Saint Mary's Church, Ninoy Aquino School, and Dansalan College [11] run by the United Church of Christ in the Philippines (UCCP). [14]

Background
The Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) stated that the fighting in Marawi was due to an operation conducted by the military in coordination with the Philippine National Police , contrary to earlier reports that the clash was initiated by the militant groups. Government security forces received reports that a group of Abu Sayyaf fighters led by Isnilon Hapilon were in Marawi to possibly meet with their Maute group counterparts. [12] The US Department of Justice has listed Hapilon as among the world's most wanted terrorists with a reward of up to US$5 million for his capture. [10]
Residents of Marawi reported the presence of an armed group within their locale and after the AFP verified the information, the military launched a "surgical operation." [12]

Engagement

May 23
Firefights between government forces and militants began at approximately 2:00 in the afternoon of May 23, 2017. The Peace and Conflict Journalism Network reported that the clash occurred in the Basak Malutlut area of the city as Hapilon's forces called for reinforcement from the Maute group. Maute fighters occupied the Amai Pakpak Hospital and ordered the PhilHealth employees out of the facility. [12] The fighters allegedly replaced the Philippine flag hoisted in the hospital with the Black Standard used by the Islamic State group . [15]
The 103rd Brigade of the Philippine Army stationed at Camp Ranao was attacked by at least 500 Maute group militants. [15] A number of militants were then seen waving their ISIS black flags as they roamed the streets of Marawi. [16]
The whole city was put on lockdown as several buildings and houses were set ablaze by members of the Maute group. [10] Dozens of gunmen occupied the Marawi City Hall as 107 inmates escaped from the Marawi City Jail and the Malabang District Jail 39 after the Maute attacks. [10] Power and communication lines were also shut down due to the continued hostilities. [17] Roads leading to Marawi were blocked by both government security forces and Maute militants. [12]
Civilians were reported to have been abducted by the Maute group, including a priest and several parishioners of the Cathedral of Our Lady Help of Christians as the group demanded that the government stop its offensive against them. [18]
The clashes sparked a mass evacuation of the city with residents fleeing by the thousands, causing traffic congestion on the highway to Iligan and Cagayan de Oro . [19] At least eleven civilians have been killed in the ongoing firefight, two of which the Lanao del Sur Provincial Disaster Office identified as ambulance drivers who were stopped by Maute militants while responding to an emergency call. [7] [20] Nine of those civilians were on board a truck when they were stopped by Maute militants at a checkpoint and shot dead with their hands tied. [21] [22] A police officer was also reported to have been beheaded by the militants. [7]

May 24
On May 24, additional government forces arrived at the Laguindingan Airport as the military regained control of the Amai Pakpak Hospital. [20] 120 civilians used as a human shield by the Maute group were rescued from the hospital. [10] Government troops also rescued Wednesday at least 42 teachers who were trapped inside a building during an attack by Maute terrorists. [9] The Philippine military has also recaptured the city hall and the Mindanao State University . [23]

May 25
On May 25, fresh fighting took place near the Lanao del Sur Provincial Capitol in the Marawi city center. [23] Black-clad Maute and Abu Sayyaf militants were still spotted in the city's major roads and bridges. The militants also reportedly took control of the Lanao del Sur Electric Cooperative in Gadungan village. [23] The AFP said there were still 30 to 40 remaining members of the Maute group in the city and that Isnilon Hapilon remained in Marawi. [24] The Philippine military launched surgical air strikes in three villages where remnants of the group have been spotted. [24]
Reports came in that two Malaysian terrorists who were with Isnilon Hapilon in Marawi to push for the creation of the Islamic State in Southeast Asia were among those militants killed late Thursday. Intelligence sources also said that an Indonesian and a Saudi Arabian linked to ISIS were also killed in skirmishes in the city. [25] The AFP said that 26 members of the Maute group have been killed, leaving the remaining terrorists in the area at around 25. Herrera also said 39 members of the government forces have been wounded in action. [26]

May 26
At a press briefing in Davao City , AFP Spokesperson Brig. Gen. Restituto Padilla confirmed that foreign terrorists are fighting alongside the Maute group in Marawi. [27] He said that of the 12 members of the Maute group killed during the latest firefight, half of them were foreigners. Padilla identified the foreign militants as Malaysians, Indonesian, Singaporean and another nationality. [27] [28]

Government response
Following the clash, President Rodrigo Duterte declared martial law in Mindanao at 10:00 in the evening (UTC+8) of 23 May 2017. As per the 1987 Constitution , the state of martial law will initially last for 60 days. President Duterte also decided to shorten his diplomatic visit to Russia . [29]
Vice President Leni Robredo called for unity as government troops continue to engage in a firefight against a local terrorist group in Marawi. [30]

Reaction
see also Reaction to Declaration of Martial Law

Social media
Reactions to the declaration of martial law were mixed on social media . [31] Prayers flooded social media amid reports of local terror group Maute's takeover and burning of public and private facilities in Marawi, Tuesday afternoon with the hashtag #PrayForMarawi trending on social media. [32] Amidst unconfirmed reports of beheading and kidnapping, PNP spokesman Dionardo Carlos appealed in a press briefing addressed to the public to limit "to what they know what they see" in making posts relevant to the Marawi incident in social media. [33] Numerous Filipino TV personalities have expressed their reactions to the ongoing clash between the government forces and the Maute terror groups in Mindanao. Some Pinoy celebrities also called for unity despite the division in political alliances. [34]

Religious sectors
The president of the Catholic Bishops' Conference of the Philippines on Wednesday asked for prayers after Maute terrorists took a priest and some parishioners hostage in Marawi. The CBCP President also asked the government forces to "make the safety of the hostages a primordial consideration" while ensuring that the law is upheld. [35]
The Philippine Center for Islam and Democracy condemned the acts of the militant groups saying that their acts were contrary to the teachings of Islam. The Muslim group noted that the incident occurred at the time when Muslims were preparing for Ramadan , which according to them made the acts of the militants more heinous. [36]

International
Malaysia began to tighten its border with the Philippines shortly after the President announced martial law. The country Inspector-General of Police Khalid Abu Bakar said they had “taken precautions, and are always beware of what is happening in neighbouring Philippines”. [37]
Russian President Vladimir Putin offered his condolences to the victims of the Marawi attacks as President Duterte cut short his state visit in Moscow . During their bilateral meeting at the Kremlin, Putin told Duterte that "my colleagues and myself definitely understand quite well that you do have to come back to return to your motherland" and expressed hope that the conflict "will be resolved as soon as possible and with minimal losses and casualties." [38]
The British government warned its nationals to avoid traveling to western Mindanao, including Marawi where clashes are still ongoing between government troops and Maute group terrorists. [39]
WebPage index: 00007
Ariana Grande
Ariana Grande-Butera (born June 26, 1993), known as Ariana Grande ( / ˌ ɑːr i ˈ ɑː n ə ˈ ɡ r ɑː n d eɪ / ), [1] is an American singer and actress. She began her career in the Broadway musical 13 , before landing the role of Cat Valentine in the Nickelodeon television series Victorious in 2009. The show ended after four seasons, and Grande starred in the spinoff , Sam & Cat , which ended in 2014. She has also appeared in other theatre, television and film roles, and has lent her voice to animated television and films.
Grande's music career began with the soundtrack Music from Victorious (2011). She signed a recording contract with Republic Records and released her debut studio album, Yours Truly in 2013, which debuted at No. 1 on the US Billboard 200 . The album's lead single, " The Way ", debuted in the top 10 of the Billboard Hot 100 , with critics comparing her wide vocal range to that of Mariah Carey .
Grande's second studio album, My Everything (2014), debuted at No. 1 in the US and charted in the top 10 in various other countries. With the lead single " Problem " and several others from that album, she was continuously in the top 10 of the Billboard Hot 100 for 34 weeks and had the most top 10 singles of any artist in 2014. In 2015, Grande promoted My Everything with her first world tour, The Honeymoon Tour , and guest-starred in the Fox comedy horror television series, Scream Queens . She also released the top 10 single " Focus " and a holiday EP , Christmas & Chill , and she participated in several collaborative projects. In 2016, she released her third studio album, Dangerous Woman , as well as several songs from the album. The title track debuted at No. 10 on the Billboard Hot 100, making Grande the first person in the history of that chart to have the lead single from each of her first three albums debut in the top 10. [2] The album debuted at No. 2 on the Billboard 200. As of January 2017, Grande's music videos had been viewed a total of more than 7 billion times online. [3]
Grande's accolades include three American Music Awards , an MTV Video Music Award , three MTV Europe Music Awards and four Grammy Award nominations. All three of her albums have been certified platinum by the RIAA . She has actively supported a range of charities, [4] and in 2016, Time named Grande one of the 100 most influential people in the world on the annual Time 100 list. [5] Grande has a large following on social media; she is the second most followed person on Instagram. [6] In 2017, Grande's worldwide Dangerous Woman Tour was suspended after the bombing at her Manchester concert .

Life and career

1993–2008: Early life and career beginnings
Ariana Grande-Butera was born in Boca Raton, Florida , [7] [8] the daughter of Joan Grande, the chief executive officer of Hose-McCann Communications, a telephone and alarm system company, [9] [10] and Edward Butera, a graphic design firm owner in Boca Raton. [8] [11] Her name was inspired by Princess Oriana from Felix the Cat . [12] Grande is of Italian descent. [13] She has an older half-brother, Frankie Grande , who is an actor, dancer and producer, [14] and she is close with her maternal grandmother, Marjorie Grande. [15] Grande's family moved from New York to Florida when her mother was pregnant with her, and her parents separated when she was around 8 or 9 years old. [11]
As a child, Grande performed with the Fort Lauderdale Children's Theater, [16] playing her first role as Annie , as well as performing in the musicals The Wizard of Oz and Beauty and the Beast . [17] At the age of 8, she performed at a karaoke lounge on a cruise ship and with various orchestras such as South Florida's Philharmonic, Florida Sunshine Pops and Symphonic Orchestras, and she made her national television debut singing " The Star-Spangled Banner " for the Florida Panthers . [18] She attended Pine Crest School and North Broward Preparatory School . [19]
By age 13, she became serious about pursuing a music career, though she still concentrated on theater. [20] When she first arrived in Los Angeles to meet with her managers, she expressed a desire to record an R&B album when she was 14: "I was like, 'I want to make an R&B album,' They were like 'Um, that's a helluva goal! Who is going to buy a 14-year-old's R&B album?!'" [11] In 2008, Grande was cast in the supporting role of cheerleader Charlotte in the musical 13 on Broadway, [21] for which she won a National Youth Theatre Association Award. [22] When she joined the musical, Grande left her high school, North Broward Preparatory School, but continued to be enrolled. The school sent materials to her so she could study with tutors. [23] She also sang various times at the New York City jazz club, Birdland . [24]

2009–2013: Breakthrough on Nickelodeon and 
Grande auditioned for the Nickelodeon television show Victorious in New York along with 13 co-star Elizabeth Gillies in 2009. [25] In this sitcom set in a performing arts high school, Grande was cast as Cat Valentine . [25] Grande had to dye her hair red every other week for the role because the executive producer , Dan Schneider , did not want all cast members to be brunettes, and the red hair was also a feature that the network felt would fit the personality of Cat. The show premiered in March 2010 to the second largest audience for a live-action series in Nickelodeon history with 5.7 million viewers. [26] [27] The role helped propel Grande to teen idol status, but she was more interested in a music career stating that acting is "fun, but music has always been first and foremost with me." [28] Her character was compared to " Brittany Murphy 's performance as the hapless Tai in Clueless " (1995) and described as being "very impressionable and easily swayed" but "generally sweet." [29] Season two premiered in April 2011 to 6.2 million viewers, becoming the highest rated episode of Victorious . [30] In 2010, she played the role of Miriam in the musical Cuba Libre , which was written and produced by songwriter Desmond Child . [31]
After the first season of Victorious wrapped, Grande wanted to focus on her music career and began working on her debut album in August 2010. [32] To strengthen her vocal range, she began working with vocal coach Eric Vetro. [33] She made her first musical appearance on the track "Give It Up" on the soundtrack Victorious: Music from the Hit TV Show in August 2011. While filming Victorious , Grande made several recordings of herself singing covers of songs by Adele , Whitney Houston and Mariah Carey , and she uploaded them to YouTube . [34] A friend of Monte Lipman , CEO of Republic Records, came across one of Grande's videos. Impressed by her vocals, he sent the links to Lipman, who signed her to a recording contract. [11] She released her first single, " Put Your Hearts Up ", in December 2011, which was recorded for a teen-oriented pop album that was not issued. [35] She later disowned the track for its bubblegum pop sound, saying that she had no interest in recording music of that genre. [35] The song was later certified gold by the RIAA . [36] Also in 2011, she voiced the fairy, Princess Diaspro, in 13 episodes of the Nickelodeon version of the Italian animated television series Winx Club , appeared in Greyson Chance 's music video for a song called "Unfriend You" from his album Hold On 'til the Night , portraying Chance's ex-girlfriend, and voiced the title role in the English dub of the Spanish-language animated film Snowflake, the White Gorilla . [37] [38]
A second soundtrack, Victorious 2.0 , was released on June 5, 2012 as an extended play , featuring Grande in the song " Don't You (Forget About Me) ". [39] After three seasons, Victorious was not renewed. [40] The finale aired in February 2013. The third and final Victorious soundtrack, Victorious 3.0 , was released on November 6, 2012, featuring Grande in the song "L.A. Boyz". [41] The music video for "L.A. Boyz" features Grande and Victoria Justice performing in front of their cast mates during an episode of Victorious . [42] In December 2012, Grande collaborated on the single version of " Popular Song ", a duet with British singer and songwriter Mika . [43] She also starred over the holiday season as Snow White in a pantomime -style musical theatre production called A Snow White Christmas , together with Charlene Tilton and Neil Patrick Harris , at the Pasadena Playhouse . [44]
Meanwhile, Nickelodeon created an iCarly and Victorious spin-off starring Jennette McCurdy and Grande. [45] The buddy sitcom, titled Sam & Cat , paired Grande and McCurdy as roommates who form an after-school babysitting business, reprising their respective roles as Cat Valentine from Victorious and Sam Puckett from iCarly . [46] The pilot aired on June 8, 2013, and the show was immediately picked up by the network. [47] The following month, Nickelodeon doubled Sam & Cat' s original twenty-episode order for season one, making it a forty-episode season. [48] Despite its success in the ratings, the series was canceled. [49] The final episode aired on July 17, 2014. [50]
Grande recorded her debut album, Yours Truly , over a three-year period. [51] She completed the album, originally titled Daydreamin' , in June 2013; it was released on August 30, 2013. [51] She is credited as a songwriter on several tracks of the album. [52] In September 2013, it debuted at No. 1 on the US Billboard 200 albums chart, with 138,000 copies sold in its first week, making Grande the first female artist since Kesha to have her first album debut atop of the charts and ranking her the fifteenth female artist overall. [53] [54] Yours Truly also debuted in the top 10 in several other countries, including Australia, [55] the UK, [56] Ireland, [57] and the Netherlands. [58] By April 2014, the album had sold over 500,000 copies in the United States, and later it became Grande's first platinum album. [59] [60]
The lead single, " The Way " featuring Pittsburgh rapper Mac Miller , debuted at No. 10 on the US Billboard Hot 100 , [61] eventually peaking at No. 9 for two weeks, [62] and spent 26 weeks on the Hot 100. [63] Grande was sued by Minder Music for copying the line, "What we gotta do right here is go back, back in time" from the 1972 song " Troglodyte (Cave Man) " by The Jimmy Castor Bunch . [64] Following the release of the album, Billboard magazine ranked Grande at No. 4 on their list of "Music's Hottest Minors 2013", an annual ranking of the most popular musicians under the age of 21. [65] The second single, " Baby I ", debuted at No. 21 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart, making it her second Top 40 hit. [66] The song also debuted at No. 6 on the US Billboard Hot Digital Songs chart, making Grande the only female music artist to debut two songs in the top 10 of the Hot Digital Songs chart during the year 2013. [67] The third single, " Right There ", featuring Detroit rapper Big Sean , [68] [69] debuted at No. 84 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart.
In the 2013 Nickelodeon film Swindle , an adaptation of the children's book of the same name , Grande played Amanda Benson. [38] [70] That same month, she lent her vocals on the duet " Almost Is Never Enough " with Nathan Sykes of the British boy band The Wanted . She also joined Justin Bieber on his Believe Tour for three shows and kicked off her own headlining mini-tour, The Listening Sessions . [71] [72] At the 2013 American Music Awards , she won the award for New Artist of the Year . [73] [74] She released a four-song Christmas EP, Christmas Kisses in December 2013. [75] Christmas Kisses received critical praise for its "R&B spin" on the Christmas classics. [76]

2014–2015: 
By January 2014, Grande had begun recording her second studio album, with singer-songwriter Ryan Tedder and record producers Benny Blanco and Max Martin . [77] [78] Grande is also credited as a songwriter on several tracks of the album. [52] The same month, she earned the Favorite Breakout Artist award at the People's Choice Awards 2014 . [79] In March 2014, Grande sang at the White House concert, "Women of Soul: In Performance at the White House". [80] [81] The following month, President Barack Obama and first lady Michelle Obama invited Grande again to perform at the White House for the Easter Egg Roll event. [82] A duet with R&B singer Chris Brown , "Don't Be Gone Too Long", was scheduled for a March 24 release date but was delayed because of Brown's legal problems. [83] Grande received the Breakthrough Artist of the Year award from the Music Business Association , recognizing her achievements throughout 2013, including her No. 1 debut on the Billboard 200 with her first album and her top 10 single on the Hot 100. [79]
Grande released her second studio album, My Everything , on August 25, 2014, with Rolling Stone magazine writing that " My Everything is where the 21-year-old Nickelodeon starlet grows up. It's a confident, intelligent, brazen pop statement, mixing bubblegum diva vocals with EDM break beats". [84] It sold 169,000 copies in its first week and debuted atop the Billboard 200, becoming her second consecutive No. 1 album in the US. [85] Its lead single, " Problem ", features Australian rapper Iggy Azalea and premiered at the 2014 Radio Disney Music Awards on April 27. [86] [87] The song debuted at No. 3 (eventually climbing to No. 2) on the Billboard Hot 100, and debuted at No. 1 on the UK Singles Chart , becoming Grande's first No. 1 single in the United Kingdom. [88] It made British chart history as the first song to land at No. 1 based on sales and streams. [88] The song was the highest debut ever for a collaboration of female soloists. [89] The second single, " Break Free ", featuring German musician and producer Zedd , [90] peaked at No. 4 on the Billboard Hot 100 and No. 1 on the Hot Dance/Electronic Songs . [91] The futuristic video has been viewed more than 800 million times. [92] She performed the song at the opening of the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards , while winning Best Pop Video for her single "Problem". [93] That video has been viewed more than 900 million times. [94] She also provided guest vocals on " Bang Bang " with Jessie J and Nicki Minaj , the lead single from Jessie J's third studio album Sweet Talker (2014). [95] The song reached No. 3 in the US, Grande's third song in the Hot 100's top 10 the same week ("Problem", "Break Free" and "Bang Bang"), [91] and went to No.1 in the UK. She joined Adele as the only female artist with three top 10 hits simultaneously as a lead artist. [91] The music video for "Bang Bang" has been viewed more than 800 million times on YouTube. [96] Billboard's review noted that My Everything is not kid-friendly, like Grande's earlier efforts, and stated:
On September 27, 2014, Grande was the musical performer on the season 40 premiere of NBC's Saturday Night Live , with Chris Pratt hosting. [98] Three days later, the third single from My Everything , " Love Me Harder ", featuring Canadian recording artist The Weeknd , debuted on the Billboard Hot 100, later peaking at No. 7. [99] In November 2014, Grande was featured in Major Lazer's song " All My Love " which was released as the fourth single from the soundtrack album for the film The Hunger Games: Mockingjay – Part 1 . [100] The same month, Grande released a Christmas song titled " Santa Tell Me ". [101] Spending 34 consecutive weeks in the top 10 of the Billboard Hot 100 in 2014, [102] Grande had the most top 10 singles of any artist that year. [103] She later released a fifth single from My Everything , " One Last Time ", which peaked at No. 13 on the Billboard Hot 100. By April 2015, the album had sold over 600,000 copies in the US [104] and is certified double platinum by the RIAA. [60]
In early 2015, Grande embarked on The Honeymoon Tour of North America and Europe, with several later stops in Asia and South America. [105] The tour earned $14 million in its first 25 performances, selling 290,699 tickets. [106] Following the tour's early success, more dates were added, [107] and the tour concluded in October 2015 after a total of nearly 90 dates. [108] Reviews of the tour performances generally praised Grande's vocals and ability to convey emotion in the songs but found the concerts to be over-produced: "[S]ome judicious editing would've elevated the evening from surprising to satisfying and possibly even shockingly good. As it is, Grande is so busy piling on the spectacle she neglects to highlight the one thing – those deceptively powerful pipes – setting her apart from her contemporaries." [109] Grande was featured on Cashmere Cat 's song "Adore" , which was released in March during her Honeymoon Tour; a review in USA Today said: "Grande's towering vocals have never sounded better than on this offbeat R&B track." [110]
In 2015, Grande guest-starred in several episodes of the Fox comedy-horror TV series Scream Queens as Chanel #2 , [111] [112] She also launched her first fragrance, "Ari by Ariana Grande". [113] [114] Grande filmed an episode for the Fox TV reality series Knock Knock Live , but the show was cancelled before her episode aired. [115] [116] Also in 2015, Grande was recording songs for her third studio album, Dangerous Woman , which was originally titled Moonlight . [117] [118] Grande released the single " Focus ", initially intended as the lead single from the album, in October 2015, [119] which debuted at No. 7 on the Hot 100. [120] The official video of the song has been viewed more than 600 million times on YouTube. [121] During 2015, she signed an exclusive publishing contract with Universal Music Publishing Group covering her entire catalogue; [122] duetted in Italian with Andrea Bocelli on the track " E Più Ti Penso " from his album Cinema , and an accompanying video; [123] covered the song "Zero to Hero", from the film Hercules , in the compilation album We Love Disney ; [124] and was featured, with Meghan Trainor , on Who Is Fancy 's song " Boys like You ". [125] Grande also released her second Christmas EP, titled Christmas & Chill , [126] which debuted at No. 34 on the Billboard 200 [127] and No. 3 on Billboard's Holiday Albums chart. [128]

2016–present: 
In March 2016, Grande released " Dangerous Woman " as the lead single from the retitled album of the same name. [129] [130] The single debuted at No. 10 on the Billboard Hot 100 and was Grande's seventh top 10 entry on that chart. She is the first person in the history of the Hot 100 to have the lead single from each of her first three albums debut in the top 10. [2] The song later peaked at No. 8 on the Hot 100. [131] On March 12, 2016, she appeared as host and musical guest of Saturday Night Live , where she performed "Dangerous Woman" and debuted another song from the album, " Be Alright ". [132] On March 18, Grande released "Be Alright", [133] which charted at No. 43 on the Billboard Hot 100. [134]
In May 2016, among other appearances to promote the album, on The Voice season 10 finale, Grande sang her second single from the album, " Into You " (which peaked at No. 13 on the Billboard Hot 100) [135] and duetted with Christina Aguilera on "Dangerous Woman". [136] She released the album on May 20, 2016; it debuted at No. 2 on the Billboard 200, [137] No. 1 in the UK, [138] No. 2 in Japan, [139] and No. 1 in several other markets, including Australia, the Netherlands, Ireland, Italy, New Zealand and Taiwan. [140] Nolan Feeney commented in Entertainment Weekly that, in the album, Grande "pulls off pop, R&B, reggae, and house – all without overextending herself or pandering to trends". [141] At the Summertime Ball at London's Wembley Stadium in June, Grande performed three songs from the album as part of her set. [142] In August, Grande released a third single from the album, " Side to Side ", featuring rapper Nicki Minaj , her eighth top 10 entry on the Hot 100, which peaked at No. 4 on that chart. [143] The video for the song has been viewed more than 900 million times. [144] Dangerous Woman and the title track were each nominated for 2017 Grammy Awards. [145]
In 2016, Grande appeared in a cameo role in the comedy film Zoolander 2 (2016), starring Ben Stiller and Owen Wilson . [146] She also collaborated with MAC Cosmetics on a makeup collection, donating 100% of proceeds to the MAC AIDS Fund , [147] released additional fragrances [148] and launched a fashion line in collaboration with Lipsy London . [149] Grande garnered positive reviews, as host of 2016 Saturday Night Live in 2016, for her impressions of various singers, [150] [151] some of which she had done on The Tonight Show . [152] Jonathon Dornbush of Entertainment Weekly wrote that Grande "not only nailed her musical performances, but also shone as the best part of some of the night's sketches", including a "shockingly good" Jennifer Lawrence impression; "Grande proved she could hold her own amongst the SNL players." [153] Stephanie Webber of Us Weekly called Grande "really, really talented" and praised her "long list of impeccable celebrity impersonations". [154] Grande won an online voting poll on Entertainment Weekly as the "best host of the season". [155]
In August 2016, Grande performed Whitney Houston songs in a tribute to Houston on the season finale of the ABC TV show Greatest Hits [156] and headlined the opening night of Billboard's Hot 100 Festival, performing a nearly hour-long set of her singles. [157] Grande made a TV commercial for T-Mobile that first aired in October 2016. [158] She played Penny Pingleton in the December 2016 NBC television broadcast Hairspray Live! . Sonia Saraiya wrote in Variety that Grande was the show's "MVP, acting as both reliably overlook-able sidekick and, once the situation required it, showstopping diva". [159] The same month, Grande, performing in her second consecutive season finale of The Voice , sang " Faith " together with Stevie Wonder ; they collaborated on the song for the soundtrack of the 2016 film Sing . [160] She also participated in the Jingle Ball Tour 2016 . [161]
Grande began her Dangerous Woman Tour on February 3, 2017, [162] across North America through mid-April, continuing in venues in Europe in May 2017. [163] Reviewing the concert for Las Vegas Weekly , Ian Caramanzana wrote: "Grande’s burly, soulful vibrato and wide range remain the star of her show, and she's at her best when it's just her, a microphone and her band – especially when she performs ... ballads". [164] Jon Pareles of The New York Times called the concert "a show of confidence, prowess and aplomb. [Grande] flaunts professionalism. ... Her agile soprano was strong and unconcealed in every song. [165] Grande's duet with John Legend of the title track of the soundtrack for the 2017 live-action remake of Disney's Beauty and the Beast debuted on the Bilboard Hot 100 at No. 87. [166]
On May 22, 2017, Grande performed at the Manchester Arena in Manchester, England, as part of her Dangerous Woman Tour . [167] At the end of the concert, a suicide bomber detonated an explosive in the foyer of the arena , causing 22 fatalities and 120 injuries. [168] Grande was unhurt in the attack. [169] She has suspended the tour until at least June 5. [170] The tour had been scheduled to continue in Europe into June, in South America and back in North America into July, followed by several stops in Oceania in September, and ending with a stop in Asia. [171] [172]

Artistry

Musical style and influences
Grande's music is generally pop and R&B , and it has elements of funk , dance and hip hop . [52] [173] Grande said she grew up mainly listening to urban pop and 90s music . [173] [174] Grande said of her debut album, Yours Truly (2013), that "half of it is a throwback and like very familiar feeling, feel good, and then half of it is something that I've created that's sort of special and unique and refreshing". [175] The doo-wop -inspired disc was complimented for recreating the R&B "vibe and feel of the 90s" with the help of nineties R&B hit maker Babyface . [176] The follow-up, My Everything (2014), has been described as an evolution from her first album with a new sound exploring EDM and electropop genres. [84] The Los Angeles Times review of her third album, Dangerous Woman , commented that it is "impressive how fully she inhabits the emotional environment of each song here, even when one directly contradicts another. ... She's ... deft [at] adapting to different styles". [177]
Grande has cited Whitney Houston , Mariah Carey , Brandy , India.Arie , and Gloria Estefan as her major influences. She describes Estefan as the person who inspired her to pursue a career in the music industry, after Estefan complimented a performance she saw Grande give on a cruise ship when she was eight years old. [179] Grande speaks of Houston's and Carey's influence on her career, stating that they have inspired her "endlessly" since she was a child. [180] Grande further indicates that her affinity for Brandy's and India.Arie's voices and abiities have been influential to her singing. [181] [181]
She has also cited Madonna , Destiny's Child , Fergie , Christina Aguilera , Imogen Heap and Amy Winehouse as influences. [174] [178] [182] [183] Grande's debut album was inspired by artists like Amy Winehouse, Mariah Carey, Whitney Houston, Alicia Keys , Christina Aguilera, Katy Perry and Madonna, with unreleased collaborations with SkyBlu of LMFAO , 3OH!3 , Kool Kojak and Pebe Sebert . [184] [185] [186] She named Keys, Carey and Beyoncé as female artists she tried to channel during the three years it took to create the record. [187] Grande described Imogen Heap as one of her influences, noting Heap's "intricate" song structure. [181] She has described actress and singer Judy Garland as being one of her childhood influences, stating that she grew up watching and listening to Garland, admiring her ability to tell "a story when she sings". [181]

Voice
Grande possesses a four- octave and a note soprano vocal range , [188] and the whistle register . [189] With the release of her debut album, Yours Truly (2013), Grande was deemed the "mini Mariah Carey" and the "new Mariah Carey" by some critics because of her wide vocal range, sound and musical material. [190] [191] [192] Speaking on the comparisons, Julianne Escobedo Shepherd of Billboard wrote that both Carey and Grande "got the talent to let their vocals do the talking." [193] Shepherd continued, "that's not where the similarities end. ... Grande is subverting it with cute, comfortable, and on-trend dresses with a feminine slant." [193] Grande expressed her feelings towards being compared to Mariah Carey as a "huge compliment" and a "blessing", [182] [194] and has cited both Mariah Carey and Whitney Houston as influences for her work. [174] [178] She said: "[I]t's a huge compliment, but when you hear my entire album, you'll see that Mariah's sound is much different than mine." [182] Steven J. Horowitz of Billboard said in 2014 that it was time to stop comparing Grande to Carey stating, "With her sophomore album, the "Problem" singer no longer resembles the elusive chanteuse – and that's okay." [192]
Her vocal display at the 2013 American Music Awards gained praise from celebrities like Kelly Clarkson and Lady Gaga , when Grande sang an a cappella rendition of her song "The Way" and gave a Motown -style performance of "Tattooed Heart." [195] During an interview with Sirius XM , American pop singer Katy Perry praised Grande, saying she has "the best female vocal in pop music today. She has literally ... the best voice live." [196] [197] In an interview with Ryan Seacrest , Coldplay 's frontman Chris Martin was asked if a duet with her was a possibility, to which he responded: "I would man, but she can sing so much better than me. I don’t want to be humiliated in that fashion, I was in the car yesterday and "Problem" was on, I was like, 'I just can’t do that.'" [198] A CBS affiliate's critic wrote that Grande's "Into You" was the No. 2 song that "saved 2016": "We've known she had singing chops for awhile now, but Dangerous Woman puts Ariana squarely in the conversation of tour de force pop stars." [199] In 2016, composer and playwright Jason Robert Brown addressed Grande in Time magazine:

Public image
Grande's modest look early in her career was described as "age appropriate", compared with other pop stars who grew up in the public eye. [193] Jim Farber of New York Daily News wrote in 2014 that Grande received less attention "for how little she wears or how graphically she moves than for how she sings." [200] By 2014, however, she opted to wear short skirts and crop tops with knee-high boots in performances and on red carpets. [201] After years of dyeing her hair red to play Cat Valentine, Grande wore extensions while her natural hair grew out. [202] Anne T. Donahue of MTV called Grande "aesthetically relevant" and argued that her bold and whimsical fashion choices should receive more critical attention:
Although Grande drew criticism for allegedly impolite interactions with reporters and fans in 2014, [204] she dismissed these reports as "weird, inaccurate depictions". [205] After considering the incidents most frequently mentioned in the press and the available evidence, PopSugar concluded that Grande's was "just normal star behavior" and "not the most ideal situation, but ... not exactly the sign of a diva". [206] Rolling Stone wrote: "Some may cry 'diva', but it's also Grande just taking a stand to not allow others to control her image." [207] In July 2015, Grande was seen on surveillance video in a doughnut shop licking doughnuts that were on display and saying "I hate Americans. I hate America. This is disgusting." [208] She responded to critics, writing that she is "extremely proud to be an American" and that her comments related to American obesity. [209] She later released a video apology for "behaving poorly". [210] The incident was parodied by The Muppets [211] and featured in Miley Cyrus' Saturday Night Live cover of " My Way ", about the regrets of the summer of 2015. [212] Grande mocked the incident herself on Saturday Night Live in 2016. [213]
Grande was praised in the press and by female celebrities like Taylor Swift , Rita Ora and Selena Gomez for an "empowering" 2015 essay posted on Twitter decrying the double standard and misogyny in the focus of the press on female musicians' relationships and sex lives, instead of "their value as an individual". [214] [215] Grande noted that she has "more to talk about" concerning her music and accomplishments. [216] [217] In 2016, E! writer Kendall Fisher called her "a feminist hero" in an essay examining Grande's feminist statements. [218] In 2017, Celia Almeida wrote for Miami New Times :

Reception and accolades
All three of her full-length albums have been certified platinum by the RIAA. [220] Grande has a large following on social media. [6] As of March 2017, Grande's YouTube channel ArianaGrandeVevo had accrued more than 15 million subscribers and was ranked as the 25th most subscribed channel ; [221] her music videos had been viewed a total of more than 7 billion times; [3] her Instagram account had accumulated more than 100 million followers, [222] ranking her as the 2nd most followed person on Instagram ; [6] her Twitter account had more than 45 million followers, [223] placing it as the 17th most followed Twitter account ; [224] and her Facebook page had more than 30 million likes. [225]
Grande has been nominated for four Grammy Awards [145] [226] and has won an MTV Video Music Award , [227] three MTV Europe Music Awards [228] and three American Music Awards (2013, 2015 and 2016). [229] She has received seven Billboard Music Award nominations. Grande won a 2014 Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Award for Favorite TV Actress for her performances on Sam & Cat . [230] Subsequently, she won two more Kids' Choice Awards [231] [232] and one People's Choice Award . [233] In 2014, she received a Breakthrough Artist of the Year award from the Music Business Association for excellence during her debut year. [234] At the Bambi Awards , she received an award for Best Newcomer. [235] She also received the 2014 IHeartRadio Music Awards Young Influencer Award [236] and the Billboard Women in Music Award: Rising Star for her accomplishments in 2014. [237] She has won six Teen Choice Awards . [238] [239] [240] In 2016, Grande was listed among Time ' s 100 most influential people in the world . [5]

Activism and charitable activities
At the age of ten Grande co-founded the South Florida youth singing group Kids Who Care, which performed for charitable fund-raising events and raised over $500,000 for charities in 2007 alone. [241] In 2009, as a member of the charitable organization Broadway in South Africa, Grande, along with her brother Frankie, performed and taught music and dance to children in Gugulethu , South Africa. [242] [243] After watching Blackfish , she urged fans to stop supporting SeaWorld and became a vegan. [8] [244]
She was featured, along with Bridgit Mendler and Kat Graham , in Seventeen magazine in a March 2013 public campaign to end online bullying called "Delete Digital Drama". [245] In September 2014, Grande participated at the charitable Stand Up to Cancer television program, performing the title track "My Everything" in dedication to her grandfather, who had died from cancer in July. [246] Grande, who has adopted several rescue dogs as pets, promoted pet adoption and paid the adoption fees of 35 rescue dogs in connection with her concerts at Madison Square Garden in New York City and American Airlines Arena in Miami in March 2015. [247] [248] In 2016, she launched, with MAC Cosmetics, a line of lip shades called "Ariana Grande's MAC Viva Glam". All of the profits benefit people affected by HIV and AIDS. [249] [250]
In May 2015, Grande and Miley Cyrus performed a cover of Crowded House 's " Don't Dream It's Over " to raise awareness for Cyrus's Happy Hippie Foundation, which helps homeless and LGBT youths. [251] The song was part of Cyrus's series of "Backyard Sessions" collaborations. [252] In June 2015, Grande headlined the Dance On the Pier event, part of the LGBT Pride Week in New York City, [111] [253] In 2016, Grande joined Madonna to raise funds for orphaned children in Malawi . [254] Grande and Victoria Monét recorded a 2016 song, "Better Days", in support of the Black Lives Matter movement. [255]

Personal life
Grande was raised a Roman Catholic but abandoned Catholicism during the pontificate of Benedict XVI , [256] citing opposition to the church's stance on homosexuality , [8] [257] noting that her half-brother is gay. [258] She has followed Kabbalah teachings since the age of twelve, along with her brother Frankie, [259] believing "the basis lies in the idea that if you're kind to others, good things will happen to you." [260] A few of her songs, such as "Break Your Heart Right Back", are supportive of LGBT rights. [261]
Grande met actor Graham Phillips in the cast of the musical 13 in 2008 and dated him until December 2011. [262] She dated Australian YouTube comedian Jai Brooks from August 2012 to July 2013. [263] [264] Grande dated her former musical collaborator, Big Sean , for eight months until April 2015. [265] [266]

Stage

Filmography

Discography

Tours
Headlining
Festivals (various artists)
Opening act

See also
WebPage index: 00008
2017 Indian Premier League Final
The 2017 Indian Premier League Final was a day/night Twenty20 cricket match between the Mumbai Indians and the Rising Pune Supergiant , on 21 May 2017, at Rajiv Gandhi International Cricket Stadium , Hyderabad . It was held to determine the winner of the 2017 season of the Indian Premier League , an annual Twenty20 tournament in India. [1]
Mumbai, playing in their fourth IPL final, defeated Pune by 1 run to win their third title. Mumbai's Krunal Pandya was awarded man of the match award for his innings of 47. The final was sold out, with a final attendance of 34,158. [2] [3]

Road to the final

League stage
Mumbai and Pune were ranked first and second respectively on the league table. [4] Mumbai had a successful first half of the season, winning six out of six matches after their opening game defeat to Pune. They managed four wins in the second half of the league stage, and finished on top of the league table with 20 points. Mumbai's success in the first half of the season was built around contributions from various batsmen, Nitish Rana and Jos Buttler in particular, as well as Mitchell McClenaghan , Jasprit Bumrah and Krunal Pandya among the bowlers. However, in the first week of May, Mumbai replaced Buttler, who was to leave for national duty after the league stage, with Lendl Simmons to open the innings, while Rana had a loss of form that led to him being benched, and Pandya was sidelined for over ten days with an injury.
Pune began the season with three defeats in their first four games, with their inexperienced bowling lineup and multi-million-dollar signing Ben Stokes struggling. [5] After this, Pune formed a settled bowling attack led by Jaydev Unadkat , Shardul Thakur , Stokes and Imran Tahir , and went on to win eight of their remaining ten matches. Stokes turned out to be a match-winner with both bat and ball, winning three man of the match awards, [6] while Rahul Tripathi and captain Steve Smith produced consistent performances with the bat. The team was also buoyed by 17-year-old Washington Sundar 's economical bowling [7] and Manoj Tiwary 's lower-order cameos, but had Stokes and Tahir departing for their respective countries on national duty at the end of the league stage. [8] [9]

League stage series
Pune won both league stage meetings against Mumbai. In the first meeting at Pune, Mumbai posted 184/8 in 20 overs after being put into bat, largely thanks to Hardik Pandya 's 35 not out off 15 balls coming in at number eight. Pune then chased down the total in the final over, having lost only three wickets, with captain Smith top-scoring with an unbeaten 84 and Ajinkya Rahane scoring a 34-ball 60. [10] In the second encounter between the two teams, Mumbai opted to field first, having prior to the match won all five games in the season in which they batted second. Pune put up 160/6 on the board, Tripathi top-scoring with 45. Mumbai, in reply, could manage only 157/8 in 20 overs, falling short by 3 runs despite captain Rohit Sharma 's 58 off 39 balls. This ended Mumbai's six-match winning streak; Stokes won man of the match for his bowling figures of 2/21 in 4 overs. [11]

Playoff stage
The playoff stage was played according to the Page playoff system and provided Mumbai and Pune, being the top- and second-ranked teams, with two ways of qualifying for the Final. They first faced each other in Qualifier 1, where the winners would qualify for the Final. The losers of Qualifier 1 would play against the winners of the Eliminator in Qualifier 2; the winners of this match would also qualify for the Final.
The Qualifier 1 was played at the Wankhede Stadium, home ground of Mumbai, where the home team won the toss and elected to bowl first at a venue favorable to teams batting second. Pune were reduced to 9 for 2 after the first two overs, with their top two batsmen of the season Tripathi and Smith dismissed for 0 and 1 respectively. Rahane and Tiwary then put up a 80-run partnership for the third wicket, scoring at close to 8 runs per over. After the fall of Rahane for 56 in the 13th over, Tiwary and MS Dhoni initially struggled to score freely on the "slow" and "two-paced" pitch [12] and the score read 121/3 after 18 overs. The last two overs, however, yielded 41 runs which included 26 runs off the penultimate over by McClenaghan. Dhoni remained unbeaten on 40 from 26 balls with five sixes, whereas Tiwary was dismissed run out off the last ball of the innings for 58. Pune's total of 162 was thought to be "below par". [12]
In reply, the Mumbai runchase started on a positive note with Parthiv Patel batting aggressively in the powerplay . The run out of Simmons in the fifth over was followed by off-spinner Sundar taking three wickets (captain Sharma, Ambati Rayudu and Kieron Pollard ) in two overs. Mumbai continued losing wickets at regular intervals and could only manage to score 142/9 in their 20 overs, falling short by 20 runs. Pune thus advanced to the Final for the first time and completed a hat-trick of wins over Mumbai in the season; [12] Sundar won man of the match for his bowling efforts (3/16 in 4 overs).
In Qualifier 2 at Bangalore, Mumbai took on the Kolkata Knight Riders who had knocked out defending champions Sunrisers Hyderabad in the Eliminator. Sharma won the toss again and elected to field keeping in mind the possibility of rain which had affected the Eliminator. [13] The bowlers backed the captain's decision by taking early wickets to reduce Kolkata to 31/5 after 7 overs. Ishank Jaggi and Suryakumar Yadav offered some resistance for Kolkata who were eventually bowled out for 107 in the 19th over. For Mumbai, leg-spinner Karn Sharma took 4 for 16 while Bumrah took 3 for 7. In their runchase Mumbai were in a precarious position of 34/3, before Krunal Pandya came to the crease and guided them to victory with an unbeaten 30-ball 45. Mumbai qualified for the Final with this win, setting up the season's fourth encounter with cross-expressway rivals Pune. [14]

Final

Background
The final was played at the neutral venue of Rajiv Gandhi International Cricket Stadium , Hyderabad , the home of the previous season champions. This was Mumbai Indians' fourth appearance in an IPL final, having won twice and lost once in the finals before. [14] The Rising Pune Supergiant, in their second and final year in the IPL, were playing in their first final. Pune led the overall head-to-head record 4–1, and had beaten Mumbai in all three previous meetings in the season. [15]
Pune were without Ben Stokes , the leader of the Most Valuable Player of the season, and Mumbai without Jos Buttler for the final. Both players were recalled by the England and Wales Cricket Board at the conclusion of the league stage to join a training camp in Spain ahead of the 2017 ICC Champions Trophy . [16] Pune also missed the services of their premier spinner Imran Tahir who had returned to South Africa for England tour and Champions Trophy preparation. Mumbai's leading wicket-taker of the season Mitchell McClenaghan , who had missed Qualifier 2 with an injury, was ruled out of the final as well. [15]

Report
Mumbai captain Rohit Sharma won the toss and elected to bat first on what he believed to be a "good pitch" which "plays a little slower in the second innings"; Pune captain Steve Smith said he would also have batted first. Both teams were unchanged from their respective previous matches. [17]
Mumbai made a poor start to their innings, losing both openers to Jaydev Unadkat in the third over of the innings. As the run rate slowed down, Sharma looked to counter-attack and struck four boundaries off Lockie Ferguson in the last over of powerplay. Ferguson came back to remove Ambati Rayudu in his next over, while Adam Zampa got the wickets of Sharma and Kieron Pollard in the 11th over. The form continued as they made it to 81 for 7 after 15 overs. [17] The last recognised batsman Krunal Pandya then scored rapidly, making 47 runs from 38 deliveries, with tail-end support from Australian Mitchell Johnson who scored 13. [1] Mumbai's innings concluded at 129 for 8 in 20 overs. [18]
Pune started positively in their runchase, despite losing Rahul Tripathi early in the innings. After being dropped on 14, Ajinkya Rahane made 44 from 38 deliveries, putting up a 54-run partnership with Smith which ended with Rahane's dismissal in the 12th over. [1] Economical bowling from Mumbai bowlers restricted Pune to 83 for 2 after 15 overs, leaving them 47 to get from the last 5 overs. Pune struck 14 runs in the 16th over to tilt the match in their favour, before Jasprit Bumrah dismissed MS Dhoni in the next over in which he conceded only 3 runs. [19] Pune reached 119 for 3 at the end of 19 overs with a six from Smith off the penultimate ball of the penultimate over, and the equation read 11 runs to get in the final over to be bowled by Johnson. Manoj Tiwary struck a four off the first ball, before he and Smith were dismissed caught in the deep in the next two deliveries. A drop catch off the penultimate ball allowed Pune to get two runs and come within four runs of the target with one ball to go. [19] On the final ball of the innings Dan Christian ran two and Washington Sundar was run out attempting a third run, resulting in a one-run victory for Mumbai. [18]

Summary
It was Mumbai's third IPL title, making them the first team to have won the IPL title more than twice. Mumbai's total of 129 was also the lowest winning total in the first innings of an IPL final. [19] Krunal Pandya was awarded man of the match for his 38-ball 47. Pune all-rounder Stokes won the Most Valuable Player award for the season. Mumbai won a prize money of ₹ 15 crore for becoming the champions, while runners-up Pune were awarded ₹ 10 crore. [20]
WebPage index: 00009
Portugal in the Eurovision Song Contest
Portugal has participated in the Eurovision Song Contest 49 times since its debut in the 1964 contest . Since then it has missed five contests, in 1970 , 2000 , 2002 , 2013 and 2016 . Portugal held the record for the most appearances in the contest without a win until 2017 when they won in Kiev, Ukraine, with Salvador Sobral 's entry, " Amar pelos dois ". The contest is broadcast in Portugal by Rádio e Televisão de Portugal (RTP).
Portugal's debut entry was António Calvário with " Oração ". It was not a successful debut for the country, with Calvário coming last in the contest. Since then, Portugal has come last on two further occasions, in 1974 , when Paulo de Carvalho sang " E depois do adeus ", and in 1997 , when Célia Lawson performed " Antes do adeus ". Despite its last-place finish in the contest, "E depois do adeus" had at that time gained national notability for being one of the two musical signals to begin the Carnation Revolution against the Estado Novo regime. Prior to their sixth-place finish for Lúcia Moniz , with the song " O meu coração não tem cor " in 1996 , Portugal's best result in the contest was two seventh-place finishes, for Carlos Mendes in 1972 and José Cid in 1980 . Despite having some really weak results, the 90s were the most successful decade for the country, reaching the top 10 four times. Portugal had admission to take part in the 2000 and 2002 contest but refused. Its place was taken by Latvia both times, which ended up winning the contest in the latter year.
Since semi-finals were introduced in 2004 , Portugal has failed to reach the final eight times, including from 2004 to 2007. The country did reach the final from 2008 to 2010. In 2008 , Vânia Fernandes finished 13th with the song " Senhora do Mar ", Portugal's best outcome since 1996. In 2017 , Portugal reached the finals with Salvador Sobral 's entry, " Amar pelos dois ", ending a 6-year non-appearance in the finals (Portugal did not participate in the song contest in 2013 and 2016; and did not qualify for the finals in 2011, 2012, 2014 and 2015), and to conclude a return to the final, they also won the contest for the first time ever, earning 758 points.

Absences
Portugal has been absent from five contests since their first participation. The country's first absence was in 1970 , where Portugal, along with four other countries, boycotted the contest due to the result of the previous year, when four countries were announced the winner. [1]
Portugal missed the 2000 contest due to their poor average results over the past five years. Despite being eligible to enter the 2002 contest , RTP declined to enter, and was replaced by eventual winner Latvia . [2]
The fourth absence was in 2013 , when Portugal didn't participate for financial reasons. [3]
The fifth absence was in 2016 . [4] RTP mentioned that this break was needed, so that the national selection for the Eurovision Song Contest had its contents renewed. [5]

Festival da Canção
Festival da Canção (sometimes referred to as "Festival RTP da Canção") is the Portuguese national selection for the Eurovision Song Contest, organized by RTP, and is normally held in February/March of the year of the contest. It is one of the longest-running Eurovision selection methods. Previously a number of regional juries selected the winner, however recently the winner has been selected through televoting. In 2009, 2010 and 2017, a 50-50 system between district juries and televote (like in the ESC) has been used.
In the years when Portugal does not participate in the contest, the Festival da Canção was not held, except in two occasions: in 1970, when Portugal boycotted the contest, and in 2000.

Contestants
NOTE : If a country had won the previous year, they did not have to compete in the semi-finals the following year. In addition from 2004-2007, the top ten countries who were not members of the big four did not have to compete in the semi-finals the following year. If, for example, Germany and France placed inside the top ten, the countries who placed 11th and 12th were advanced to the following year's grand final along with the rest of the top ten countries.

Voting history
As of 2017 , Portugal's voting history is as follows:

Hostings

Marcel Bezençon Awards
Press Award
Artistic Award
Composer Award

Commentators and spokespersons

Comedy
In the late 1990s the English actor and comedian Steve Coogan created the character "Tony Ferrino" for his television comedy series. "Tony Ferrino" is supposedly a Portuguese singer and winner of the Eurovision Song Contest; he is a stereotype based on singers and entertainers often seen on European television programmes in the 1970s and 1980s. The BBC produced a one-off programme The Tony Ferrino Phenomenon in 1997.

Photogallery

See also
WebPage index: 00010
Battle of Mosul (2016–present)
The Battle of Mosul ( Arabic : معركة الموصل ‎‎; Central Kurdish : شەڕی مووسڵ ‎) is a joint offensive by Iraqi government forces with allied militias, the Kurdistan Regional Government , and international forces to retake the city of Mosul from the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). [75] [76] [77] The offensive, dubbed Operation " We Are Coming, Nineveh " ( قادمون يا نينوى ; Qadimun Ya Naynawa ), [78] [79] began on 16 October 2016, with forces besieging ISIL-controlled areas in the Nineveh Governorate surrounding Mosul. [80] [81] [82] The battle for Mosul is considered key in the military intervention against ISIL , which seized the city in June 2014. [83] Outnumbering ISIL forces 10 to 1, it is the largest deployment of Iraqi troops since the 2003 invasion of Iraq . [84]
The operation follows the Mosul offensives in 2015 and 2016 . The offensive began with Iraqi troops and Peshmerga fighters engaging ISIL on three fronts outside Mosul, going from village to village in the surrounding area. More than 120 towns and villages were recaptured from ISIL control in the first two weeks of fighting. At dawn on 1 November 2016, Iraqi Special Operations Forces entered the city from the east. [85] Met with fierce fighting, the government advance into the city was slowed by elaborate defenses – including road blocks, booby traps, suicide bombers and snipers – and by the presence of civilians. [86] The Iraqi Prime Minister announced "full liberation of eastern side of Mosul" on 24 January 2017. [87] Iraqi troops were then regrouped and began their offensive to recapture western Mosul on 19 February 2017. [88]
The Battle of Mosul is concurrent with the Battle of Sirte (2016) in Libya, and the Raqqa campaign by the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF), on ISIL's capital city and stronghold in Syria . [89]

Background

General background
Mosul is Iraq's second most populous city. It fell to 800–1,500 ISIL militants in June 2014, because of the largely Sunni population's deep distrust of the primarily Shia Iraqi government, and its corrupt armed forces. [52] [90] It was in the Great Mosque in Mosul that ISIL leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi declared the beginning of ISIL's self-proclaimed "caliphate" which spans Iraq and Syria. [90] The original population of 2.5 million has fallen to approximately 1.5 million after two years of ISIL rule. The city was once extremely diverse, with ethnic minorities including Armenians , Yazidis , Assyrian , Turkmen , and Shabak people, all of whom have suffered and continue to suffer considerably under the (majority Sunni Arab) Islamic State. [91] Mosul remains the last stronghold of ISIL in Iraq, [92] and the anticipated offensive to reclaim it was promoted as the "mother of all battles". [93] [94] [95] [96]

Preparations for the battle
In the weeks leading up to the ground offensive, the US-led CJTF – OIR coalition bombed ISIL targets, and the Iraqi Army made gradual advances on the city. [84] Royal Air Force 's Reaper drones, Typhoons , and Tornados targeted " rocket launchers , ammunition stockpiles , artillery pieces and mortar positions" in the 72 hours before the ground assault began. [97] Leaflets dropped on the city by the Iraqi military advised young male residents to "rise up" against ISIL when the battle began. [92] To prepare defenses against the assault, ISIL operatives dug 4 m 2 holes around the city, which they planned to fill with burning oil to reduce visibility [84] and slow advances. [49] They also built hundreds of elaborate tunnels in the villages surrounding Mosul, rigged with explosives and booby-traps, and laid improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and mines along the roads. [98] There was considerable concern that ISIL might employ chemical weapons against soldiers and civilians. [99]
According to Iraqi sources, the assault towards Mosul was being waged from Al-Khazer axis (east of Mosul), Mosul Dam (northern axis), Baashiqa axis (eastern axis), Al-Qayyarah axis (southern axis), and Talul el-Baj- Al-Khadr axis (southwestern axis). [100]

Forces involved in the offensive
About 3,000–5,000 ISIL fighters were estimated to be in Mosul city, according to the United States Department of Defense. [101] Other estimates ranged as low as 2,000 and high as 12,000 ISIL fighters. [52] [54] Mosul Eye estimated approximately 8,000–9,000 fighters loyal to ISIL, with "half of them... highly trained, and the rest... either teenagers or not well trained. About ten percent of the fighters are foreign (Arabs and non-Arabs). The rest are Iraqis. Most are from Nineveh’s townships and districts." [102] Prior to the start of the battle, in late September 2016, it was estimated that around 20,000 ISIL fighters were living in Mosul, [103] many of whom later fled the city to Syria and Ar-Raqqah, when Iraqi forces began to besiege Mosul.
The Iraqi-led coalition was initially estimated by CNN to have 94,000 members, [104] but this number was later revised upward to 108,500; [50] 54,000 to 60,000 Iraqi security forces (ISF) soldiers, 16,000 Popular Mobilization Forces (PMF) fighters (also referred to as PMU), and 40,000 Peshmerga (including approximately 200 Iranian Kurdish female fighters from the Kurdistan Freedom Party (PAK) [105] are deployed in the battle. [48] [49]
Among the PMF units, the Nineveh Plain Protection Units composed of Assyrians are among the paramilitary forces in the government coalition. [106] [107] Shia militias, including several brigades of the paramilitary organization Hashd al-Shaabi, the Peace Companies , Kata'ib Hezbollah , the League of the Righteous , the Badr Organization , Saraya Ashura, Saraya Khorasani, Kata'ib al-Imam Ali , Harakat Hezbollah al-Nujaba and Turkmen Brigades also took part. [108] [109] The Ezidi community of the Sinjar region contributed the Sinjar Resistance Units (YBŞ) and Êzîdxan Women's Units (YJÊ), [110] which are operating in concert with Sunni Arab Shammar tribal militias and People's Defence Forces (HPG) of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK). [111] Other Assyrian forces involved in the planned offensive includes the Nineveh Plain Forces (NPF) and Dwekh Nawsha , who are allied to the Peshmerga. [112] [113]
An international coalition of 60 nations, led by the United States, is supporting Iraq's war against ISIL, providing logistical and air support, intelligence, and advice. [114] The international coalition forces are headquartered 60 kilometres (37 mi) south of Mosul at Qayyarah Airfield West (or Q-West) in Qayyarah , which was retaken from ISIL in June. [115] About 560 U.S. troops from the 101st Airborne Division were deployed to Q-West for the battle, including command and control elements, a security detachment, an airfield operations team, and logistics and communications specialists. [116] The U.S. deployed HIMARS rocket launchers and M777 howitzers , manned by the 101st's 2nd Brigade Combat Team and the Golf Company, 526th Brigade Support Battalion. The French army deployed four CAESAR howitzers and 150 to 200 soldiers at Qayyarah, with 600 more French troops announced at the end of September. [117] An additional 150 French soldiers are in Erbil , east of Mosul, training Peshmerga. [109] The aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle , with a squadron of 24 Rafale M jets , was deployed from Toulon to the Syrian coast to support the operation against ISIL through airstrikes and reconnaissance missions; 12 other Rafale jets are operating out of French Air Force bases in Jordan and the United Arab Emirates (UAE). [118] [119] 80 Australian special forces soldiers and 210 Canadian Special Operations Forces Command (CANSOFCOM) soldiers were also deployed to assist the Peshmerga. In addition, the Canadian Forces 21 Electronic Warfare Regiment was also reported to be in the area, working to intercept and relay ISIL communications, while a Role 2 Canadian Army field hospital with 60 personnel has been set up to treat Peshmerga casualties. [120] [121]
The Ba'ath loyalists group, known to be led by Saddam Hussein 's former vice president Izzat Ibrahim al-Douri , issued a statement before the start of operations calling for the people of the city to start an uprising against ISIL and announced that they will fight the "terrorist organization." [122] [123]

Timeline of the battle

2016

October: Initial advances
On 16 October 2016, Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi declared the beginning of the assault to recapture the city of Mosul. [82] Officials reported howitzers firing on ISIL targets later that day. [80] The main assault began on 17 October at approximately 6am, [92] with shelling and the arrival of armored vehicles to the front lines. [124] The Peshmerga in the Khazir region, east of Mosul, started the ground assault by advancing on ISIL-held villages from three fronts, while Iraqi security forces advanced from the south. [125] Iraqi troops advanced on the Bartella area east of Mosul while ISIL fighters fired mortars at Peshmerga. [126] The President of KRG , Massoud Barzani , said that Peshmerga and Iraqi government fighters retook 200 square kilometers (80 square miles) from ISIL on the first day of fighting. [127] Iraqi government officials reported that "heavy losses of life and equipment" were inflicted upon ISIL fighters in the Hamdaniya district southeast of Mosul. ISIL fighters who were wounded in the battle were reported to have been bussed towards its Syrian headquarters of Raqqa for medical aid. [48] The anti-ISIL coalition destroyed 52 targets during the day. [128] Family members of ISIL fighters fled from Mosul to the village of Nawran due to the shelling. It was also reported that some fighters had started shaving their beards and were getting rid of their Afghan uniforms. [129] ISIL was also reported to have evacuated and shifted its headquarters from the west side of Mosul to its east side. [130] A bridge into Mosul known as the "Freedom Bridge" was destroyed. Peshmerga sources blamed ISIL for its destruction, while ISIL claimed it was destroyed by airstrikes. [131]
On 18 October, the Iraqi government declared that twenty villages near Mosul were captured from ISIL in the first 24 hours of fighting by the Peshmerga and Iraqi forces. [132] On the southern front, Iraqi troops retook several villages near Qayyarah , including al-Sirt, Bajwaniya, al-Hud and al-Mashraf, and parts of the al-Hamdaniya District southeast of Mosul. Iraqi Federal Police also regained control of 56 oilfields in the Qayyarah district. [133] According to reports, the Peshmerga met little resistance on the eastern front, while Iraqi and PMF fighters coming from the south were facing tougher resistance from ISIL. [134]
The coalition strategy was reported to be to encircle Mosul completely, after which Iraqi troops would advance into the city-center. [135] Early in the day on 18 October, Iraqi forces in the east came close to Qaraqosh (Bakhdida), once the largest Assyrian town in Iraq, and fighters in the south were closing in on Hammam al-'Alil. [128] Iraqi Army forces later stormed Qaraqosh and fought with ISIL fighters who remained holed up. [136] [137] [138] The Iraqi and Peshmerga advance had been slowed down during the same day due to suicide bombers, roadside IEDs and oil fires. In order to eliminate any ISIL presence completely from the villages on the outskirts of the city, they were carrying out street-by-street search operations. [139] [140] The Peshmerga later paused their advance while the Iraqi Army continued its advance. [141]
Pro-government fighters in the south of Mosul were battling pockets of ISIL fighters and snipers as they tried to reclaim the village of Abbasi, [142] and expected to soon take control of the village of Zawiya. [143] Fighting resumed in the village of Kani Harami, which was captured by the Iraqi Army a day earlier but recaptured by ISIL on 18 October as the Army lacked reinforcements. [137] The Army also retook the village of Al-Hud on the Tigris, where villagers had risen up against ISIL and killed at least 9 militants. [144] [145] State police also secured the Al-Mishraq sulfur plant south of Mosul. [146] The al-Shura district was stated by its mayor to have been captured by the Iraqi security forces. [147] Joint airstrikes by Iraqi and coalition warplanes on ISIL headquarters in Mosul destroyed 13 targets and killed 35 militants. [148]
As the Iraqi Army advanced on Mosul, rebellion against ISIL broke out in the city. The group's Islamic Police revolted and attacked four headquarters of the organisation. The revolt was put down with 7 rebellious leaders being killed and many militants being executed. A group of rebels attacked a headquarters of the group the next day, killed 2 militants and raised the Iraqi flag over the building. ISIL patrols in the city were also attacked. [149] [150] [151]
A group of Naqshabandi Army militants reportedly attacked an ISIL controlled checkpoint in the village of Al-Houd, wounding two ISIL militants before they were captured along with a few other militants who attacked a group of ISIL militants in the same village in coordination with the PMF on the day before. In total, 30 Naqshabandi militants were captured. [152]
The Iraqi army resumed fighting on 19 October, surrounding Qaraqosh with ISIL deploying snipers and car bombs. [153] [154] Lt. Gen. Qassim al-Maliki declared that Iraqi forces had captured 13 villages north and northeast of Al Quwayr, south of Mosul. The Iraqi Army was also reported to be within 6 kilometres (3.7 mi) from the outskirts of Mosul. [155] The village of Kani Harami was captured after heavy fighting in the morning with the militants retreating to Abbasiyah. [156] A total of 22 towns were reported to have been captured, with 12 by the Peshmerga and 10 by the ISF. [157] Nofal Hammadi, governor of the Nineveh Governorate , declared that 40% of the province had been retaken from ISIL. [158]
The offensive to retake the town of Bashiqa northeast of Mosul, originally scheduled for dawn, was delayed due to lack of logistical support. [159] Thousands of Peshmerga were reportedly preparing to retake Bashiqa. [160] The international coalition's commander Gary Voelsky also stated that a majority of ISIL leaders were fleeing Mosul and predicted foreign fighters will form the majority of militants remaining in the city. [161] [162]
The fighting grew more intense on 20 October. [163] A large convoy of Golden Division arrived at positions retaken by the Peshmerga forces. [164] They also captured Bartella . ISIL fighters detonated 9 truck bombs during the fighting. [165] According to Maj. Gen. Maan al-Saadi of the Iraqi Army, 200 ISIL fighters were killed in the fight for Bartella. [163]
The Peshmerga and NPF also announced a "large-scale operation" to the north and northeast of Mosul, aiming to retake the Assyrian towns of Tesqopa and Bashiqa . [162] [166] During the day, the Peshmerga liberated 6 villages, including 4 on the Bashiqa front line and 2 on the Nawaran front. In addition, they also entered another 4 villages. They briefly captured the village of Tiz Khirab but were forced to withdraw. [167] On the southern front, Iraqi forces resumed their push north after a brief pause [168] and recaptured six villages east of Qayyarah . [167]
A U.S. bomb disposal expert embedded with the Peshmerga was killed after the vehicle he was riding in drove over a roadside bomb. [169] ISIL also set Al-Mishraq sulfur plant on fire, causing two deaths and nearly 1,000 hospitalizations from sulfur fume inhalation. [170] An ISIL ambush near Bashiqa left dozens of Peshmerga dead or wounded. [168] The group was also reported to be digging trenches to slow the advancement of coalition troops. [171]
ISIL launched multiple attacks in Kirkuk on 21 October to divert military resources. Multiple explosions and gun battles in the city, mostly centered on a government compound were reported. A suicide bomber killed 13 workers, including four Iranians, at a power plant in Dibis . A senior Peshmerga commander said that attackers had entered by posing as IDPs . [172] Iraqi government forces meanwhile reported that they had retaken 2 more villages south of Mosul and killed 15 militants. [173]
On 22 October, Iraqi police declared that ISIL's attack on Kirkuk had been repelled and all attackers had been killed or had blown themselves up. [174] Iraqi officials also stated that 80 people were killed in Kirkuk, primarily Kurdish security forces, and about 170 wounded; 56 ISIL militants were also killed. [175] A reporter of Türkmeneli TV also died in the attack, [174] while at least seven journalists were wounded. [176]
A large-scale offensive began to retake the Assyrian town of Qaraqosh which remained under ISIL control after several days of fighting. [177] Iraqi troops also advanced on the town of Tel Keppe , north of Mosul. [178] Shifting winds sent the gas from the ablaze Al Mishraq sulphur plant to Qayyarah Airfield West , where U.S. and coalition forces were forced to use gas masks. [174] A journalist was also killed by a sniper in the al-Shura area. [174]
Mosul Eye reported that ISIL had executed detainees and teens aged 15–18 comprised the majority of ISIL fighters in Mosul. The group was also reported to have planted bombs and booby traps throughout the city and was preparing for battle. [179]
The Peshmerga claimed on 23 October that they had recaptured Bashiqa , [180] [181] however it was reported on the following day that they were still trying to capture it with the help of the Turkish military. [182] The Peshmerga General Command also stated that Peshmerge had cordoned off 8 villages and had secured a significant stretch of the Bashiqa-Mosul highway. It also stated that they were now within 9 kilometres (5.6 mi) of the city. [183]
ISIL increased its counterattacks in order to distract the pro-government advancing towards Mosul. In addition to the attack on Kirkuk on 21 October, ISIL fighters struck Ar-Rutbah as well as Sinjar . Yazidi provincial chief Mahma Xelil said that at least 15 ISIL fighters were killed and two Peshmerga wounded in a two-hour battle in Sinjar. ISIL claimed its forces destroyed two Peshmerga vehicles, killing all on board. [184] Nearly 800 ISIL fighters had been killed while 78 villages were reported to have been retaken from the group as of 24 October. [185] The attack on Kirkuk was also brought to an end by 24 October, with 74 militants being killed and others including the leader of the attackers being arrested. [186]
Iraqi Special Operations Forces, advancing on Mosul from the east of the city, were reported to be within 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) of the city and were pausing to wait for reinforcements before proceeding. [187] Turkish military supporting the Peshmerga destroyed several ISIL targets in the Bashiqa region of Northern Iraq. [188] [189] ISIL also used the burning oil trenches to impede the visibility of the Iraqi Air Force and international coalition air force and executed 9 deserters. [190]
Iraqi forces were met with heavy resistance from ISIL as they attempted to clear the militants from villages in Shora, south of Mosul. [191] Hundreds of ISIL suicide bombers were reported to have been sent from Syria to defend Mosul. [192]
Meanwhile, Peshmerga forces captured the village of Derk, 12 kilometres (7.5 mi) northeast of Mosul, where they discovered a large ISIL tunnel containing a large cache of weapons. [193] Stephen Townsend, the commander of US forces in Iraq, stated that coalition forces had delivered more than 2,100 aerial bombs, artillery and mortar shells, rockets and missiles since the offensive to retake Mosul started. The Iraqi government stated that that 57 Iraqi soldiers had been killed and about 250 wounded while 20 to 30 Peshmerga fighters are thought to have been killed. [194]
Captain Fahd al-Laithi of Iraq's National Information Agency stated that 13 militants were killed in a coalition airstrike that targeted an IS concentration in the Hamam al-Alil district while Iraqi forces had managed to retake 2 villages to the south of Mosul. [195] The head of the United States Central Command , Gen. Joseph Votel stated that 800-900 militants had been killed in the battle. [194]
U.S. military officials estimated on 28 October that were 3,000 to 5,000 ISIL fighters left defending Mosul while 1,500 to 2,000 militants were stationed outside the city. [196] Abdulrahman al Wagga, a member of Nineveh provincial council, stated that Iraqi forces had retaken the town of Al-Shura, to the south of Mosul and had evacuated 5,000 to 6,000 civilians from there. He further stated that the area was now being cleared of homemade bombs and booby traps while security forces had almost surrounded Hammam al-Alil. [197] He also stated Iraqi security forces might storm Hammam al-Alil in the next few hours but that it would depend on the situation on the ground, as civilians were still present and ISIL militants were using a "scorched earth" policy by destroying houses, buildings and bridges to slow them down. [198]
Peshmerga and Iraqi forces also captured Fadiliya, which lies just 4 km away from Mosul. [199] UN meanwhile stated that ISIL had taken tens of thousands of civilians to use as human shields in Mosul, including at least 5,000 families from around Al-Shura and 2,210 families from the Nimrud area of Hamdaniya. Those who refused to go were executed [197] [200]
The PMF stated on 29 October they had launched an offensive towards the west of Mosul with an aim to capture villages west of Mosul and reach the town of Tal Afar in order to prevent ISIL fighters from retreating into neighboring Syria or any reinforcement for their defense of Mosul. They have been tasked with recapturing around 14,000 km 2 of territory from the group. [201] [202] [203] They also stated that they would not enter Mosul. [204] Meanwhile, Iraqi Army and PMF captured 15 villages from ISIL. [203]
Mosul Eye confirmed that civilians from outside Mosul had been abducted and forced into the city by ISIL which was confiscating homes from people for their own use. A new escape route from Mosul had been set up by Syrian Kurds, who were charging $3,000 per person to smuggle people out of the city to Turkey. The blog also reported that all bridges into the city were booby-trapped with IEDs. [205]
The Peshmerga stated on 30 October that they had captured six more villages to north and east of Mosul, and had seized control of several major roads and landmarks. [206] It also stated that it had captured 500 square kilometers of territory since the operation began. [207] PMF meanwhile stated that they had captured eight more villages to the southwest of Mosul. [208] SOHR stated that at least 480 Syrian fighters including 300 child soldiers (known as "Cubs of the Caliphate") brought to Iraq by ISIL had been killed since the offensive began. [209]
On 31 October, a major Iraqi operation was launched on Bazwaya, to the east of Mosul. The ISOF came under heavy fire from ISIL but managed to capture the town along with several nearby villages. [210] After capturing Bazwaya, ISOF were less than 1 mile (1.6 km) from Mosul. [211]
Several Iraqi military officials stated that ISOF will begin its push into Mosul shortly. [212] [213] [214] The U.S.-led coalition meanwhile aimed to target ISIL militants from the air if they attempted to flee the city. The US Department of Defense stated that hundreds of militants were believed to have already escaped. [215] Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi meanwhile called on ISIL fighters in Mosul to surrender. [211]

November: Entering East Mosul, reaching Tal Afar
The operation to enter the city began at dawn on 1 November. The forces began their assault in Mosul's eastern Karama district, with artillery, tank and machine-gun fire on ISIL positions as they prepared the larger push into the city. [216] Airstrikes by the U.S.-led coalition targeted ISIL positions, and ISIL started tire fires to reduce visibility. [85]
Heavy fighting occurred in the Gogjali district, at the gate of the entrance to eastern Mosul, where ISIL militants used car bombs and sniper fire to try to halt the advance. [217] The Golden Division entered Mosul's city limits that afternoon, engaging in street fights with ISIL militants. [217] Shortly after, the Iraqi Army announced that they had captured Mosul's state television building on the city's left bank. [218] [219] The Gogjali district was reported to be under Iraqi government control by the evening, while the Iraqi Army's 9th Division and 3rd Brigade had entered the neighborhood of Judaydat al-Mufti on the left bank. Near midnight, the Iraqi war media office reported that airstrikes had killed 116 militants inside Mosul, including 29 in Ghabat, 10 at an ISIL headquarters, 10 at a weapons depot and 67 at a hotel pool. They also stated that Iraqi government forces suffered no casualties. [217] [220] Meanwhile, Iraqi government forces captured two villages on the northern front. [217]
Brigadier Saad Maan, the spokesperson of Iraq’s Interior Ministry, stated that the plan of the joint command in Nineveh was going faster than the Army had planned. [221] On the western front, at least 15 Popular Mobilization Forces (PMU) fighters were killed when they entered abandoned villages booby-trapped with explosives. [222] ISIL also executed fifty deserters in Mosul. [223]
On 2 November, ISOF continued fighting remaining ISIL fighters in the eastern section of Gogjali. [224] Iraqi Brigadier General Haider Fadhil said his troops were forced to hold their positions in eastern Mosul as poor weather conditions were limiting visibility for drones and aircraft, and preventing them from advancing. [225] Meanwhile, eight militants were killed in Mosul by Iraqi forces. [226]
The PMU announced that it had captured 115 km² that day after fierce fighting with ISIL, including six villages, and had surrounded three ISIL-held villages. They also claimed that they had reached a highway to the southwest of Mosul and had cut the first supply line to Mosul from Raqqa . [224] The Iraqi Army in the southern front launched an offensive in the morning to recapture Hamam al-Alil and engaged in heavy fighting with the group. [227] Meanwhile, Iraqi Federal Police captured two villages in the south. [224]
ISIL released an audio file purportedly from their leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi , in which he said he was "confident of victory" in Mosul, and urged ISIL fighters not to retreat. [228]
Meanwhile, the Iraqi Army's 9th Armored Division was reported to have entered the neighborhood of al-Intisar in eastern Mosul. [229] while Mosul's Fifth Bridge , located over the Tigris river, was destroyed by airstrikes. [230]
U.S. and Iraqi authorities stated the offensive was "ahead of schedule" while Brigadier Saad Maan stated that the priority of protecting civilian lives and infrastructure would possibly slow their advance into the city. [231]
The Iraqi Army recaptured six districts in Mosul, including the eastern district of al-Zahra of which they claimed to have captured 90%. They were also forced to withdraw from Karama district because of heavy resistance. [232] Meanwhile, ISIL was reported to be abducting Mosul's boys to use as child soldiers . [223]
Fighting continued in the morning, with clashes most intense in the neighborhood of al-Bakr. [233] The eastern neighborhoods of Kirkukli and al-Zahra in the east and Al-Tahrir in the north-east were under Iraqi control while the southern neighborhoods of Qudes and Karama reportedly remained under ISIL control. [234] Fighting resumed in the Gogjali district, after militants emerged via tunnels during the night. [235]
CNN's Arwa Damon , who was embedded with ISOF in Mosul, reported being trapped for 28 hours near the neighborhoods of Kirkukli and Khadraa after an ambush on their military convoy forced them to run into buildings for cover and hide among civilians. Despite multiple soldiers being injured, backup forces were unable to assist as they were also under attack. [236]
ISIL claimed it had killed fifteen Iraqi soldiers and destroyed six military vehicles. [234] Meanwhile, satellite images released by private U.S. firm Stratfor revealed ISIL had installed defenses including rubble blocking main routes to the city center, rows of concrete barricades, and earthen berms . The images also showed evidence that ISIL had leveled buildings and cleared the terrain around a former military base on the west bank and around the Mosul International Airport . [233]
The Iraqi Army continued its assault on three fronts to Hamam al-Alil . [234] In the early afternoon, Iraqi forces entered the town center with heavy clashes continuing. ISIL fighters were reportedly traveling by motorcycle to avoid airstrikes. During the night, Hamam al-Alil was reported to have been retaken by Iraqi forces. [235]
On 6 November, Iraqi forces in the southwestern front stated that they were 4 kilometres (2.5 mi) from Mosul International Airport after taking control of Hamam al-Alil the previous day. [237] They also stormed the Al-Sada district, their first entrance into northern Mosul. [238] The Iraq War Media Office announced that Abu Hamza al-Ansari, a key ISIL leader from Algeria, was killed in southern Mosul during clashes with the Iraqi Army's 15th Division. [35]
Blogger Mosul Eye reported that ISIL had begun installing bombs around residential buildings. [239] Meanwhile, a Kurdish official stated that three militants had been killed in an uprising by civilians in eastern Mosul. [35]
The Peshmerga, backed by coalition airstrikes, launched an offensive from three fronts in the morning to take the town of Bashiqa , which was still held by ISIL and had been surrounded for about two weeks. [240] About 100 to 200 ISIL militants were estimated to be left in the town. [241] In the early afternoon, the Iraqi troops also advanced on the town of Tel Keppe , north of Mosul, besieging the town. The town of Bashiqa was reported to be fully under Peshmerga control, though an ISIL pocket remained under siege in the town. [240]
On the southern front, Hamam al-Alil , which had been reported to be under Iraqi control two days earlier, was fully captured by pro-government forces. [242] In eastern Mosul, the ISOF surrounded the neighborhoods of Karama, Malayyin al-Salasa, Shquq Khazraa, Zahra, Karkuli, Aden, and Zahabi. The Iraqi Army's 9th armored division and the 3rd Brigade liberated the village of Manarat Shabak east of the city, and made an incursion into the eastern Mosul neighborhoods of Hay Intisar, Judaydah al-Mufti, and Hay Shaima. Meanwhile, the Iraqi Federal Police captured two villages near Hammam Al-Alil. [240]
The Peshmerga killed twelve ISIL fighters trying to flee Bashiqa . [243] In the western front, PMU forces were reported to have advanced to a distance of 25 km towards strategically important Tal Afar military air base, south of the city. [244] CJTF–OIR also stated it had carried out an airstrike on an ISIL headquarters building near Tal Afar. [245] ISIL senior commander Mahmoud Shukri al-Nuaimi was also reported to have been killed in a coalition airstrike in western Mosul. [36]
The ISOF captured the majority of the Intisar district in southern Mosul, while ISIL had reportedly deployed armed child soldiers in Mosul. [246] Aid agencies were unable to reach Mosul's neighborhoods retaken by Iraqi forces because of the danger of boobytraps and snipers. [247]
In eastern Mosul, the Golden Division (controlling Zahra district and at least half of Aden district where clashes were ongoing) as well as elements of the 9th division (controlling Intisar district) were reported to be regrouping and clearing neighborhoods once occupied by ISIL, as well as screening residents fleeing from Mosul for any militants hiding among them. [248] On the southern front, pro-government forces advanced towards the ancient city of Nimrud . [249] Iraqi officials announced that the new ISIL war official, Khaled al-Mitwiti, had been killed, [250] while the Abbas Rajab village was captured by Iraqi forces. [251]
On the southern front, Iraqi forces were preparing to advance up the western bank of the Tigris River toward Mosul International Airport . [252] In eastern Mosul, Iraqi forces launched a new offensive to regain control of the neighborhood of Karkukli. [253] Iraqi anti-terror units were reported to have entered the Qadesiyya neighborhood. [254]
On 12 November, heavy clashes were reported in the al-Salam neighborhood of east Mosul. [255] Iraqi Army announced that it had captured al-Arbajiya district and was clearing the adjacent al-Qadisiya al-Thaniya district. [256] They also reached Palestine neighborhood in southeast Mosul and were engaged in battle with ISIL in the Quds neighborhood. [255] The PMU announced that the Sinjar Resistance Units (YBŞ) as its part, had started the operation to capture villages around Sinjar from ISIL. [257]
After a number of its senior leaders were killed by a coalition air strike in east Mosul, ISIL imposed a curfew in the city. [258] A local source also stated that the group was evacuating families of its fighters from west to east Mosul, denoting a severe collapse of defenses on the western front. [259] Its fighters were meanwhile using drones for surveillance as well as suicide bombers and snipers against the Iraqi Army. [255]
On 13 November, Iraqi forces recaptured the ancient Assyrian city of Nimrud as well as the adjacent modern town. [260] [261] Iraqi forces meanwhile captured the Karkojli neighborhood in eastern Mosul. [262] Brig. Gen. Maan al Saadi, the commander of the 2nd Group of ISOF, stated ISIL was collapsing and losing control, with Iraqi forces now only two days away from seizing a neighborhood where they planned to fight for four days. [263]
On 14 November, thirty ISIL fighters, including senior leaders, were killed as PMU forces captured the village of al-Abbas. [264] They also captured two more villages, and stated ISIL received severe human and material losses. [265] Meanwhile, twenty militants were killed in airstrikes by the Iraqi air Force. [266]
Pro-government forces on the southern front captured the village of Bo Youssef and were 3 kilometres (1.9 mi) from Mosul airport. [264] ISIL meanwhile launched three attacks using rockets filled with mustard gas on Qayyarah, causing seven casualties. [267]
On 15 November, 49 militants were killed in airstrikes by the United States Air Force on the al-Bakr neighborhood of Mosul. [268] Troops of the Golden Division meanwhile began storming areas in northern and eastern Mosul, including the neighborhoods of al-Akhaa, al-Bakr and al-Hadbaa. Two car bombs were destroyed while three suicide bombers were killed. [269] On the Western front, the Badr Organization announced that it had captured two villages and advanced 10 kilometers in the western axis of the offensive. [270]
On 16 November, fourteen civilians were killed by ISIL in the al-Zahraa neighborhood under government control. [271] Airstrikes by the US-led coalition meanwhile destroyed 4 watercrafts, 6 mortar systems, 2 fighting positions, 2 vehicles, a bunker and a building held by ISIL. [272]
PMF also took control of Tal Afar military airbase west of the city Mosul. [273]
On 18 November, in the West, PMF were securing and clearing Tal Afar military airbase, which they had captured from ISIL two days earlier, and preparing the assault on the city proper. [274] In the vicinity, they were attacking further villages, in an area infamous for Sunni Islamist militancy and outstanding support for ISIL among the population. [275] PMF control had already been established in over 16 villages in the surrounding area, during preceding days. [276]
The Anti-Terrorism Directorate said in a statement aired by the state-owned television that the Anti-Terrorism forces managed to liberate the areas of Hayy Adan, al-Akhaa and the water project in Mosul, within the eastern axis of Nineveh liberation operations. The Wali of Islamic State in Hayy Adan, Marwan Hamed Saleh al-Hayali, was killed. [277]
On 22 November, in Mosul ISIL fighters were reported targeting Iraqi special forces with rockets and mortars as they slowly advanced in the densely populated Zohour neighborhood. [278] Four of the five Tigris bridges were hit by coalition airstrikes within the past 48 hours. [279]
Far to the West at the Syrian border, near the town of Baaj, four Islamic State commanders were captured in a U.S. special operation. [279]
On 23 November, to the West, PMF reported cutting the road between Sinjar and Tal Afar , their Shia component groups advancing from the South linking up with the Sinjar Resistance Units and Êzîdxan Women's Units to the North, thus completing the encirclement of the Mosul pocket. [280]
50 ISIL fighters were killed and 32 others were arrested with Iraqi Federal Police continuing the operation to clear the area south of Mosul. [281]
On 30 November, the PMF said that they captured 12 villages from ISIL in the Tal Afar area, over the past five days. [282]
At the end of November, the Iraqi military assessed that it had taken control of 19 neighbourhoods in eastern Mosul during the month, constituting somewhat less than 30 percent of the area of Mosul east of the Tigris . [283] While the "Golden Division" Special Operations Forces persistently advanced into East Mosul, the 9th Division took one neighbourhood in the southeast, the 16th Division had not yet breached Mosul city limits from the north, and the 15th Division, advancing from the southwest, was still several kilometres away from western Mosul. [284]

December: Advancing towards the Syrian border
2 ISIL leaders, Abu Turq and Falah al-Rashidi, were killed in airstrikes by the anti-ISIL coalition on 4 December. Al-Rishdi was involved in the group's use of VBIEDs ( vehicle-borne improvised explosive device ) and was killed in Mosul. Abu Turq was killed in Shirqat and was a financial facilitator. [285]
20 airstrikes by the US-led coalition were heard on the morning of 6 December following an assault on the city's strategic main bridge that was held by ISIL. In the overnight hours, ISIL launched a counter-attack in the southeastern area of Mosul, near al-Salam; however, casualty figures from either side were not announced. [286] PMU meanwhile stated that it had captured the southern section of Tal Abta. [287]
Following the overnight ISIL attack, Iraqi forces continued to secure the al-Salam area, capturing al-Salam hospital. However, ISIL recaptured the hospital after a counterattack which destroyed or disabled 20 Iraqi vehicles. [288]
Iraqi Joint Operations Command announced on 9 December that they had captured the three districts of Saha, Adel and Tahrir. It further added that Iraqi forces had captured 27 districts of Mosul with clashes ongoing in 4 districts. Lieutenant-General Abdul Ameer Yarallah meanwhile stated that three factories making car bombs in Mosul and three weapons warehouses were destroyed by Iraqi airstrikes. [289]
The CTS forces mentioned that they had captured another district of east Mosul, al-Nour neighborhood. [290]
The Iraqi federal police said that three of their brigades, initially meant to advance from the southwest toward the airport, were redeployed to join the three "Golden Division" counterterrorism brigades in the east of the city. [291]
CTS commander Abdul Wahab al-Saedi stated that there were only 6 districts left to be captured by the CTS forces in East Mosul and they had already captured 32 of them. [292] While the PMF to the West continued clearing villages in the desert region of the ISIL heartland, on 13 December it was reported that the Badr militia was targeting villages around Tal Afar to "surround Daesh and tighten the noose around them", and Kata'ib Hezbollah advanced further west towards the Syrian border. [293] Abu Dur al-Tunsi and Bilal al-Shawash, two Tunisian ISIL military commanders, reportedly deserted after they were attacked by Iraqi members. According to the head of Nineveh Media Centre's Raafat al-Zarari, the local militants were being made to fight at the front lines, while some non-Iraqi commanders didn't engage in direct clashes. [41] CTS forces meanwhile captured al-Falah Oula and al-Falah Thaniya districts later in the day while PMU captured 7 villages near Tal Afar. [294]
On 14 December, 70 ISIL fighters including 20 senior leaders as well as their bodyguards were killed in Iraqi airstrikes on Tel Abta where they were holding a meeting. [295] Meanwhile, 40 civilians were killed in airstrikes and shelling in east Mosul. [296] A number of militants who attempted to launch suicide attacks in 3 districts of east Mosul were also killed, with some of their booby-trapped vehicles also destroyed. [297]
The Iraqi Federal Police announced on 15 December the capture of Saleh Najem Abdullah, the Media Center Official of ISIL. [298] CTS commander Abdul Ghani al-Assadi meanwhile announced that the first phase of retaking the eastern shores of the city was completed, with CTS forces capturing 40 out of 56 districts. [299]
PMF were in the process to take control of further villages to the south and southwest of Tal Afar , after capturing Tel Abth district, home to almost 50,000 people and a major strategic ISIL stronghold, in the past days. [291] Iraqi forces meanwhile repelled 4 ISIL attacks, killing 174 militants and destroying 13 SVBIEDs. [300]
An airstrike by the US-led coalition near Mosul destroyed 5 buildings used by ISIL in addition to quantities of weapons and equipment. [301]
Brig. Gen. Taher al-Sammak of Iraq's SWAT forces stated that the 9th Division, with the assistance of CTS, had started attacking al-Wehda district of east Mosul in order to regain control of al-Salam hospital. [302]
Captain Iyad Ziad of Nineveh Operations Command stated that Iraqi forces had stormed into al-Mazare’ area after retaking large parts of al-Wahda in southeastern Mosul and also killed 14 ISIL fighters including 4 suicide bombers. [303] 4 PMF fighters were meanwhile killed in an ISIL attack on Abu Senam village near Tel Afar. The group also shelled Tel Afar Airport and destroyed 2 PMF vehicles. [304]
U.S. Air Force Brigadier General Matthew Isler announced on 21 December that pro-government forces had entered a planned operational refit which included repairing vehicles, re-supplying ammunition and preparing for the next stage of the battle. He also stated that they had captured more than a quarter of the city. [305]
The UN stated, on 22 December, that 4 Iraqi aid workers and 7 civilians were killed by mortar fire. Later, ISIL launched a triple suicide bomb attack at a market in Gogjali. 23 people, including 15 civilians, were killed in the attacks, according to the Iraqi military. [306] The Iraqi Ministry of Defense says the Iraqi Air Force bombarded a gathering of Islamic State members, south of Tal Abta area, killing 20 leaders and 50 members, based on intelligence information. [307]
The Iraqi Army captured the Mosul Police Academy headquarters in Al-Qahira district on 23 December. This was their first major advance since suspension of military operations a week earlier. [308]
U.S. Army Colonel Brett G. Sylvia stated on 24 December that American soldiers assisting Iraqi forces will be embedded more extensively and will partner with additional formations. [309] Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi stated that Iraqi forces are in control of over a third of Mosul. Iraqi Joint Operations Command spokesperson Yahia Rasoul stated that Iraqi forces control 44% of Nineveh Governate. He added that CTS forces control 40 districts in east Mosul, while the Iraqi Army's 9th Battalion held six districts. [310] Meanwhile, 10 civilians were killed due to ISIL shelling in eastern Mosul. [311]
At least 97 militants were killed in Mosul during the day according to Operations Commander Lieutenant-General Abdulamir Rashid Yarallah. He stated that an attack by ISIL on police stations south of Abuyosif area resulted in the death of 21 IS fighters. He also added that another attack at Al-Intisar, Salam and Al-Shaima'a neighborhoods had killed 51 jihadists, while the anti-ISIL coalition killed 25 militants in airstrikes on their hideout. [312] CTS reportedly stormed into the Al-Quds district later in the day. [313]
Commander of Nineveh Operations Major General Najim al-Jabouri announced on 26 December that new military reinforcements had arrived in the Mosul neighborhoods retaken by Iraqi forces, both to enhance their presence and to prepare themselves to storm into the remaining areas of the eastern side. [314] Lieutenant Colonel Stuart James, commander of an American battalion assisting the Iraqi forces, meanwhile stated that a new advance in Mosul would begin within days. [315] The Iraqi Defence Ministry meanwhile stated that 10 militants were killed and 14 ISIL cannons were destroyed in coalition airstrikes in east of Mosul. [316] According to a military official, another 5 ISIL fighters were captured for information after some troops of the 16th Division, disguised as ISIL members, infiltrated inside the Owaiza area. [317]
The ISIL-run Amaq News Agency stated that the anti-ISIL coalition had destroyed the Old Bridge, the last functioning bridge in Mosul. The US-led Coalition, meanwhile, stated that it had disabled a Mosul bridge with airstrikes without providing the details. [318]
Iraqi forces launched the second phase of the battle on 29 December, pushing from three directions into eastern Mosul districts. Iraqi soldiers and Federal Police entered about half a dozen southeastern districts. CTS meanwhile advanced in al-Quds and Karama districts. In the third front, Iraqi soldiers also pushed toward the northern limits. [319] Jabouri stated that they were ordered by the Prime Minister to reach the Tigris River . [320] An ISIL headquarters in al-Thobat district was reportedly destroyed in coalition airstrikes, killing 12 militants. [321] Later in the day, the commander of the operation declared that they had captured 2 villages to the north of Mosul, killing 70 militants. [322] Iraqi forces had captured half of al-Quds by early afternoon. [323] The Iraqi military later announced that they had killed more than 200 militants during the day. [324]
Iraqi security forces advanced in several areas on 30 December. In the northern front, the 16th Division stormed the Habdaa district while also trying to cut off the supply lines to Tel Kayf. [325] [326] Meanwhile, ISIL was reported to have evacuated family members of its foreign fighters from four districts in western Mosul. [327] 2 ISIL attacks in eastern Mosul were later repelled. [328] Ammar al-Haweidi, who is an elite leader of ISIL was reported to have been killed by the Iraqi Federal Police. [329] Clashes broke out again in one of the villages reported to be captured a day earlier. [330]
Heavy clashes occurred on the southeastern and northern fronts of Mosul on 31 December. An Iraqi Army officer deployed in the southeastern front reported that their advances were slowed down due to heavy clashes and difficulty in differentiating between civilians and militants. Iraqi forces on the northern front advances towards the periphery of Mosul, with an officer stating that heavy clashes were ongoing in the Argoob area. [331] The CTS destroyed four VBIEDs when ISIL tried to attack them in the street linking al-Ta’mim neighborhood and the garage area in east Mosul. [332] The U.S. military meanwhile stated that its airstrikes on a van carrying ISIL fighters at a hospital compound parking lot might have killed civilians. [333]

2017

January: Liberation of remaining ISIL held city districts east of the Tigris river (second phase)
Iraqi forces continued their advance on 1 January 2017. The military announced that it had captured a part of the Karama district, and a federal police officer stated that they had taken near complete control of Intissar and Siha districts, and were clearing the Salam district. [334] CTS linked up with Rapid Response Division during the day at the edge of al-Intissar and al-Quds. Staff Lieutenant General Abdulwahab al-Saadi, a top CTS commander, stated that Iraqi forces had captured more than 60% of east Mosul. [335] Iraqi Defence Ministry's War Media Cell announced during the day that Iraqi forces had captured Yunus al-Sabaawi and Yafa districts in the southeastern part of the city. Lt. Col. Eyad al-Awsyi said that they had also completely captured al-Intissar, and were nearing completion of capturing Karama. [336] Federal Police announced later in the day that they had captured the Gogjali-Intsar road. [337] They also stated during the day that they had captured the strategic No.60 Street to the southeast of Mosul. Army major Ali Mohsen meanwhile said that the Iraqi Army had captured al-Malayeen, al-Kindi and al-Arabi al-Thania districts. [338]
CTS announced on 2 January that they had completely captured al-Karama district. [339] Sabah al-Numan, the CTS spokesman, later stated that they were clearing the remaining militants in North Karama. ISIL meanwhile cut off a strategic road linking Mosul and Baghdad. The group also shelled Shirqat, after attacking a military barracks near Baiji and seizing weapons. According to the Mayor of Shirqat, they had seized 3 checkpoints on the main road between the city and Baiji. Iraqi authorities later said that they had regained control of the road. [340]
Iraqi forces stormed three districts on 3 January and killed 50 militants during clashes in 2 of them. [341] The operation commander said that Iraqi Air Force airstrikes had destroyed the office of ISIL's hisbah police located on Mosul-Tel Afar road, and several warfare utilities of the group. [342] The Federal Police said that it had destroyed the headquarters of Jund al-Khilafa (Soldiers of Caliphate), an ISIL explosives factory and a drone headquarters in al-Mithaq district. [343] The Iraqi Army announced later that CTS had captured Karama industrial neighborhood, the Industrial district, the Karama Silo (a flour mill), and a Mercedes Company building during the day. [344] The Ministry of Defense later announced that Iraqi forces had captured the area of exhibitions and the commercial complex to the south of Ta'mim district. [345] The forces later announced that they had captured Al-Hay al-Senai and al-Mithaq districts as well as the Maaridh area to the east of Mosul. [346]
Iraqi forces cleared Mithaq district and advanced in al-Wahda on 4 January. [347] The United Nations said that civilian casualties had started increasing as they advanced. [348] The Joint Operations Command said that the Federal Police and 9th Division had captured Wahda after heavy clashes, bringing them closer to the city center, and that ISIL counter-attacks in southeastern Mosul had been repelled, with the death of about 40 militants and destruction of 7 VBIEDs. Iraqi forces also advanced in al-Salam, Palestine, al-Shaimaa, Domiez and Sumer districts amid heavy clashes. [349] The Federal Police meanwhile announced the killing of Abu Marawan al-Hadithi, an ISIL leader. Lt.-Gen. Ra'ed Shaker also said that Iraqi forces had cleared al-Wahda, al-Moallemin and Sumer districts, and had captured the Mosul-Kirkuk road. [350] The United States Department of Defense and the anti-ISIL coalition stated that American advisers had entered Mosul along with Iraqi forces. [351]
Lt.-Gen. Talib Shaghati stated on 5 January that Iraqi forces had captured about 65-70% of east Mosul. [352] During the day, the Federal Police said that they had destroyed three ISIL drones in east Mosul. An attack on PMU near Tal Afar was meanwhile reportedly repelled, with the deaths of 35 militants including senior recruitment agent Abu Qaswara al-Shami. [353] The Federal Police announced that 1,700 ISIL fighters had been killed in the second phase. General Raed Shaker Jawdat stated that the group's headquarters in Nineveh province had been destroyed and Iraqi forces had captured eight districts in the second phase, thus bringing the entire southeastern section of Mosul under their control. He added that they had also captured drone factories, five car bomb manufacturing plants, an electrical plant, a windmill and several schools. He said that all the remaining districts in east Mosul had been surrounded and would be stormed soon. [354]
On 6 January, CTS was reported to have stormed the al-Muthanna district during an overnight raid across the al-Khawsar river. [355] A CTS spokesman later said that ISIL had been driven out of the district and dozens of militants killed in airstrikes by the anti-ISIL coalition. [356] This was the first time that Iraqi forces had entered Mosul from the north. [357] They also launched an assault on the Hadbaa apartment complex in the northern front, and faced heavy clashes later in the day. [358]
Iraqi forces continued their advance on 7 January, coming within several hundred metres of the Tigris river. During the day CTS said that they had captured the al-Gharfan district (previously known as al-Baath) and had entered Wahda district. The military later announced that they had captured a hospital complex in Wahda. Meanwhile, a spokesman of the anti-ISIL coalition stated that ISIL had deliberately damaged the fourth bridge as Iraqi forces advanced. [359] Staff Lieutenant General Yarallah said that Iraqi forces had captured Al-Salam Hospital, Al-Shifa Hospital and the Faculty of Medicine, a medical college. They had also captured ISIL's command center and two prisons. [360] [361] He later said that CTS had captured Rifaq, Atibaa 1st and Atibaa 2nd districts, and well as the Hadbaa residential complex. [362]
On 8 January, al-Saadi said that CTS troops advancing towards Sukkar and Baladiyat districts had been attacked by ISIL from a historic hill, but had been repelled with the help of coalition warplanes, killing dozens of militants. [363] Security sources said that Iraqi forces were shelling ISIL's positions in al-Kindi district in preparation for storming it later, while the 9th division and Federal Police had launched an attack on Sumer and Domiz districts in the southeastern front. [364] The CTS spokesman said that Iraqi forces had reached the Tigris river for the first time in the offensive, advancing towards the eastern side of the fourth bridge. Brett McGurk , USA's envoy to the anti-ISIL coalition, said that ISIL's defences in eastern Mosul were showing signs of collapse. [365] An ISIL attack on Hadbaa apartments was later reportedly repelled, with the death of about 10 militants and destruction of 4 VBIEDs. [366] PMU meanwhile stated that they had repelled an ISIL attack near Adaya, located to the west of Mosul, killing about 10 militants. [367]
Iraqi military stated on 9 January that CTS had captured the Baladiyat district in the eastern front while the Federal Police and Iraqi Army had captured Domiz and Palestine districts in the southeastern front. CTS also carried out operations to clear Furqan and Atiba districts. An ISIL attack in Furqaan was repelled according to the military, resulting in deaths of 30 militants. [368] Iraqi Defense Ministry’s War Media Cell meanwhile stated that Iraqi Air Force killed 25 militants in airstrikes in eastern Mosul while airstrikes by the anti-ISIL coalition killed about 20 militants in al-Abra village near Tal Afar. [369] The group which was still in control of the city's water stations, was reported to have cut the water supply to more than 30 districts captured by Iraqi forces. [370] ISOF meanwhile surrounded the University of Mosul . [371]
Iraqi Joint Operations Command stated on 10 January that CTS forces had captured the Sukkar and al-Dhubbat districts while advancing in Siddeeq and al-Maliyah districts. Several governmental offices including the communication complex, provincial electricity department and a security headquarters were also captured according to it. It also stated that ISIL had blown up two bridges in order to prevent Iraqi forces from attacking western Mosul. It added that in the southeastern front, the Federal police and Iraqi Army pushed further into al-Salam, Palestine, Sumer, Yarimja and Sahiron districts. Regarding the northern front it stated that Iraqi Army advanced further into al-Hadbaa while capturing northern part of Sabaa Nisaan. [372] Meanwhile, a security source stated that Iraqi Air Force had conducted airstrikes on headquarters of ISIL's Australian leaders in Mosul, killing the commander of Australian Brigade Khaled Sharouf, also known as Abu Mosab al-Australi along with three of his aides. [373]
Iraqi forces continued advancing on 11 January with military officials stating that the CTS had advanced in the Sadeeq district and were firing into the adjacent Hadbaa. Iraqi forces also clashed with ISIL in the southern front during the day. [374]
CTS spokesman al-Numan stated on 12 January that CTS had captured 7th Nissan and Sadeeq districts, successfully linking up with Iraqi Army advancing in Hadbaa district. He claimed that Iraqi forces were now in control of about 85% of eastern Mosul. The Rapid Response Division meanwhile advanced in Sumer and Sahiroun districts. [375] Iraqi Defense Ministry’s War Media Cell stated that a senior ISIL leader was killed along with his companions in an airstrike by Iraqi Air Force on their camp in al-Amel district. [376] Security sources stated that 90 militants were killed in airstrikes by Iraqi Air Force on Yaramja district while local sources stated that 3 militants including a senior member in charge of ISIL's prisons were killed in a drone strike in western Mosul. [377] The operation command later announced that Iraqi Army had captured Sumer and Sahiroun districts. [378] PMU meanwhile stated it had captured 3 villages near Tel Abta. [379] The operation command later also announced that Iraqi forces had captured al-Salam district. [380]
The operation command announced on 13 January that CTS had reached the second bridge of the city, which is also called the "Freedom Bridge". Yarallah stated that in response, ISIL had destroyed all five bridges of the city, in order to slow the Iraqi advance towards western Mosul. [381] [382] CTS later announced they had reached the Old Bridge also known as the "Iron Bridge" and stormed the University of Mosul, capturing a part of its complex later in the day. [383] The operation command later announced that CTS had captured al-Kafa'at district in eastern front as well as al-Sadriya, al-Naser and al-Faisaliyah in central part of East Mosul. [384] Iraqi Army also captured the Hadbaa district during the day, [385] while Yarallah declared that CTS had captured a government complex which included the Nineveh Governorate and council buildings. [386]
Spokesman Abdel Amir al-Mohammedawi stated on 14 January that the Rapid Response Division had captured the Yarimja area as well as a field hospital ISIL was using. A military statement meanwhile announced that the Federal Police had captured the highway between Mosul and Kirkuk . [387] Iraqi forces later completely captured the University of Mosul, in addition to the eastern side of a third bridge. [388] Meanwhile, 10 militants were reportedly killed or wounded in infighting between a group of ISIL fighters who fled towards west Mosul and the leaders in western side due to mutual accusations. [389] An airstrike by CJTF-OIR on the house of a senior ISIL leader was reported to have resulted in deaths of around 30 civilians. CENTCOM stated that the allegation will be investigated. [390] Suicide bombings were carried out by an Iraqi, Tajik, and an Uzbek. [391]
On 15 January, Iraqi forces carried out a sweeping operation in the University of Mosul for any hiding militants while continuing their advancement along the Tigris river. [392] The operation command later announced that the Iraqi Army had captured al-Kafaat Thani (Second) district in the northern front while CTS had captured Andalus in the eastern front. [393] [394]
Clashes occurred in Shurta and Andalus districts on 16 January. By this point, Iraqi forces had taken complete control of the river banks in the south. [395] The operation command during the day announced that the Army had captured Kindi and Qairawan districts while CTS had captured Jammasa. [396] CTS spokesman al-Numan later announced that they had captured the Nabi Yunus area including the Nabi Yunus shrine . [397]
al-Numan stated that CTS was now in complete control of Shurta and Andalus. He also stated that they had pushed into Eastern Nineveh and Souq al-Ghanam districts. A separate military statement announced that CTS had also captured al-Muhandiseen district. Meanwhile, the Iraqi Army in the northern front stormed the Kindi military base. [398] Yarallah later announced that CTS had captured Nineveh al-Sharqiya, Bab-Shams and Souq al-Ghanam districts in the eastern front. He added that they had also captured Nu'maniya and Uttshana districts in addition to storming the adjacent al-Jazair district. Regarding the northern front, he stated that Iraqi Army had captured the Kindi military base, the former headquarters of the 2nd Division as well as the nearby al-Kindi facility. [399] [400] Iraqi forces also succeeded in capturing all five bridges of the city during the day while al-Saadi announced they had also captured the Zaraei district. [401] CTS also captured Al Jazair, Al Derkazlih, Al Seuis and Sanharib districts during the day. Yarallah also stated that they had captured the Grand Mosque of the city. [402] [403] United States Air Force Colonel John Dorrian stated during the day that Iraqi forces were in control of 85-90% of east Mosul. [404] Iraqi Prime Minister al-Abadi meanwhile stated that Iraqi forces had begun moving against ISIL in western Mosul. [405]
Lieutenant-General Talib Shaghati announced on 18 January that CTS had captured all the districts of east Mosul they were tasked with taking, and that Iraqi forces were almost in complete control of the eastern side. A military statement announced that a few parts of the city in north had yet to be captured by the Iraqi Army. [406] Shaghati also stated that all five bridges of the city were under control of Iraqi forces. During the day, CTS captured the Nineveh ruins as well as the adjacent Tal Nirgal area. The operation command meanwhile announced that Iraqi Army had captured al-Qadhiyah district and were fighting on the edges of al-Arabi district. [407] [408] PMU meanwhile announced that they had captured 2 areas in the Nineveh Plains region. [409]
On 19 January, the military statements announced that the Iraqi Army had captured the town of Tel Kayf (after a nearly 3-month-long siege), [410] [411] as well as the Nineveh Oberoi hotel and the "Palaces" area on the eastern bank of the Tigris. Clashes were still ongoing in the Al-Arabi District. Meanwhile, McGurk announced that over 50 watercrafts and barges being used by ISIL to supply its members in eastern Mosul were destroyed in airstrikes. [412] Iraqi Air Force carried out an airstrike in al-Zerai area in Mosul, reportedly killing five ISIL leaders including Abdel Wahed Khodier, assistant to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi ; the Islamic Police Chief in Nineveh, Ahmed Khodier Sayer al-Juwan and Agriculture Minister in Tal Afar and Mahlabiya, Abdel Karim Khodier Sayer al-Juwan. [413] Yarallah meanwhile announced that Iraqi forces had also captured the Fadiliyah district and Jaber ibn Hayyan military facility. [414] Iraqi forces also captured the Ghabat area during the day. [415]
Yarallah announced on 20 January that the 9th Division had captured the free zone in the northern sector. [416] Iraqi forces also captured a pharmaceutical plant to the north of Mosul as well as Al-Arabi 1 district. They also clashed with ISIL in Rashidiyah district. Meanwhile, CTS started clearing the districts they had captured in Mosul. [417] [415] Iraqi Air Forces also said that they carried out an airstrike targeting the regions of Tel Kaif and al-Sehaji, in northeastern Mosul, killing 88 militants. [418]
Iraqi forces continued advancing in the outskirts of the city on 21 January. During the day, the operation command announced that the Iraqi Army had completely captured al-Arabi district as well as al-Qousiyat village, leaving some 40 militants killed and four car bombs destroyed. [419] The CJTF-OIR also announced that between 19 and 21 January, they had targeted a flotilla of 90 boats and three barges being used by ISIL to cross the Tigris and escape the clashes. [420] On the same day, Coalition officials stated that the fight for west Mosul is expected to be tougher than the fight for east Mosul. [421]
The Iraqi military announced on 22 January that Iraqi forces had captured Al-Milayeen district and Al-Binaa al-Jahiz area as well as the Mosul- Dohuk road. By this point, only the Rashidiyah district was left under ISIL control in eastern Mosul. [422]
Iraqi defense ministry issued a statement earlier on 23 January on its website, announcing the complete capture of eastern Mosul. However it was later removed with fighting ongoing in Rashidiyah which the Iraqi Army entered during the day. [423]
The operation command announced on 24 January that Iraqi troops captured the Rashidiyah district as well as the villages of Ba'wiza, Shrikhan and Baysan. Iraqi Prime Minister al-Abadi later announced the "full liberation" of eastern Mosul. [87]
Col. Khaled al-Jewari, from the Joint Operations Command, told DPA that ISIL executed a qadi (senior judge), along with other combat commanders, for escaping from the battle for eastern Mosul. [424]
Meanwhile, the PMU announced that they took over Tel Shana, a strategic hill in Salahuddin, after killing dozens of IS militants. It added that PMUs also took over the villages of ِArab Leith, Mohamed al-Awad and Ard Mosaltan after intense fights with the extremist group. [425]
The PMU's 2nd Brigade announced that they repelled an attack launched by ISIL on the al-Kobayrat area, to the west of Mosul, killing 40 militants. [426]
Iraqi state TV reported that the PMU killed 35 ISIL members west of Mosul. [427]

February: Third phase and advance into western Mosul
On 3 February, the PMU announced that they had captured the villages of Bostan Radif and Um Gharba, as well as the Sherka region of western Mosul. [428]
On 13 February, more than 200 ISIL fighters launched an attack on three villages to the west of Tal Afar with tanks and VBIEDs, to regain access between western Mosul and Raqqa. The attack was repelled by the PMU, resulting in deaths of more than 50 ISIL fighters and the destruction of 17 VBIEDs. [429] Another attack on a village to the south of village was repelled, resulting in deaths of 13 militants according to the Federal Police. [430] Airstrikes by the anti-ISIL coalition killed Haqi Ismail Hamid al-Emri, a former member of al-Qaeda in Iraq who played a leadership role of ISIL's security networks in Mosul. [431]
On 18 February, leaflets were distributed to western Mosul residents announcing and assuring that the offensive against the ISIL-held region of the city would continue soon. [432] Iraqi fighter jets also targeted ISIL's headquarters and communication positions in the western area. [88]
On 19 February, Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, announced the start of the operation to capture western Mosul. [88] Iraqi forces attacked to retake the Mosul Airport , capturing around 15 villages and a power plant near west Mosul during the day. [433] [434]
On 20 February, Iraqi forces captured the strategic village of Albu Saif to the south of Mosul and reached the vicinity of the city's airport. [435] [436] PMU meanwhile recaptured Sahaji, the last ISIL-held village on the road between Tal Afar and Mosul, effectively cutting off the road between the two cities. [437] It also captured the village of Lazaga during the day. [438] Iraqi Kurdistan's Counter-terrorism Group (CTG) meanwhile stated that Peshmerga forces had killed several ISIL leaders and at least 30 militants in an operation carried out with the co-operation of the anti-ISIL coalition. The leaders killed in the operation included Abu Bakr el Sheshani, who is a Russian national and ISIL's military official in Nineveh Governorate, Abu Fatma el Tounsi who is the group’s financial official in the governorate, Dr. Salah Hassan el Sakalawi (also known as Dr. Abdullah) who is considered ISIL's health minister, as well as Dr. Abu Hassan el Homosi who is the group's Emir for health in Wilayat el Sham. [42] Iraqi forces also attacked Ghazlani camp, the biggest military facility in Mosul. [439] Federal Police also was reported to have captured about 8 villages western outskirts of Mosul. [440]
On 21 February, Iraqi forces continued clearing the hills around Albu Saif, successfully clearing two villages near it. [441] Raed Shakir Jawdat, Federal Police chief later stated that ISIL had pulled out of Mosul airport after clashes. At least 90 ISIS militants were announced to have been killed in drone strikes during the day, ISIL's chief security observant "Abu Abdullah" and Mekhled al-Geheishi, a senior ISIL executioner at Badush prison, were among them. [442] [443]
Contrary to previous days reports, the airport was reported to be still under ISIL control, with Iraqi forces readying an assault to retake it. [444] Meanwhile, PMU launched an assault to capture Tal Afar and captured two villages around it, killing 47 militants and destroying 13 booby-trapped vehicles in the process. [445] Ammar Mustafa Yusuf (also known as Abu Ibrahim), ISIL's wali of Tal Afar, was killed along with his son in an airstrike by Iraqi Air Force on a village near Tal Afar. [446] Jawdat announced that Iraqi forces had recaptured al-Bouseif hills during the day. [447]
On 23 February, Iraqi forces backed by drones and heavy artillery attacked the Mosul airport, advancing from several directions towards it. They captured the airport later on along with 2 other villages near it. In addition, Brig. Gen. Yahya Rasoul also announced that Iraqi forces had captured an ISIL weapons storage warehouse, a former ISIL headquarters and the barracks at al-Ghazlani military facility. [448] Jawdat also announced that Iraqi forces also captured a nearby sugar plant along with its residential areas. [449] Meanwhile, airstrikes in western and southern Mosul reportedly killed 35 ISIL members including a regional mayor. [450] ISIL also issued a death warrant against a senior leader named "Abu Osama" who had fled during the battle for Mosul airport. [451] PMU meanwhile announced that Ali Abdel Kadim al-Saeedi, commander of its 10th Brigade, was killed in clashes with ISIL in Tel Afar. [452] One of ISIL's emirs, Abu Dujana al-Tunsi, was also reported to have been killed during clashes in Tal Afar. [453] An ISIL counter-attack to break Mosul's siege was repelled by PMU during the day. [454] An ISIL rocket attack late in the day on soldiers stationed at Mosul airport resulted in dozens of deaths. [455]
On 24 February, Iraqi forces captured al-Ghazlani military base and entered a district in western Mosul for the first time. Jawdat announced that they had captured a sports facility in al-Tayyaran district. [456] Sami al-Aridhi, a lieutenant-general of CTS, also announced that Iraqi forces captured the Tall al-Rayyan village, outside Mosul, and entered al-Mamoun district. [455]
Iraqi forces continued advancing inside western Mosul on 25 February. Brigadier General Hisham Abdul Kadhim announced that Federal Police and Rapid Response Division had captured Hawi al-Josaq and had begun clearing the Tayyaran district. Al-Saadi meanwhile stated that CTS pushed towards Wadi Hajr and al-Mamoun districts from two fronts and had entered both of them. [457] Saadi later also stated that their advance had slowed and they were facing heavy resistance, especially in al-Mamoun, since its streets are organized randomly, making it difficult to set up roadblocks for countering VBIEDs. [458] Shifa Gardi, a Kurdish reporter working for Rudaw , was killed by a roadside bomb while covering the advance of Iraqi forces. [459] During the same day, PMU announced it had captured eight villages to west of Mosul. [460] The Ministry of Defense's War Media Cell also announced that the 9th Armored Battalion of the Iraqi Army had fully captured al-Yarmouk power station, which supplies power to the whole city. [461] ISIL destroyed a bridge to the Badush village to hinder the Iraqi advance while a coalition airstike on an ISIL convoy in the village killed 16 militants. [462]
Iraqi forces advanced further on 26 February in order to gain control of the southernmost bridge linking Mosul's eastern and western sides. Clashes were also ongoing in Hawi al-Josaq and al-Tayyaran districts. [463] Iraqi forces later captured al-Tayyaran and al-Maamoun districts. They also entered al-Mansour, al-Shuhadaa and Dawas districts. [464] They also announced they had captured al-Harakiyat, an area south of the city used as a major oil-smuggling route by ISIL. [465]
Iraqi forces advanced in Hawi al-Jowsaq, and announced they had captured the Fourth Bridge on 27 February. [466] They later regained control of Jowsaq district. [467] The operation command meanwhile announced that they had captured Tal Rumman village in western Mosul. [468] They also entered and clashed with ISIL in Wadi Hajr district. [469] Iraqi troops killed 120 militants and ISIL's designated “emir” of Dawasah district during advances towards central Mosul. [470]
Iraqi forces advanced towards Mosul's main governmental buildings on 28 February. The CTS continued advancing in Wadi al-Hajr to link up with the Rapid Response Division and Federal Police stationed by the riverside. [471] Jawdat announced during the day that 929 militants had been killed since the start of the assault on west Mosul. al-Jubouri stated that the 15th Division of the Iraqi Army was preparing to storm Tal Afar . [472] Colonel Ahmed al-Jubouri of the Iraqi Army’s Nineveh Operations Command later stated that Iraqi forces had captured the Wadi Hajr district. [473] The Iraqi Defense Ministry's War Media Cell meanwhile announced that Iraqi forces had captured the Damerji village to south of Badush. [474]

March: Battle for southwestern Mosul
On 1 March, an Iraqi general announced that the Iraqi Army had taken control of the last major road to western Mosul, with the 9th Armoured division coming within a kilometer of Mosul's northwestern entrance known as the "Syria Gate". This move effectively cut off western Mosul from Tel Afar. The CTS continued advancing and clashed with ISIL in the Wadi Hajr, al-Mansour, and al-Shuhada districts. [475] The Joint Operations Command meanwhile announced that CTS continued advancing in Jawsaq and Tayaran, while capturing 70% of Wadi Hajr, completely cleared the residential buildings of al-Mamoun district, and advanced in the adjacent Mansour district. [476] Major Adnan Mostafa later stated that Iraqi forces had captured Syria Gate, along with al-Rihani village, besieging Badush. [477] They later captured the underground "Tadmour Base", which had been used by ISIL to train recruits, according to Iraqi commanders. [478]
On 2 March, ISIL launched a counterattack on Iraqi forces during an overnight rainstorm during the night of 1–2 March, though the fighting subsided by morning. [479] Some residents of the city alleged that an airstrike on the Omar al-Aswad mosque in al-Farouq districts killed a number of civilians and suspected ISIL fighters. A Coalition spokesman, however, stated that he was unaware of such a strike. [480] A captain in Rapid Response Division meanwhile stated that advancing Iraqi forces were forced to retreat from Dawasah to Jawsaq, after falling into an ISIL trap of a fake withdrawal and taking many casualties. [481] Abu Huthaifaq al-Halabi, a cameraman who recorded Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi's declaration of a "caliphate" in 2014, as well as ISIL's dewan of mosques in Nineveh Governorate, was reported to have been killed during the day, along with his son and an aide. [482] [483] On the same day, it was reported that 14,000 civilians fled western Mosul during the day. [484]
Iraqi forces announced they had captured Wadi Hajr district on 3 March, an advance that allows them to link up all their forces in south of the city. [485] The Red Cross meanwhile stated that a chemical weapon was apparently used in mortar fire on houses in east Mosul, the first such attack during the battle. 12 people were injured in the attack. [486] On the same day, 14,000 people fled western Mosul, bringing the number of displaced civilians from western Mosul up to 46,000 people. [484]
Jawdat stated that the Federal Police had repelled an ISIL attack on the outskirts of the Dawsah district, killing 10 suicide bombers and destroying 5 VBIEDs. [487] The Defense Ministry' War Media Cell stated that an airstrike by the anti-ISIL coalition on an ISIL headquarters in al-Najjar district killed Abu Abdel Rahman al-Ansari, Jund al-Khilafa's official as well as 6 emirs including Abu Khalid, Sabah al-Anzi, Abu Azzam, Abu Hejab, Abu Sayah and Abu Taiba. [488] Iraqi forces resumed their offensive on 5 March, after pausing it for two days because of bad weather. The Rapid Response Division was reported to have captured the Danadan district, coming close to a complex housing governmental buildings in western Mosul. Meanwhile, the CTS pushed through Somood and Tal al-Ruman districts. [489] [490] They also clashed with ISIL in Shuhada and Mansour districts. [491] An ISIL leader alleged to be al-Baghdadi’s cousin was reported to have been arrested in the Jowsaq district. [492]
Iraqi forces captured the al-Hurriya Bridge (also called "Freedom Bridge") on 6 March. [493] Iraqi military also announced that CTS had captured Somood district. [494] The operation command meanwhile announced that Rapid Response Division and Federal Police had captured the Nineveh police headquarters, the courts complex and the water, electricity and sewage directorates. The CTS assaulted al-Mansour district after capturing Somood. [495] A Federal Police officer stated that an airstrike by the coalition on the city's train station had by mistake killed 33 former troops held there as captives by ISIL. [496] Airstrikes at various districts were also reported to have killed 22 civilians and wounded 34. [497] PMU meanwhile captured a strategic mountainous region near Al-Ayathia village. [498]
Lieutenant Colonel Abdel Amir al-Mohammadawi announced that the Rapid Response Division had captured the Nineveh Governorate complex as well as the Mosul Museum , a central bank branch and a building housing ISIL's main court of justice. The operation command stated that the Federal Police had captured the Nineveh provincial government headquarters. It also announced that Iraqi forces had completely captured Dawasah, Danadan and Tal al-Rumman districts. [499] [500] Iraqi forces were also reported to have captured the Turkish consulate in western Mosul. [501] Meanwhile, the Iraqi Counter-Terrorism Force announced that government forces had recaptured 60 percent of the western Mosul from ISIL. [502]
The Iraqi military announced that Iraqi forces repelled an overnight counterattack by ISIL, and had taken full control of the last major road leading to Tal Afar. Major General Ali Kadhem al-Lami of the Federal Police stated that they will clear captured areas in western Mosul during the day. [503] The military later announced that the 9th Armoured Division had captured the Badush prison, known for the Badush prison massacre committed by ISIL in 2014. [504] Yarallah later announced that Iraqi troops along with PMU had fully captured al-Atshana hills and had stormed the residential apartments in the area of Badush prison after taking the prison itself. [505] PMU meanwhile announced that they had also captured the al-Sabuniyah train station on the road between Mosul and Tal Afar and captured Tal Khazaf village near Mosul. [506] [507] Yarallah later announced that they had captured Mansur and Shuhada districts. [508]
Iraqi forces continued to battle ISIL inside Mosul. Yarallah announced that the CTS had captured Moalimin and Silo districts. [509] Iraqi forces also reached the Grand Mosque of al-Nuri from where al-Baghdadi had made a declaration of a "caliphate". PMU meanwhile captured 7 villages to the west of Mosul. [510] It also stated that it had captured Badush power station. [511]
Iraqi forces launched a raid during nighttime between 9 and 10 March. [512] Iraqi forces were counterattacked in various neighborhoods and in the government complex under their control, with Captain Waleed Ibrahim stating they lost control of two streets. [513] Despite the attacks, they continued advancing towards the Old City, reaching and fighting around the remaining streets near it. [512] They also fought against ISIL around the Assyria Hotel. [514] The operation command, meanwhile, announced that the CTS had captured al-Amil al-Oula along with al-Amil al-Thaniya district. [515] Yarallah later announced that the Rapid Response Division, along with Federal Police, captured Nabi Sheet and Akidat districts. [516] The Defense Ministry's War Media Cell also stated that Iraqi forces had captured 3 villages around Badush, taking control of the western bank of Tigris. [517] [518]
Iraqi forces pushed into the "Old City" centre of Mosul on 11 March, amidst heavy clashes, and advanced in Bab al-Toub district, while CTS advanced inside Aghwat and Risala in the western front, and also advanced in the Nafet and Nablus districts. Meanwhile, Iraqi Army's 16th Division captured 2 villages to west of Mosul, as well as the Khwaja Khalil village, a compound of industry installation and a water facility to the west of Mosul, while the 9th Armoured Division along with PMU captured a part of Badush town and surrounded the Badush cement plant. [519] [520] Colonel Emad al-Bayati stated that Iraqi forces had captured al-Mahata area containing a train station and residential complexes. He also stated that they had stormed al-Abar area and had captured Bab al-Bayd and al-Farouq areas to south of Mosul. [521] [522] ISIL was also reported by residents of Mosul to have released dozens of prisoners who had been detained for small 'offences' such as selling cigarettes, violating a smoking ban, or being in possession of a mobile phone. The Iraqi state TV meanwhile announced that Iraqi forces had captured about half of western Mosul. [523]
Brett McGurk announced that the 9th Armoured Division cut off the last road out of Mosul. al-Saadi stated that Iraqi forces controlled more than a third of western Mosul. He also stated that the CTS was battling ISIL inside the al-Jadida and al-Aghawat districts. Meanwhile, the operation command stated that the Rapid Response Division and Federal Police were attacking the Bab al-Toub district. [524] The Military Intelligence Directorate announced that airstrikes by the anti-ISIL coalition killed Mahmoud Fathi al-Jabouri, a.k.a Abu Rusol, the Administrative Official of ISIL, and also destroyed an explosive plant belonging to the group. [525] The 16th Division, along with the PMU, captured 2 villages northwest of Mosul during the day. [526] The Joint Operations Command later announced that CTS had captured the Aghawat district. [527] Jawdat added that they had also captured Souk al-Arbaa and al-Remah Square in Bab al-Toub, in addition to Mosul al-Jadida (New Mosul) district. [528]
Iraqi forces faced heavy resistance as they tried to advance in the Old City and to the Iron Bridge. Military officials stated that their advance was slowed due to heavy rain in the morning, though they came within a distance of 100 metres from the bridge. [529] The Joint Operation Command later announced that the CTS had completely captured Nafet and New Mosul districts. [530] Khamis Khanjar, a prominent Iraqi Sunni politician who lobbied the United States and Iraqi governments to ensure that civilian losses in the battle were minimal, warned that civilian casualties were rising due to the accelerated pace of the campaign. He added that more than 3,500 civilians had been killed since the beginning of assault on western Mosul. [531]
Iraqi forces continued advancing in the Old City and towards the Iron Bridge. A federal police officer announced that the Federal Police had killed Abu Abdul Rahman al-Ansary, ISIL's military commander of the Old City. [532] Iraqi forces captured Mosul's train station, once one of the main rail hubs of Iraq. Jawdat also stated that they had captured the nearby bus station. [533] They also captured the Baghdad Garage district. [534] Iraqi forces were also reported to have arrested ISIL's Industry Minister and his assistant. Meanwhile, Jawdat stated that Iraqi forces had captured the Bab al Jadid and Bab al Bidh areas, and were in control of 90% of the Old City. [535] Iraqi forces also captured 2 villages to the northwest of Mosul. [536]
The Federal Police announced on 15 March that they had captured the Iron Bridge, with the Rapid Response Division, putting them in complete control of three out of five bridges in Mosul, and also advanced to the al-Nuri Mosque. Iraqi officers stated that cloudy weather was slowing their advance, due to unavailability of air cover. Staff Brigadier Falah al-Obeidi stated that the CTS had captured the Dor al-Sikak and al-Nafut areas, the sites of ISIL's main weapons facilities, located to the west of the Old City. [537] The International Organisation for Migration stated that the number of civilians who fled from western Mosul rose to 100,000. [538] Samir Dawoud al-Mohsen, an officer of the 9th Armored Division stated that Iraqi forces had begun to advance on Bab al-Bayd district. [539] Iraq’s military intelligence service stated that 3 senior ISIL leaders were killed in airstrikes on al-Jadida district by the Iraqi Air Force, including: Abu Anas al-Jubouri, who was an official of the suicide bomber units, Mohamed Fathy al-Jubouri, who was a military official of the group, as well as his aide, Ahmed Nawwaf al-Jubouri. [540] The 9th Armored Division also captured the town of Badush, as well as a nearby village, taking control of the entire Badush region. The CTS also advanced in the Nablus, Yabsat, Risala, and Wadi al-Ayn districts. [541]
The Federal Police and Rapid Response Division continued to clash with ISIL in Old City, coming within 500 meters of the al-Nuri Mosque, though their advance was slowed by heavy rain. Iraqi forces also captured a hospital during the day. [542] An ISIL attack on Badush was also repelled during the day. [543] Iraqi forces continued advancing in the Old City on 17 March, trying to gain control of a main road used by ISIL to launch VBIEDs at their positions. A spokesman of the Federal Police stated they had captured al-Basha mosque, al-Adala street and Bab al-Saray market. [544] Staff Lieutenant General Abdulghani al-Assadi also stated that CTS was advancing in the Risala and Nablus districts. [545]
Jawdat announced on 18 March that they had captured the al-Arbiaa market and a grain silo overlooking the Old City. [546] Adel Ahmed, captain of the Federal Police, meanwhile stated that they had captured al-Kur and al-Tawafa districts, allowing their use as corridors for fleeing civilians. [547] [548] Captain Yunis Mohammed stated that ISIL had launched a chemical attack on al-Adala, Bab al-Saray and Shaer Nineveh. He stated that 12 people were injured in the attack. [549]
A police spokesman stated that Federal Police and Rapid Response Division had resumed their advance after pausing it due to bad weather. Iraqi forces clashed with ISIL to close in on the al-Nuri mosque during the day. Iraq's Defense Ministry meanwhile stated that the anti-ISIL coalition destroyed an ISIL command center, resulting in deaths of 6 foreign ISIL leaders including Abdul Kareem al-Rusi, a Russian leader who was the head of Tareq Bin Zayad brigade. Other leaders killed in the airstrike were identified as Salih al-Ahmed, Abu Duaa al-Magribi, Yousif Uwni, Abdulla Humoud and Milad Seiro. A police statement also announced the capture of Husam Sheet al-Jabouri, a local chief of ISIL's Diwan al-Hisba in Bab al-Sijin area. The Joint Operations Command announced that CTS had captured the Nablus district. It also stated that the 9th Armoured Division had captured al-Mulawtha area as well as a village to the north of Badush. [550] [551] A security source stated to the Arabic news-channel Skypress that they had also captured Khalid ibn al-Walid and Bab al-Sijin districts. [552] [553]
On 20 March, Federal Police and Rapid Response Division resumed their advance on al-Nuri mosque after fog and rain in the early morning, coming within 1600 feet (488m) of the mosque. [554] [555] Iraqi forces stated that they had captured a residential complex near Badush cement plant. [556] [557] An Iraqi interior ministry official also stated that an Iraqi police colonel and eight other officers were captured by ISIL fighters after they ran out of ammunition during clashes in Bab Jadid district in the early hours. [558] Rapid Response Division's media officer Lieutenant Colonel Abdel Amir al-Mohammedawi denied any police officers were captured though some Federal Police sources stated they had been killed. [559] Meanwhile, Iraqi airstrikes targeted several IS locations in Tal Afar and Sinjar killed 47 militants and destroyed five booby-trapped vehicles, according to the Ministry of Defense. Another 20 ISIL members were also killed in Tal Afar, the ministry added. [560]
Iraqi forces of the Interior Ministry continued battling inside the Old City where snipers were deployed to target the militants while CTS clashed in the western front on 21 March. The operation command announced that CTS had captured al-Risala and Shaqaq Nablus in the west. [561] Yahya Rasool stated that Iraqi forces controlled about 60% of western Mosul. Brigadier Saad Maan also stated that bodies of the colonel and two officers kidnapped a day earlier were found, but denied they had been captured. [562] PMU also announced that it had captured the residential complex, as well as two villages and Arheiya area near Badush. They also stated that they had reached the outskirts of western Mosul. [563] [564]
ISIL shelled areas captured by Iraqi forces, resulting in civilian casualties. The Federal Police blocked off roads in the Old City with earthen barricades to prevent VBIEDs from attacking their locations. A CTS officer meanwhile stated that CTS was advancing in Yabsaat district and the old industrial area. [565] Iraqi military intelligence announced that Hassan Mahmoud al-Farahat, an ISIL commander of the group's artillery brigade, was killed in coalition airstrikes on his vehicle in al-Tank district along with his wife Iman al-Toukhi, who was a medical officer of the group. [566] During the day, Yarallah announced that the 9th Armoured Division had captured two villages in the northern Badush district. [567] The Defense Ministry stated that they also captured an ISIL command center in the region, killing more than 40 militants including a senior leader known as Abu Adul-Rahman. [568]
Iraqi forces paused their advance in the morning on 23 March, due to cloudy weather. A police spokesman later said Federal Police reinforcements had moved towards the Old City and were preparing to storm it. [569] Civil defense officials and locals meanwhile stated that dozens of civilians were buried under rubble after airstrikes in Mosul Jadida district a week earlier. Civil Defense chief Brigadier Mohammed Al-Jawari stated that 40 bodies were recovered while one Iraqi official put total casualties at 137. The coalition stated that the allegations will be investigated. [570] Another 100 civilians were reported to have been killed in airstrikes nearby. [571]
It was reported that Iraqi forces would deploy new tactics, as advances had slowed in western Mosul. U.S. Army Brigadier General John Richardson said that they might open another front on the Old City, to put further pressure on the militants. Brigadier General Yahya Rasool meanwhile stated that Iraqi forces had advanced, to recapture areas outside the Old City, including al-Yabsat. [572] Civilians who fled ISIL-controlled areas, during the night between 23 and 24 March, reported that ISIL had fired upon them as they tried to flee Mosul. [573] Meanwhile, Iraqi Observatory for Human Rights stated that about 500 civilians had been killed in coalition airstrikes in the past few days. [574] Jawdat stated that Iraqi forces had captured an ISIL command center in the Old City. [575] A Federal Police spokesman stated on 25 March that military operations had been halted, due to rising civilian casualties. [576] [577] The Coalition confirmed that it had carried out the airstrikes in al-Jadida, a week earlier, where civilian casualties were reported. [578]
Iraqi forces continued clashing in the city despite reports of the battle being paused. Iraqi military denied that coalition airstrikes had killed the civilians in al-Jadida a week earlier, claiming that the houses were rigged by ISIL and 61 bodies were found. Eyewitnesses, locals and some government officials contradicted these claims. During the day, Iraqi forces clashed with ISIL around al-Nuri mosque. Lt. Col. Ali Jassem of the 9th Armoured Division stated that Iraqi forces had raided and entered the Badush cement plant to where some ISIL fighters had retreated to. [579] [580] Yarallah later announced that the CTS had captured Wadi al-Ayn and Rajm al-Hadid districts. The Badush cement plant was also captured by the 9th Armoured Division during the day. [581] [582] Iraqi forces were also stated to have captured the Orouba district and the industrial zone in west of the city. [583] It was also reported that they had captured the Badush Dam . [584]
Iraqi forces stated on 27 March that they had launched new assaults in the Old City area with the Federal Police stating that they had started to advance in its southwestern part along with the Rapid Response Division. A police officer added that the attacks were the start of operations to besiege the area. [585] Jawdat stated on the next day that Iraqi forces had tried to storm al-Midan and Suq al Sha'areen districts. Meanwhile, Townsend stated that the anti-ISIL coalition probably had a role in the airstrike that killed civilians in al-Jadida, adding that the civilians might have been gathered there by ISIL. [586] A train station and the football stadium were reported to be captured by the Rapid Response Division. Some commanders of the ERD units meanwhile were critical of the Federal Police, with one officer stating that some of them deployed to hold newly captured areas in overnight raids kept withdrawing and ceding them to ISIL. [587]
On 29 March, Jawdat stated that Iraqi forces were besieging the area around al-Nuri mosque and had captured the Qadheeb al-Ban district as well as al-Malab sports stadium. He also stated that the Federal Police had killed ISIL's health minister, Saadallah Abu Shuaib and his two guards near the Republican Hospital. Iraqi military's media office announced that the Iraqi Air Force had destroyed a security headquarters and two workshops making VBIEDs and booby-traps in Tal Afar. [588] [589] Meanwhile, US Army General Joseph Votel stated that 284 members of Iraqi security forces had been killed in the battle for western Mosul while more than 1,600 had been wounded in addition to the 490 killed and more than 3,000 injured during the battle for eastern Mosul. [590] On the next day, it was reported that Iraqi forces had captured a village along with its train station to west of Badush. [591] [592] A spokesman of the anti-ISIL coalition meanwhile stated that less than 1,000 fighters were estimated to be left in western Mosul. [593] Mosul's police chief stated on 31 March that ISIL had fired rockets into eastern Mosul. Clashes occurred in the Old City during the day, but Iraqi forces didn't attempt a new push. [594]

April: Slow block-by-block Iraqi advance
Airstrikes resumed on 4 April after the weather cleared. Iraqi military stated that Iraqi Air Force killed dozens of militants in airstrikes. Iraqi Military Intelligence meanwhile stated that 4 ISIL leaders had also been killed in airstrikes on al-Tanak district by the anti-ISIL coalition. It added that the commanders in charge of booby traps, Arab suicide fighters and child recruitment were among those killed in the airstrikes. [595] [596] Some intelligence sources stated that gas bombs launched by ISIL in Rajm al-Hadid district had killed 6 civilians and injured 29. [597] Iraqi Joint Operations Command announced on 5 April that CTS forces had captured al-Maghrib district, west of Mosul's old city center. They also advanced in Aabar and Matahin districts. The Federal Police and the Rapid Response Division continued to clash with ISIL on the southern and western front lines at the edge of the old city center. [598]
On 6 April, the operation command announced the capture of al-Yarmouk district, killing 42 militants in the process. [599] It also added that the anti-ISIL coalition conducted airstrikes on an ISIL headquarters of suicide bombers, resulting in its destruction as well as killing of dozens of militants including some non-Iraqi leaders. [600] Meanwhile, an Iraqi helicopter providing support to the Federal Police in the Old City was shot down by ISIL, resulting in the deaths of its two pilots. It was the first aircraft shot down by ISIL during the battle. The joint operations forces stated that it had crashed in eastern parts of Mosul. [601] Meanwhile, Iraqi News quoted Maj. Gen. Najm al-Jubouri claiming that Iraqi forces controlled over 90% of the "western axis". [602]
Iraqi security sources stated on 7 April that they had captured three more villages to the west of Mosul. Iraqi army officer Jabbar Hassan stated that the 9th Armoured Division had captured Ghazliwa after storming it in the morning. Yarallah stated that they had also captured the villages of Rihaniyah Qadima and Rihaniyah Jadida. [603] The United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs meanwhile stated that over 264,000 people had been displaced from West Mosul since the beginning of the Iraqi military operations to capture it. [604]
Mosul residents stated that ISIL had killed dozens of residents in the last few weeks. [605] An army official stated on 9 April that the Governor of Nineveh Governorate, Nofal Hammadi al-Sultan, had escaped an assassination attempt on his convoy in east Mosul, with no injuries reported in the attack. [606] A suspected chlorine gas attack by ISIL in the al-Hadba district of east Mosul was reported on 10 April, with an Iraqi security sources stating that 4 civilians had been killed and 6 had been injured. [607] Meanwhile, Mutahin district was announced as captured by the operation command on 9 April. [608] On the next day, it also announced that CTS had completely captured Yarmouk district along with Sikak. [609]
The Joint Operations Command announced on 13 April that CTS had completely captured the district of Aabar. A security source also stated that Iraqi forces continued to clash with ISIL in the nearby Matahin and Urouba districts while also capturing most of Tanak district. Iraqi military also issued new instructions to civilians in the remaining ISIL-held districts to flee to avoid being caught in crossfire by spreading in other buildings. Advances of the Iraqi forces had slowed down in the Old City as they had limited use of bombs and were relying more on sniper fire. [610] Jawdat meanwhile announced that the Federal Police had destroyed ISIL's command and control headquarters in the Old City. He added that a unit of the Iraqi military had killed 13 militants and destroyed 7 VBIEDs during a raid in the area. [611] Iraqi forces announced during the day that Abdullah al-Badrani (also known as Abu Ayoub al-Atar), one of the seniormost religious leaders of the group had been killed in an airstrike by the anti-ISIL coalition. [612] Jawdat added that two other leaders of the group, including Abdul Qadir Mahmoud al-Hamdouni, were killed in another area. During the day, Yarallah announced that Iraqi forces had captured three more villages in the outskirts of West Mosul. Iraqi Army also announced the capture of the western entrance of the city. [613]
An Iraqi military source claimed that Gulmurod Khalimov had been killed in an airstrike in west Mosul a week earlier. [614] Jawdat stated that the Federal Police had killed Mahmoud Ali Mahmoud, a militant leader and also took control over a network of tunnels beneath the Old City. Iraqi Defense Ministry meanwhile stated that Iraqi forces had taken control of a booby trap and VBIED-manufacturing factory after capturing al-Maloutha, located in the right side of Mosul. [615] An Iraqi military officer meanwhile stated that ISIL had launched a gas attack in the form of a rocket filled with chlorine on Iraqi forces in al-Aabar district, injuring seven soldiers. [616]
Jawdat stated on 16 April that Iraqi forces had advanced 200 metres inside the Old City and took new positions near al-Nuri mosque after the Federal Police and the Rapid Response Division advanced from the area of Qadheeb al-Ban during the early morning. [617] Joint Operations Command spokesperson Gen. Yahya Rasoul stated that Iraqi forces had fully encircled the Old City area while CTS spokesman, Sabah al-Noaman stated that 2,900 ISIL members had been killed in the past few days in western Mosul. [618] Lieutenant-Colonel Abdul Salam al-Jubouri announced on the next day that Abu Quhafa, the leader of the group's "services bureau", had been killed by the Rapid Reaction Forces a day earlier. [619] Meanwhile, it was also reported that all bridges in and out of western Mosul had become impassable due to flooding, resulting in suspension of aid supplies and escape routes for fleeing civilians being cut. [620] The Federal Police accused ISIL of shelling Iraqi troops with chemical weapons agents in Urouba and Bab Jadid districts, causing minor injuries. [621]
A media officer of the Federal Police stated on 17 April that they were engaging ISIL in heavy door-to-door clashes in the Old City and had advanced in the area, while a police spokesman stated that the troops were closing in on the al-Nuri mosque. [622] Army Captain Jabbar Hassan stated that heavy clashes had erupted in al-Tanak and al-Thawra districts, with two Iraqi soldiers killed and Iraqi forces having made rapid advances in al-Tanak. [623] Lieutenant-Colonel Abdul Salam al-Jubouri announced that Aziz Ibrahim Faris al-Anzi, ISIL' s head of security, had been killed in an airstrike near the Republican Hospital in the Al-Sihha district. He also added that another leader by the name of Ali Ibrahim Mohamed was killed in clashes with CTS in al-Tanak district. [619] The United Nations meanwhile stated that over 493,000 had been displaced since the beginning of the battle with about 500,000 still estimated to remain in ISIL-held districts of the city. [624]
A senior official stated on 18 April that more than 60 ISIL militants including a commander were killed in clashes with Iraqi forces who advanced in al-Farouk area in the vicinity of al-Nuri mosque. They also destroyed five armored vehicles, eight motocycles fitted with bombs and six anti-aircraft batteries. [625] Jawdat stated that they had captured a building being used as a health office by the group and had erected barricades around al-Farouk district. [626] Iraqi state sources claimed the group only controlled six districts though this couldn't be independently verified. CBS News reported that an Iraqi unit with American and Australian advisers had been hit by a rocket containing mustard agent, injuring 25 Iraqis though the advisers were unharmed. [627] Army Captain Khader al-Asadi stated that 16 civilians were killed in al-Thawra district by a suicide bomber that originally tried to target CTS troops stationed there but detonated in a residential area after he failed to reach them. [628] The Iraqi Army built a new pontoon bridge over the Tigris river, opening an escape route for fleeing civilians. [629]
A CTS spokesman announced that Iraqi forces had captured al-Thawra district while the Joint Operations Command stated that they had also captured al-Nasr district. Jawdat stated that Iraqi forces had killed a senior ISIL operative in charge of the chemical weapons in Mosul, in a guided-missile strike in the Zanjili district. [630] Iraq's Military Intelligence Directorate issued a statement announcing that a coalition airstrike had killed the group's head of intelligence, Ahmed Khalid Najim, known as Abu Obeida, in Tayaran district. [631] He also stated that Abu Abdulrahman, Baghdadi's first aide, was killed in a bombing by Iraqi forces. Other commanders killed by Iraqi forces are Abul Walid al-Tunisi, who was killed near the al-Awsad mosque in the Old City along with four of his bodyguards, a Russian commander known as Abo Maria, and a military chief by the name of Abu Baraa al-Dagestani, along with his aide Abu Abdul-Rahman al-Zamari, near the Fifth Bridge, as well as a relative of Baghdadi. [632] [633]
Military statements announced that CTS had captured al-Thawra and al-Saha districts. CTS commander Maan Saadi stated that the forces were linking up with the Federal Police, moving on the Old City from a different direction to complete its encirclement. Iraqi forces also stated that half of al-Tanak district was still held by ISIL. [634] Yarallah from the Joint Operations Command announced on 25 April that CTS had completely captured al-Tanak district at the western edge of Mosul. Meanwhile, the troops inside the Old City pushed reinforcements into the area. PMU also launched an operation to clear the town of Al-Hadar and its surrounding villages from ISIL forces, seizing three villages. [635] By the end of the day they had captured 12 villages in the region. [636]
PMU announced during the afternoon of 26 April that they had captured the ancient city of Hatra , a day after launching their offensive in the region. They also stated they had advanced to the edge of the nearby modern town. [637] The city is also strategically significant as it commands access to Nineveh, Saladin and Anbar Governorate . [638] They also took over 3 villages in the region during the day and another along with a cemetery on the next day. [639] The modern town was also captured by PMU on 27 April. [640] The advance cut off several desert tracks used by ISIL to move between Iraq and Syria. [641] CTS spokesman Sabah al-Noaman stated that security forces had killed more than 500 militants and needed to capture four more districts before fully capturing the city. [642]
The Pentagon stated on 29 April that one U.S. service member was killed by an explosive device outside Mosul. [643] [58] The killed American was later identified as 25-year old 1st Lieutenant Weston Lee from Bluffton, Georgia. [644] An Iraqi rights activist stated that at least 15 Iraqi civilians were killed when a warplane struck a house in western Mosul. [645] Meanwhile, military sources stated that the Federal Police on 29 April had retaken positions lost after attacks on two positions on the edge of the Old City killed a Federal Police brigade commander and 18 other members of the Interior Ministry force a day earlier. Iraqi army's chief of staff, Lieutenant General Othman al-Ghanmi claimed that Mosul would be completely captured within three weeks. [646] PMU meanwhile continued advancing further southwest of Mosul, clearing five villages near Hatra from ISIL control. [647]

May: Slow progress around old city center and assault from northwest
Iraqi forces fought to recapture the Old City area on 3 May, tightening their control around the al-Nuri mosque. [648] The 9th Armoured Division and Rapid Response Division backed by the Emergency Response Division of the Iraqi Interior Ministry opened a new front against ISIL-held districts on 4 May, assaulting them from the north in order to accelerate the military operation which had slowed down to a great extent and allow other units to speed up the capture of the remaining districts. The Federal Police stated that they had advanced 1,400 metres and were pushing in the Hulela area towards the northwestern Haramat district. [649] [650] The troops were reported to have captured a village and a gas factory in the assault. [651] Meanwhile, the United Nations stated that over 419,000 people had fled western Mosul since the assault on it began. [652] The Joint Operations Command later stated that Iraqi forces had captured most of Mushairfah district including a water purification facility, taking new positions near residential buildings of Harmat while other troops cut off supply lines between ISIL-held Kanisah district and Najjar as well as 17 Tamouz districts. [653] According to an ISIL security source, 81 civilians, including 29 women and 18 children, were killed and another 86 wounded during a missile attack on the El-Vela School in 17 Tamouz (17 July) district of western Mosul, while Iraqi forces denied targeting civilians, saying the building was being used by ISIL as a bomb factory. [654] But it was later that an Iraqi federal police source admitted that at least 80 civilians were killed by an air raid in the area. [655] An Anti-Terror Unit Captain Ali el-Behadili meanwhile stated that Habib Abdulcebbar, who was responsible for ISIL's war administration, had been killed. [656]
Iraqi forces captured three villages after their assault from the north. [657] [658] An army statement announced that Iraqi forces had captured the Second Mushairfah district along with the Church and Mikhail's Monastery area. Brigadier General Walid Khalifa, deputy commander of the 9th Brigade, added that Iraqi forces had killed about thirty militants in addition to destroying five VBIEDs before they could be used. [659]
Iraqi security official Safa al-Behadli stated that nine security officials were killed and three others were injured when ISIL attacked using four bomb-laden vehicles in west Mosul, also resulting in destruction of two military vehicles. [660] Iraqi military announced during the day that they had fully captured the entire Mushairfah district though some officers stated that the fighting was still ongoing. [661]
Iraqi forces met severe resistance from ISIL on 7 May while trying to push into the few remaining districts held by the group. Iraqi officers meanwhile stated that reinforcements from the Rapid Response Division had arrived in northwest Mosul to help clear areas on the banks of Tigris. [661] Jawdat stated that Khaled ibn al-Waleed, a prominent Libyan ISIL leader and five of his sentry were killed when security troops bombed ISIL's police headquarters. Another 40 ISIL members were killed in police bombardment on al-Zanjili district. [662]
The Iraqi Interior Ministry said that 3,320 militants were killed and 525 villages and regions were recaptured since security operations were launched on 19 February to retake western Mosul from Islamic State militants. Iraqi military intelligence stated that Jassim al-Basri (also known as Abu Mohamed), ISIL's leader for Mushairfah and Haramat districts, was killed by an anti-ISIL coalition airstrike. [663] [664] The Joint Operations Command announced that the 9th Armoured Division and Rapid Response Division had captured the Haramat district. A commander of the 9th Division stated that they had also captured the district's residential buildings, killing 17 militants. Meanwhile Iraqi forces advanced toward 30 Tamouz district, with Federal Police advancing to the adjacent al-Iqtisadi district and opening a new front in southern 30 Tamouz. The CTS meanwhile advanced in Wadi Ikab, seizing most of the area. [665]
Iraqi Joint Operations Command said that CTS had captured the Northern Industrial Area while a small district of 30 Tamouz had also been captured. [666] Yarallah in a separate statement added that CTS had captured the northern part of the Wadi Ikab industrial area. [667] According to a local police officer, ISIL militants attacked Iraqi police sites, killing one policeman and injuring four others. Another eight militants were killed in the clashes. Three PMU members were killed and six injured when ISIL attack their position in west Mosul. [668] A spokesman of the Emergency Response Division said that 250 militants had been killed in the Haramat district in the past 5 days. [669]
Major General Maan al-Saadi announced on 10 May that CTS had captured the district of al-Maamel in the center of the right coast of Mosul. Lieutenant General Abdul Ghani al-Asadi meanwhile announced that an ISIL military commander for Islah al-Zeraie district, Abu Ayyub al-Shami and three of his companions had been killed during the clashes. [670] [671] After capturing Maamel, Iraqi forces stormed the Islah al-Zeraie district. They were also reported to be in control of half of the Kanisah district. [672] Nineveh Liberation Operation commander, Lieutenant General Abdul Amir Yarallah, said that soldiers from the army’s 9th Armored Division had killed 1,321 Daesh militants, including senior commanders, since February. Moreover, 139 explosive vehicles had been destroyed, 11 unmanned aerial vehicles shot down, another 61 militant hideouts, 10 bomb-making workshops and five command centers were also demolished. Separately, 20 ISIL members were arrested by police in the Karamah, Khadra and Kokceli neighborhoods. [673]
Iraqi forces pushed further to besiege the Old City center. Jawdat stated that the Rapid Response Division backed by armoured vehicles advanced in Iqtisadiyn district, killing many militants and destroying 17 of their vehicles including 5 booby-trapped ones. Commander Abdul Ghani al-Asadi stated that CTS had captured a large part of Islah al-Ziraie district but refrained from capturing it completely to avoid civilian casualties. [674] Lt Gen Othman al-Ghanimi meanwhile claimed the rest of Mosul will be captured by the Islamic holy month of Ramadan which is to begin on 26 May. [675]
The Joint Operations Command announced that PMU had launched an offensive, backed by Iraqi Air Force's helicopters to capture the ISIL-held areas near border with Syria including the towns of Al-Ba'aj and Qayrawan. The PMU later announced that it had captured four villages while clashing in two other villages. [676] The Operations Command also announced that CTS had captured the first part of al-Islam al-Ziraie and had started a push into the second part. In a separate statement, it stated that the Rapid Response Division backed by Iraqi Army had cleared the Haramat district while advancing in Iqtisadiyn and 17th Tamouz districts. [677] Meanwhile, Jawdat stated that the Federal Police had killed two key ISIL leaders, Abu Ali al-Basrawi and Abu Yousef al-Masry along with his assistant Radwan al-Muslawi. The Operations Command separately stated that the 9th Division, 15th Infantry Division and the Rapid Response Division had captured Haramat al-Thaniya district during the day. [678] The operation command later announced that Iraqi forces had captured that CTS had captured the Islah al-Zeraie district. PMU separately announced that it had captured 21 villages around al-Qairawan, killing 77 militants and destroying 15 VBIEDs. [679]
The PMU continued advancing in areas near the Iraqi-Syrian border, with the Joint Operations Command stating that they had captured 11 villages around al-Qairawan. The paramilitary forces surrounded the town from three sides, while cutting off the main roads between it and Tal Afar as well as Sinjar . Another statement announced that the 16th Infantry Division of the Iraqi Army had completely captured the Hawi al-Kanisah district. [680] It also stated that an Iraqi Air Force helicopter was shot down, after it came under fire from ISIL while supporting PMU to capture villages located in the desert to the west of Mosul. [681]
Brigadier General Yahya Rasoul stated on 14 May that ISIL controlled no more than 9 percent of west Mosul. [682] Joint Operations Command stated that CTS stormed the Ureibi and Rifaie districts in the early hours, while the 9th Armored Division along with the Emergency Response Division attacked 17 Tamouz. [683] The 9th Divison managed to destroy the defensive lines of ISIL in the northern part of 17 Tamouz. [684] The PMU stated that it had captured the villages of Khailo and Tal al-Qasab near al-Qairawan besides surrounding another village. The statement added that the paramilitary forces were continuously surrounding al-Qairawan from three sides, and had killed 23 militants while also destroying four car bombs. [685] Udai al-Khadran, mayor of Al Khalis , said that he had received confirmation that an unnamed ISIL senior commander was killed in an airstrike along with four of his aides in western Mosul. [686]
The Joint Operations Command announced that CTS had captured the Ureibi district while Iraqi forces clashed against militants in Rifaie, 17 Tamouz and Iqtisadiyn, all of which were partly under their control. It also added that Iraqi fighter jets had carried out an airstrike on a village near Tal Afar, killing 13 militants and destroying three vehicles carrying rocket launchers. [687] The PMU meanwhile announced it had captured eight villages to the north and south of the Qayrawan region as part of their operation to drive out the militants from areas near Iraq-Syria border, killing 39 of them in the clashes. [688] Meanwhile, Federal Police chief Shaker Jawdat was quoted saying that his forces killed 173 militants including a leader during recent clashes in addition to destroying 40 booby-trapped cars. [689]
The Iraqi military stated that the PMU captured three villages to the north and south of al-Qairawan in addition to clashing in another village. [690] The Joint Operations Command Brigadier General Yahya Rasool stated, during a press conference, that government forces control 89.5 percent of western Mosul and killed 16,467 ISIL members since the start of operation. According to him, 679 booby-trapping vehicles, 11 ISIL headquarters, 47 drones and 76 booby-trapping workshops were destroyed, while 6,661 bombs and 217 explosive belts were defused. He also stated that ISIL controlled only about 12 square kilometers of area in Mosul while Iraqi planes dropped leaflets telling civilians the battle was nearly won, also telling them to stop using all vehicles to avoid being misidentified as ISIL fighters. Col. John Dorrian of United States Air Force separately stated that the group was near total defeat. [691] [692] Meanwhile, CTS said that troops killed ISIL media official Jalal Ayoub Shehab, a Syrian national, in Iktisadiyeen district. Security forces also arrested a 25-member ISIL cell in the al-Sukkar and al-Seddiq districts, north of Mosul. [693] A security source claimed seven ISIL members, including a commander in charge of booby-trapped vehicle attacks, were killed when unidentified fighter jets bombarded a house in the Iqtisadiyn district. [694]
The Joint Operations Command announced that CTS had completely captured the Rifaie district. They also advanced in Iqtisadiyn and 17 Tamouz districts, large parts of both districts were under their control. [695] PMU said that they cut off a road linking Tal Qasab and Qairawan, which is considered the main ISIL supply route north of Qairawan. [696] Fierce clashes between Iraqi forces and ISIL militants in regions of Bab al-Toub, al-Mekkawi and Bab al-Jadid left 20 militants dead and others injured, Federal Police officer Lt. Gen. Odai Sami said. [697] Meanwhile, more than 25 militants were killed in western Mosul, according to the Rapid Response forces. [698] PMU's first brigade repelled an attack by ISIL, which left four attackers dead, and stated that 70 percent of a first phase of clearing operations to recapture the al-Qairawan region has been completed. [699] The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs stated that about 275,000 civilians remained in areas still under ISIL control. [700] A Federal Police officer meanwhile stated that 3 soldiers were killed by a suicide bomber in al-Rifaie during the day, while four policemen and three CTS soldiers were killed in Ureibi in two car-bomb attacks. Iraqi officer Sadoun Fahd stated that coalition airstrikes targeting a group of militants preoaring for an attack against Iraqi forces had killed 25 civilians. [701]
The PMU captured the Sahl Sinjar Air Base on 18 May which Karim al-Nuri of the Badr Organisation stated would be used as a base by PMU and Iraqi Air Force to chase militants across the desert with Syria. [702] The Iraqi military stated that the paramilitary forces had also captured eight villages near al-Qairawan, killing 54 ISIL fighters in addition to destroying a headquarters of the group. [703] Later, the Joint Operations Command announced that Federal Police backed by the Rapid Response Division had captured the Iqtisadiyn district. [704] Maj. Gen. Najm al-Jubouri, stated that Iraqi troops will target the town of Tal Afar, after the recapture of Mosul, while officials say 750 fighters still remain in the town. [705] Federal Police chief Shaker Jawdat said his forces are in control of over 291 square kilometers of western Mosul and ISIL members set sewage networks at the south of 17 Tamuz district on fire with petroleum to prevent drones from tracking its members. [706] A PMU commander stated that his forces have captured the Washington military airbase, west of Mosul, while ten militants were killed in the Ain Fathi village. [707] Meanwhile, CTS managed to storm al-Najjar district, recapturing half of it. [708]
Brig. Gen. Mohamed al-Jubouri, from the Rapid Response forces, saying that the troops repelled an attack by militants who used 20 booby-trapped vehicles. Twelve militants were killed at Tamuz, Mesherfa, Najjar and al-Rifaie neighborhoods when troops repulsed the attack. [709] Iraqi Joint Operations Command said that CTS recaptured Rawshan area in northwestern Mosul. [710] ISIL militants from west Mosul fired five mortar missiles on al-Ghabat region, eastern Mosul, leaving two police personnel wounded, according to a security source. [711] War Media Cell said that 9th armored division retaken the northern part of 17 Tamuz district and dozens of ISIL fighters were killed in airstrikes in western Mosul. [712] An Iraqi official meanwhile said that over 526,000 had been displaced since the beginning of operation to capture West Mosul. [713]
The Joint Operation Command announced on 20 May that the Federal Police and Rapid Response Division had captured the 17 Tammouz (17 July) district while the CTS had captured the al-Rabie district. [714] Iraqi Federal Police said they retook 80 targets, killing 172 ISIL snipers and destroying 373 booby-trapped vehicles since the military operation began in western Mosul. Another 66 militants were killed, 13 vehicles and nine motorbikes were destroyed in the Iqtisadiyeen and 17 Tamuz districts. [715] Militants launched several attacks against PMU checkpoints in the village Deheila, west of Mosul, leaving seven PMU personnel killed and others injured. [716] Iraqi special forces spokesman Sabah al-Numan announced that his forces had captured all areas assigned to them and had thus completed their mission, declaring that only eight square kilometers of Mosul remained under militant control. He added that they'll carry out any further operations if so ordered. [717]
The paramilitary PMU announced that it had captured four villages to south of al-Qairawan during the day in addition to cutting off the ISIL supply route between the villages of al-Hatmiya and Tal Qasab. They also added that they had captured Tel Qasab in addition to 2 villages to the north of al-Qairawan. [718] Meanwhile, twenty militants, including senior leaders of Arab nationalities and Western nationals, were killed trying to reach an old bridge in Mosul. [719] Lt. Gen.Abdul Wahab al-Saadi, CTS commander, said that his forces had captured 47 out of 74 residential districts from ISIL in western Mosul, killing hundreds of militants. [720] At least 17 Iraqi soldiers were killed and others wounded in four suicide attacks carried out by ISIL in the northwestern Mosul, a local security official said. [721]
Iraqi military announced on 22 May that CTS had captured al-Najjar district. [722] Iraqi Federal Police forces meanwhile pounded ISIL targets in Mosul's Old City, as they prepared to storm the area. [723] Unknown gunmen abducted the Nimrud neighborhood chief Khazaal Theyab al-Duleimi in east of Mosul, along with two others, according to a security source. [724] Two civilians were killed by a ISIL mortar missile and a bomb blast in Hawi al-Kanisa district, according to a security source and local residents. [725] War Media Cell said Iraqi forces managed to capture al-Najjar district. [726] It also added that eleven militants, including two Arabs were killed and a so-called hisbah (vigilantism) office was destroyed in an airstrike on Baaj town. [727] Meanwhile, seven ISIL militants were killed when a drone from the U.S.-led coalition pounded a house in Zanjili district. [728]
The military announced on the next day that PMU had captured the town of al-Qairawan in western Nineveh province along with all villages around it. [729] [730] The battle leaves at least 13 PMU fighters killed and nine others injured. Another 41 militants were also killed in the fighting. [731] Meanwhile, the military engineers installed a new bridge across Tigris to allow the deployement of reinforcements ahead of what was described as a "final assault" on the remaining militant-controlled areas. [732] Federal Police have declared that they killed Abul Hassan al-Iraqi, in charge of military engineering, and Mohamed Mejbal abu Othman, military leader of western Mosul during a operation. [733] Meanwhile, local residents reported that eighteen civilians and nine ISIL members were killed in an airstrike that targeted a house in Haderet al-Sada region in the Old City. [734]
Federal Police said they have taken control of a so-called “legislative court of the soldiers state” in 17 Tamuz district, killing six ISIL members, while destroying a vehicle and three motorbikes. [735] Federal Police officer, Capt. Ahmed al-Obeidi said that dozens of militants were killed, including three suicide bombers following the incursion into the al-Zanjili neighborhood. The Joint Operations Comman noting that security forces were in control of about 97 percent of west Mosul. [736] On 25 May, PMU fighters captured four villages and a strategic road west of Mosul from ISIL, according to an Iraqi army officer. [737]
The United States admitted that an airstrike conducted by them in March killed at least 105 civilians. The precision-guided munitions were aimed at two ISIS snipers. However, according the CentCom, there were explosives planted in the building which detonated that ultimately cost the lives of the civilians. [738]

Humanitarian issues
Up to 1.5 million civilians live in the city, sparking concerns among various organizations of a large humanitarian crisis. [739] Lise Grande , the United Nations' humanitarian coordinator in Iraq, stated, "In a worst-case scenario, we're literally looking at the single largest humanitarian operation in the world in 2016." [739] Save the Children warned that massive civilian bloodshed was likely unless safe routes were allowed to let civilians flee. [740] The U.S. government has accused ISIL of using civilians as human shields . [741]

ISIL abuses and abductions
Fears that civilians could be used as human shields by ISIL were realized as it was confirmed the group had been abducting civilians from villages for this purpose, which received widespread condemnation from human rights groups and the United Nations Security Council . [742] [743]
ISIL has reportedly threatened to execute civilians trying to flee. Snipers , landmines , toxic weapons and trenches are preventing people from attempting to escape. [84] Iraqi officials, via radio broadcasts and leaflets dropped over the city, warned civilians to stay in their homes. Leaflets advised residents of various precautions to take including instructions to tape over their windows to protect from flying glass and to disconnect gas pipes. [92] [744]
Shortly after the battle began, news surfaced of ISIL kidnapping and executing civilians in Mosul. Pentagon spokesman Capt. Jeff Davis stated that ISIL was using civilians as human shields and holding people against their will in the city. [745]
The International Business Times reported that ISIL has forced boys from Mosul as young as 12 to fight for them, and that ISIL had trained the children to "behead prisoners and make suicide bombs." [746]
An Iraqi intelligence source stated on 21 October that ISIL executed 284 men and boys abducted from Mosul for the purpose of using them as human shields. The civilians were shot and put in a mass grave. A United Nations official said the UN is "gravely worried" about the fate of 200 families from Samalia and 350 families from Najafia who were abducted Monday by ISIL, who could be used as human shields. [747]
UN sources stated that four people died from inhaling toxic fumes after ISIL set fire to the Al-Mishraq Chemical Factory on 23 October. [748]
On 26 October, CNN reported that ISIL has been carrying out "retribution killings" of civilians as revenge for others welcoming Iraqi and Peshmerga troops in liberated villages. [192]
According to Ravina Shamdasani, of the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, ISIL executed 232 people near Mosul in late October for defying its orders and had taken tens of thousands of people to use as human shields against advancing Iraqi forces. She claimed that ISIL "executed 42 civilians in Hamam al-Alil , south of Mosul. Also on Wednesday ISIL executed 190 former Iraqi Security Forces for refusing to join them, in the Al Ghazlani base near Mosul." [198]
Iraqi forces evacuated more than 1,000 civilians from the front lines surrounding Mosul on 26 October, moving them to the Khazir region. [749] Civilians on the southern front had reported that their relatives had been taken by retreating ISIL fighters to be used as human shields. [191]
In October 2016, Iraqi government has launched a military operation in Mosul to eject ISIL. Based on reports provided by the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Monitor, more than a million residents in Mosul are at risk and many of them were killed or used as human shields against the advance of Iraqi army. Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Monitor warns that Iraqi government and international forces have to put an end to the humanitarian crisis in Mosul and provide its residents with their basic needs. ISIL has driven some of Mosul’s residents out of their neighborhoods while others were prevented from fleeing to the regions controlled by Iraqi army. Human rights are violated by both ISIL, which drove about 550 families from the villages of As-Semalyya and An-Nejafyya, and Iraqi troops which captured 1,500 civilians from mosques and schools in the Dybka refugee camp. On 21 October 2016, Another human rights violation committed by Iraqi army and police as they arrested almost hundreds of civilians and executing some villagers in the south of Mosul claiming that they are hosting ISIL militias. On the same day, Iraqi airstrikes targeted a funeral in Kirkuk province causing death of 20 people and injuring dozens others. Mosul's population reached to 1.5 million people, including 600,000 children who are besieged by ISIL militias and suffering from the shortage of food, water, electricity and medical care. ISIL militias monopolize the local hospitals in Mosul and Al-Hemdanyya District to treat only its supporters and members. About 690 families have been evacuated from the Makhmoor District east of Mosul and Al-Hemdanyya District to the Al- Hood camp. [750]
On 31 October, a member of the Nineveh Provincial Council stated that ISIL executed 300 civilians and former security members in the village of Moshairefa, north of Mosul. They had been imprisoned and accused of collaborating with the government. [751]
Mosul Eye reported on 3 November that mortar strikes killed five civilians in Mosul. [752]
Two roadside bombs struck a convoy of civilians fleeing Hawija on 4 November as the families were being taken to the town of Al-Alam. At least 18 people were killed, a police officer said. [753]
On 7 November, the Iraqi War Media Office announced that the bodies of estimated 300 people were found in a mass grave at the agriculture college in Hamam al-Alil , south of Mosul. Many had been decapitated. Iraqi forces made the discovery after noticing the smell. Abdul Rahman al-Waggaa, a member of the Nineveh provincial council, said ISIL had used the college as "a killing field." [754] [755] The Iraqi War Media Office said there would be an investigation into the murders: "Inside the building of the Faculty of Agriculture there is a new crime: the presence of 100 beheaded bodies of citizens killed by terrorists, and a special team will be sent to inspect this heinous crime," the office said in a statement. [240]
The United Nations reported on 8 November that ISIL had abducted 295 former Iraqi Security Forces members and 1,500 families from Hamam al-Alil, forcing them to retreat with the militants into Mosul. [756]
On 9 November, it was reported that ISIL killed at least 20 civilians after accusing them of being spies. Five crucified bodies were displayed at a traffic intersection, while others were left hanging from traffic signals and electricity poles. [757] Civilians who had fled the city in the past few days reported that ISIL was using suicide bombs to attack residents in addition to Iraqi forces. [758]
BBC News reported on 11 November that ISIL executed 40 civilians in Mosul after accusing them of being spies. One man was killed for defying the ban on mobile phone use. They were shot and their bodies displayed around the city. [759]
The U.N. Office of Human Rights provided new details that ISIL is using chemical weapons and has stockpiled "large quantities" of ammonia and sulfur. "We can only speculate how they intend to use this," U.N. spokeswoman Ravina Shamdasani said. "We are simply raising the alarm that this is happening, that this is being stockpiled." [760]
On 17 November, Iraqi forces found two more mass graves near Hamam Alil, containing at least 250 bodies. One of the graves was inside a well. "We believe the well contains more than 200 bodies. ISIS used this mass grave to kill and dump people over the past two years," Iraqi Federal Police Commander Brig. Gen. Faris Radhi Abbas told CNN. [761]
In late February 2017, Iraqi forces uncovered the largest known mass grave dug by ISIL at the "Khafsa Sinkhole" near Mosul, containing the bodies of 4,000 Iraqi government personnel. They had been killed by ISIL shortly after the Fall of Mosul in June 2014. [762]

Allegations against anti-ISIL forces
The presence with Iraqi forces of several militias with histories of human rights abuses was criticized; Human Rights Watch called for Shia militias from the Popular Mobilization Forces (PMF) not to enter Mosul, following allegations of abuse of Sunni Muslims in anti-ISIL operations in Fallujah , Tikrit and Amirli . [763] [764] [765] Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi later stated that only the Iraqi army and the Iraqi national police will enter the city itself. [82] [766]
On 21 October, International Business Times reported that "disturbing and graphic footage posted to social media allegedly shows Iraqi security forces torturing and interrogating young children for information about ISIL as they attempt to retake Mosul from the Islamic State terror group." [767]
On 11 November, the Sunni website Middle East Monitor hosted video of the Iraqi Special Forces allegedly murdering an Iraqi Sunni child. The boy, identified as Muhammad Ali Al-Hadidi, was dragged through the desert and shot dead before a tank was driven over him. The men in the video were identified as Shia and yelled sectarian slurs at the child. The video "caused outrage on social media", with Sunni Arabic speakers using the hashtag #CrushedByATank ( Arabic : #السحق_بالدبابة ‎‎). The soldiers were wearing the insignia of the Iraqi Special Forces. [768]
On January 19, Iraqi forces summarily executed three civilians who they later claimed were IS suspects. [769] [770]
The Middle East Monitor accused Iraqi Shias of targeting Sunni Arabs "in a possible genocide", and claimed that "Sunni Arabs are being targeted for ethnic cleansing by Iraqi Christians". [771] [772] However, Middle East Monitor was the sole origin of the report. [773] [774]
The fundamentalist Sunni Muslim Brotherhood is linked to the "Middle East Monitor". [775]
On March 17, a U.S.-led coalition airstrike in Mosul killed more than 200 civilians. [776] [777] Amnesty International 's senior investigator on crisis response said: “The high civilian toll suggests that coalition forces leading the offensive in Mosul have failed to take adequate precautions to prevent civilian deaths, in flagrant violation of international humanitarian law.” [778]

Displacements and relief efforts
Italian Filippo Grandi , the UN High Commissioner for Refugees , arrived in Erbil on 17 October to meet with Kurdish officials. [779] The UN has set up five refugee camps capable of taking up to 45,000 people and has the capability of taking in up to 120,000 if more sites are available for camps. [780] Dozens of families from Mosul arrived in the Al-Hawl camp in Rojava , Northern Syria, bringing the number of Iraqis in al-Hawl to more than 6,000. On 18 October, more than 2,000 refugees from Mosul were attempting to cross into Syria, according to the People's Defense Units (YPG). [137] The UN is attempting to communicate with citizens inside Mosul that they should not flee to the West of the city toward Syria, an area still under ISIL control, but to the camps in the east. [781]
Australia announced it would donate USD$7.5 million in humanitarian aid to the operation, and New Zealand pledged NZ$1 million (USD$718,600). [782]
The World Health Organization (WHO) said it had trained 90 Iraqi medics in "mass casualty management" as part of its preparations for the Mosul operation, with a special focus on responding to chemical attacks, AP reported. ISIL has previously used chemical weapons in attacks on Iraqi and coalition forces, and there are fears that it might do so again inside Mosul, where more than a million civilians live. [783]
On 3 November, Kurdish and UN aid workers said more than 40,000 refugees had fled to Kurdistan in the first few weeks of fighting. Ten new refugee camps have been built in the Dohuk Governorate , Erbil Governorate and in the town of Khazir. [784] According to the United Nations and UNICEF, 22,000 people had been displaced, including more than 9,000 children. [785]
On 6 November, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) stated that 33,996 people had been displaced from the Mosul District . 63 percent of families are missing civil documentation and 21 percent of families are headed by a female. The previous 48 hours saw a 53 percent increase in displacement. [71] The following day, WHO announced it had established 82 "rapid response teams" to prepare for possible concerns among civilians fleeing Mosul, including health epidemics such as cholera , and exposure to chemicals and smoke from burning oil wells. [786] A particular concern is potential disease outbreaks among young children who have not been immunized since ISIL took over the city in June 2014. [787]
More than 900 Iraqi civilians have fled to the Al-Hawl refugee camp located in the Rojava region of northeastern Syria , while another 700 civilians run away to the Turkish - Iraqi borders. [788]

Use of chemical weapons
The World Health Organization stated on March 4, 2017 that twelve people were being treated in Erbil for possible exposure to chemical weapons in Mosul. The WHO said that they had enabled "an emergency response plan to safely treat men, women and children who may be exposed to the highly toxic chemical[s]" and were preparing for more patients with exposure to these agents. According to the UN, four patients show "severe signs associated with exposure to a blister agent", which they were exposed to on the eastern side of the city. [789] [790]
In April 2017, American and Australian advisory forces embedded with Iraqi units were attacked with low-grade, "rudimentary" chemical weapons during an offensive. [791]

Context

International reactions

Media coverage and social media
Several media outlets including Al Jazeera and Channel 4 live streamed the first day's battle on Facebook , a first in war coverage. [798] [799] [800] Additional live video feeds were available on YouTube and the streaming app Periscope . Iraqi and Kurdish officials are also joining in on social media using the hashtag #FreeMosul. [801] Brendan Gauthier, assistant editor of Salon , noted that given ISIL's slick campaigns on social media, "It's only appropriate then that the Iraqi military’s effort to reclaim Mosul from the PR machine turned extremist group be live-streamed." [802]
On 17 October, several Iraqi media outlets established the National Media Alliance to support journalists reporting on the battle. The groups include both government-run and private media, including Al Iraqiya and Al Sumaria . The alliance provides technical and journalistic services, including a joint operations newsroom. It was formed to counter ISIL propaganda and foster cooperation among the various media groups in order to reduce chaos and improve safety. Journalist Walid al-Tai told Al-Monitor , "One of the reasons behind the establishment of the alliance is to avoid any chaotic media coverage of the battle as every media and military institution is sending its correspondents to battlefronts. This leads to conflict in the coverage of the fighting and a greater number of casualties among journalists." [803]
Journalist Mustafa Habib reported that Iraqi citizens are coordinating efforts on Facebook and Twitter to counter ISIL propaganda, such as fake photos and videos, that may be used to intimidate locals in Mosul. A communications department of a Shia militia also announced it would be contributing to a social media campaign, and that 500 Iraqi journalists were embedded with the militias surrounding Mosul to report updates. [804]
On 27 October 2016, The New Yorker ' s Robin Wright interviewed the anonymous self-described historian Mosul Eye , a purported Mosuli who has blogged from the city about life in Mosul under ISIL despite death threats from the group. Responding to Wright's questions, Mosul Eye estimated the size and make-up of ISIL's force in Mosul, hopes for the future ("gain back power over the city" with help of "an international trusteeship to protect Mosul"), and the level of support for ISIL inside Mosul ("There is no support for ISIL in Mosul. They are left only with weapons that they will use to kill themselves once the liberating forces make the decision to raid the city."). [102]

 Turkish involvement
The involvement of Turkey in the operation has considerably strained its relations with Iraq. [5] Turkey has 1,500 to 2,000 soldiers in Iraq, [805] including 500 Turkish soldiers deployed to a base near Bashiqa , where they trained 1,500 Iraqi Sunni volunteers, mainly Turkmens , and Arabs to recapture Mosul from ISIL. [806] [807] Turkey's participation is against the wishes of the Iraqi government, which has said the Turks are violating Iraq's sovereignty. Turkey has refused to withdraw its forces. [5] Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan told the Turkish parliament on 1 October, "We will play a role in the Mosul liberation operation and no one can prevent us from participating," [808] and said their presence was to ensure that Mosul did not fall to Kurdish or Shia control and become a threat to Turkey. [809] [810] Turkey's presence was criticized by Kurds in northern Iraq, [811] and thousands of protestors demonstrated at the Turkish Embassy in Baghdad on 18 October, demanding Turkish forces withdraw from Iraq. [812] The United States has reportedly attempted to persuade Iraq to cooperate with Turkey on the Mosul offensive. [813] Al-Abadi declined the offer of Turkish assistance, saying, "I know that the Turks want to participate. We tell them thank you, this is something the Iraqis will handle and the Iraqis will liberate Mosul and the rest of the territories." [814] However, on 23 October, Turkish Prime Minister Binali Yıldırım announced Turkish troops had fired on ISIL positions near Mosul after requests for assistance from the Peshmerga. [5]
The situation between Turkey and Iraq escalated on 1 November, the day Iraqi forces entered Mosul. Turkey announced it was sending tanks and artillery from Ankara to Silopi near the Iraqi border. Turkey's Minister of Defense Fikri Işık said the deployment was a move to "prepare for "important developments" in the region and be ready for any possible scenario" and stated that "further action can be taken if Turkey's red lines are crossed" warning Shi'ite militias and PKK not to "terrorize" and take hold of Iraqi Turkmen -majority regions in the area. [815] [816] [817] Prime Minister Al-Abadi warned Turkey not to "invade" Iraq, predicting war if they did. Al-Abadi, addressing journalists in Baghdad, said, "We warn Turkey if they want to enter Iraq, they will end up becoming fragmented... We do not want to fight Turkey. We do not want a confrontation with Turkey. God forbid, even if we engage in war with them, the Turks will pay a heavy price. They will be damaged. Yes, we too will be damaged, but whenever a country fights a neighboring country, there will be no winner, both will end up losing." [818]
On 7 November, Iraq rejected Turkey’s proposal to continue running the Bashiqa military camp, no matter if it were formally transferred under the auspices of the coalition forces, and suggested that Turkey hand over control of the camp to Iraq’s central government. [819]

Violation of the Laws of War in the Battle of Mosul
February 2017, Human Rights Watch issued a report regarding the violation of the laws of war in Iraq . According to the report, Islamic State fighters occupied Al-Salam Hospital in Mosul on June 2014, and put the staff and the patients at risk of attacks. During the Battle of Mosul, seven Iraqi soldiers’ corpses were dragged through the streets, and the bodies of three soldiers were hanged from a bridge in the city. As the report mentioned, ISIL fighters occupied a clinic in the town of Hammam al-Alil , which was then hit by an airstrike without warning on October 18, killing at least eight civilians. Previously, they occupied other clinics in other towns controlled by the Islamic State fighters in Iraq, as well operating offices in all the medical facilities in the Republican, Ibn Sina, al-Salam, and Mosul General Hospitals.
Human Rights Watch has also accused the Iraqi Security Forces and Popular Mobilization Forces of dragging the bodies of alleged ISIL fighters in the town of Qayyarah and in the city of Fallujah , after Iraqi forces took eastern Mosul on January 24, 2017. [820] They warned that allowing Popular Mobilization Forces to conduct the screenings of men and boys fleeing Mosul for having fought for ISIL would have "dire human rights consequences." [821]
Human Rights Watch warned that Popular Mobilization Forces were poorly trained to conduct these screenings. They argued that the irregular nature of screening and detention practices and isolation of detainees in custody risk abuse of the detainees, including arbitrary detention and enforced disappearances. Despite assurances from the Iraqi government that the PMF would not screen detainees in Mosul, an observer reported that three PMF groups were seen at a screening site on March 11, 2017 : Hezbollah Brigades , al-Abbas Brigades, and Imam Ali Battalions. [821]

Order of battle

Anti-ISIL forces
Commanded by Prime Minister Haidar al-Abadi , Lieutenant General Abdul Amir Rashid Yarallah (commander of the operation), Major General Najim Abdullah al-Jubouri (ISF commander of the operation)
Commanded by President Massoud Barzani
Commanded by Lieutenant General Stephen J. Townsend
United States
France
United Kingdom
Australia
Commanded by Secretary-General Sayyed Hassan Nasrallah

ISIL
Military of ISIL

See also
WebPage index: 00011
Chris Cornell
Chris Cornell (born Christopher John Boyle ; July 20, 1964 – May 18, 2017) was an American musician, singer, and songwriter. He was best known as lead vocalist for the bands Soundgarden and Audioslave . He was also known for his numerous solo works, soundtrack contributions since 1991 and as founder and frontman for Temple of the Dog , the one-off tribute band dedicated to his friend, the late Andrew Wood .
Cornell, who is considered one of the architects of the 1990s grunge movement, is well known for his extensive catalog as a songwriter, for his nearly four- octave vocal range , [3] and for his powerful vocal belting technique. He released four solo studio albums, Euphoria Morning (1999), Carry On (2007), Scream (2009), Higher Truth (2015), and the live album Songbook (2011). Cornell received a Golden Globe Award nomination for his song "The Keeper" which appeared in the film Machine Gun Preacher and co-wrote and performed the theme song to the James Bond film Casino Royale (2006), " You Know My Name ". The last solo release by Chris was the charity single " The Promise ", written for the ending credits for the film of the same name . He was voted "Rock's Greatest Singer" by readers of Guitar World , [4] ranked 4th in the list of "Heavy Metal's All-Time Top 100 Vocalists" by Hit Parader , [5] 9th in the list of "Best Lead Singers of All Time" by Rolling Stone , [6] and 12th in MTV's "22 Greatest Voices in Music". [7]
Cornell was found dead from suicide in his Detroit hotel room early on the morning of May 18, 2017, following a Soundgarden concert the night before. He suffered from depression and had substance abuse problems earlier in life.

Early life
Cornell was born Christopher John Boyle on July 20, 1964, [8] in Seattle, Washington , where he was raised. He attended Christ the King Catholic elementary school, [9] and Shorewood High School . His parents are Ed Boyle, a pharmacist, and Karen Cornell, an accountant. [10] Cornell spent a two-year period between the ages of nine and eleven solidly listening to the Beatles after finding a large collection of Beatles records abandoned in the basement of a neighbor's house. [11]
Cornell was a loner; he was able to deal with his anxiety around other people through rock music. [12] During his teenage years, he spiralled into severe depression, dropped out of school, and almost never left the house. [13] At the age of 12, he had access to heroin, marijuana and prescription drugs and used them daily by 13, stopped for a year, but relapsed at age 15 for another year until he turned to music. [14] Before becoming a successful musician, he worked at a seafood wholesaler and was a sous-chef at Ray's Boathouse in Seattle. [15]
In the early 1980s, Cornell was a member of a cover band called The Shemps, which performed around Seattle. [16] The Shemps featured bassist Hiro Yamamoto . After Yamamoto left The Shemps, the band recruited guitarist Kim Thayil . [16] Cornell and Yamamoto stayed in contact, and after The Shemps broke up, Cornell and Yamamoto started jamming together, eventually bringing Thayil to join them. [16]

Recording career

1984–1997; 2010–2017: Soundgarden
Soundgarden was formed in 1984 by Cornell, Thayil and Yamamoto with Cornell originally on drums and vocals. In 1985, the band enlisted Scott Sundquist as the drummer to allow Cornell to concentrate on vocals. [17] The band's first recordings were three songs that appeared on a compilation for C/Z Records called Deep Six . In 1986, Sundquist, who by that point had a wife and a child, decided to leave the band and spend time with his family. [16] He was replaced by Matt Cameron , the drummer for Skin Yard , who became Soundgarden's permanent drummer.
Soundgarden signed to Sub Pop , releasing the Screaming Life EP in 1987 and the Fopp EP in 1988 (a combination of the two was issued as Screaming Life/Fopp in 1990). Though the band was being courted by major labels, in 1988 they signed to SST Records to release their debut album, Ultramega OK (1988), for which they earned a Grammy Award nomination for Best Metal Performance in 1990. [18] The band subsequently signed with A&M Records , becoming the first grunge band to sign to a major label. In 1989, the band released their second effort, and their first for a major label, Louder Than Love . Following the release of Louder Than Love , Yamamoto left the band to finish his master's degree in physical chemistry at Western Washington University . He was replaced by former Nirvana guitarist Jason Everman . Everman was fired following Soundgarden's tour supporting Louder Than Love . In 1990, the band was joined by a new bassist, Ben Shepherd .
Along with Alice in Chains , Nirvana, and Pearl Jam , Soundgarden became one of the most successful bands from Seattle's emerging grunge scene in the early 1990s. With Shepherd, the new line-up recorded Badmotorfinger in 1991. The album brought the band to a new level of commercial success, and Soundgarden found itself amidst the sudden popularity and attention given to the Seattle music scene. Badmotorfinger included the singles " Jesus Christ Pose ", " Outshined ", and " Rusty Cage ". The three singles gained considerable airtime on alternative rock radio stations, while the videos for "Outshined" and "Rusty Cage" gained considerable airtime on MTV. The song "Jesus Christ Pose" and its music video was the subject of widespread controversy in 1991, and the video was removed from MTV's playlist. "Rusty Cage" was later covered by Johnny Cash on his 1996 album, Unchained . It also appeared on the fictional radio station Radio X on the video game Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas and in the 32-bit version of Road Rash . " Room a Thousand Years Wide " was released previously as a single in 1990, but not to promote the album. It was released (with the song "HIV Baby") as a 7" through Sub Pop's Single of the Month club a full year before the release of Badmotorfinger . The song was re-recorded for this album. Badmotorfinger was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance in 1992. [18] It was also ranked number 45 in the October 2006 issue of Guitar World on the magazine's list of the 100 greatest guitar albums of all time. [19]
Superunknown became the band's breakthrough album. Upon its release in March 1994, Superunknown debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 . [20] The album launched several successful singles, including " Spoonman " and " Black Hole Sun ", and brought Soundgarden international recognition. Superunknown achieved quintuple platinum status in the United States, [21] triple platinum status in Canada, [22] and gold status in the United Kingdom, [23] Sweden, [24] and the Netherlands. [25] Rolling Stone gave Superunknown four out of five stars. Reviewer J.D. Considine said Superunknown "demonstrates far greater range than many bands manage in an entire career." Considine criticized "Black Hole Sun" and "Half", stating that the former is "not a very good song" while the latter "is the virtual definition of a B-side." [26] Jon Pareles of The New York Times said that " Superunknown actually tries to broaden its audience by breaking heavy-metal genre barriers that Soundgarden used to accept." He added that "Soundgarden ... want[s] something different from standard heavy metal." [27] David Browne of Entertainment Weekly gave the album an A. He said, "Soundgarden is pumped and primed on Superunknown , and they deliver the goods." He praised it as a "hard-rock milestone—a boiling vat of volcanic power, record-making smarts, and '90s anomie and anxiety that sets a new standard for anything called metal." [28] The album was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Rock Album in 1995. [29] Two singles from Superunknown , "Black Hole Sun" and "Spoonman", won Grammy Awards, and the music video for "Black Hole Sun" won a MTV Video Music Award and a Clio Award . [18] [30] Superunknown was ranked number 336 on Rolling Stone magazine's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time , [31] and "Black Hole Sun" was ranked number 25 on VH1 's list of the 100 greatest songs of the '90s. [32]
The band's fifth album was 1996's self-produced Down on the Upside . The album spawned several singles, including " Pretty Noose ", " Burden in My Hand ", and " Blow Up the Outside World ". The album was notably less heavy than the group's preceding albums, and marked a further departure from the band's grunge roots. Soundgarden explained at the time that it wanted to experiment with other sounds. [33] David Browne of Entertainment Weekly said, "Few bands since Led Zeppelin have so crisply mixed instruments both acoustic and electric." [34] However, tensions within the group arose during the sessions, with Thayil and Cornell reportedly clashing over Cornell's desire to shift away from the heavy guitar riffing that had become the band's trademark. [35] Despite favorable reviews, the album did not match the sales of Superunknown . [21] In 1997, Soundgarden received another Grammy nomination, for the lead single "Pretty Noose". [36] Due to tensions within the band, reportedly due to internal strife over its creative direction, Soundgarden announced it was disbanding on April 9, 1997. In a 1998 interview, Thayil said, "It was pretty obvious from everybody's general attitude over the course of the previous half-year that there was some dissatisfaction." [37]
On January 1, 2010, Cornell alluded to a Soundgarden reunion via his Twitter account, writing: "The 12-year break is over and school is back in session. Sign up now. Knights of the Soundtable ride again!" The message linked to a website that features a picture of the group performing live and a place for fans to enter their e-mail address to get updates on the reunion. Entering that information unlocks an archival video for the song "Get on the Snake", from Soundgarden's second studio album, 1989's Louder Than Love . [38]
In April 2010, Soundgarden announced their plans to headline Lollapalooza 2010. Soundgarden made the announcement through their website and email list. On April 16, 2010, Soundgarden held a secret show at the Showbox Theater on First Avenue in downtown Seattle, publicized via the band's mailing list. The show was billed as Nudedragons, an anagram for Soundgarden. [39] Asked in August 2010 if Soundgarden will record new material, Cornell replied, "it would be exciting to record one song, to hear how Soundgarden-ish that might be this much time later. But for me, it's been more of a trip relearning the songs and playing them together. Some of the songs we're approaching we've never played live." [40]
Soundgarden made their first television appearance since their reunion on Conan O'Brien 's second episode of Conan on November 9, 2010 on TBS and toured North America in summer 2011. In summer 2012, Soundgarden released a new single & video, "Live to Rise", for The Avengers movie soundtrack. Their sixth album, King Animal , was released in November 2012 to largely positive reviews. Cornell rerecorded the song " Seasons " for the film Man of Steel in 2013. [41]
Soundgarden had continued to tour worldwide and guitarist Kim Thayil mentioned in several interviews that the band was to begin work on material for their seventh album. [42] [43]

1998–2000; 2006–2017: Solo career
In 1998, Cornell began working on material for a solo album on which he collaborated with Alain Johannes and Natasha Shneider of the band Eleven . The album, titled Euphoria Morning , was released on September 21, 1999. In his first ever solo tour Cornell spent seven months on the road from September 13, 1999 to March 7, 2000 playing 61 shows [44] in support of Euphoria Morning. Cornell performed two of those coinciding with the debut of the album on September 21 and 22, 1999 at the Henry Fonda Theater in Hollywood California. Attendance for the shows were high, considering he performed the initial shows before fans were even familiar with the music. The touring band was made up of some of the contributing musicians Alain Johannes, Natasha Shneider, Rick Markmann, and Greg Upchurch. The album proved commercially unsuccessful although the album's single " Can't Change Me " was nominated for Best Male Rock Vocal Performance at the 2000 Grammy Awards . [45] Euphoria Morning includes "Wave Goodbye", Cornell's tribute to his late friend Jeff Buckley . It has been noted that Euphoria Morning is influenced by Buckley's songwriting and distinctive vocal style. He also contributed the song "Sunshower" (a bonus track on the Japanese release of Euphoria Morning ) to the soundtrack of the 1998 film, Great Expectations , and a reworked version of the track "Mission", retitled "Mission 2000", was used on the soundtrack to the 2000 film, Mission: Impossible 2 . An unreleased song called "Heart of Honey" was also recorded in collaboration with Johannes and Shneider during this period. According to Alain Johannes, [46] "Heart of Honey" was recorded for the film Titan A.E. but not used.
Cornell and composer David Arnold collaborated on the song " You Know My Name ", which Cornell co-wrote and performed and which accompanies the opening titles for the 2006 James Bond film, Casino Royale . [47] "You Know My Name" is the first theme song since 1983's Octopussy to use a different title than the film, the first ever sung by a male American, and the first ever title theme song that did not appear on the soundtrack album. "You Know My Name" won a 2006 Satellite Award in the category of Best Original Song , [48] and a 2007 World Soundtrack Award in the category of Best Original Song Written Directly for a Film . [49] The song was also nominated for Best Song Written for a Motion Picture, Television or Other Visual Media at the 2008 Grammy Awards . [50] This song became the first song recorded for his solo album, which he began work on in 2007.
Though not officially released onto CD, an hour-long acoustic concert Cornell performed on September 7, 2006 at O-Baren in Stockholm , is widely available for download under the title Chris Cornell: Unplugged in Sweden . A promotional CD for his solo album, Carry On , was released in March 2007, titled The Roads We Choose – A Retrospective . The 17-song CD included songs from Soundgarden, Temple of the Dog, Audioslave and Cornell's solo work.
On June 5, 2007, Cornell released his second solo album, Carry On , produced by Steve Lillywhite . It debuted at number 17 on the American Billboard charts. Among the artists who accompanied him on his second solo release was friend Gary Lucas , who contributed acoustic guitar to some of the tracks. Cornell has stated that he is always writing, and that there are some songs that he was not able to put onto an Audioslave album. [51] While recording his second solo album, Cornell was involved in a motorcycle accident. [52] He was apparently " rear-ended by a truck in Studio City, Los Angeles while riding his motorcycle" and "catapulted 20 feet into the air." He was able to walk away from the accident, but had severe cuts and bruises. He returned to the studio later that day.
In 2007, Cornell appeared as support to Aerosmith on at least two legs of their 2007 world tour [53] — Dublin , London, and Hyde Park —and to Linkin Park in Australia and New Zealand. [54] These shows formed part of his own ongoing world tour which began in April 2007 and continued into 2008 and 2009. Cornell has described his touring band—comprising guitarists Yogi Lonich and Peter Thorn, bassist Corey McCormick and drummer Jason Sutter —as "musicians that could get the whole picture" playing music by Soundgarden and Audioslave, as well as his solo material. [55]
In 2008, Cornell was featured on the Main Stage of Linkin Park's Projekt Revolution tour. [56] Throughout the tour, Cornell collaborated with Chester Bennington from Linkin Park while performing "Hunger Strike", and with Street Drum Corps for a number of his Soundgarden tracks. [57] While Linkin Park would perform their Grammy-winning song " Crawling ", he would appear on stage singing the second verse of the song, the outro, and harmonies Aaron Lewis provided for the Reanimation version. [57]
Cornell worked with producer Timbaland on his studio album Scream , which was released on March 10, 2009. [58] Timbaland has referred to the recording sessions as "The best work I've done in my career," and predicted that Cornell will be the "first rock star in the club." Cornell called the new album "a highlight of my career." The album was largely panned by critics, [59] [60] [61] but was the highest charting album of Cornell's solo career, reaching # 10 on the Billboard 200 .
On April 2, 2009, Cornell took over Atlanta Rock station, Project 961, WKLS . For 24 hours the station became "Chris-FM" and included a two-hour special of Cornell DJing and playing his favorite songs of his career with the stories behind them leading up to a rebroadcast of his solo show from the previous night. [62] On September 11, 2009, Cornell performed John Lennon 's " Imagine " on The Tonight Show with Conan O'Brien .
In January 2011 Cornell announced his solo acoustic "Songbook" tour, following on from a series of acclaimed solo acoustic shows in Los Angeles during 2009 and 2010. The first leg of the sold-out tour began on April 1, 2011 and continued through the US and Canada until May 6, resuming in October and visiting New Zealand, Australia, South America and the US, ending December 17. The tour received universally positive reviews. [63]
In August 2011 Cornell released "The Keeper", an original song written for the Marc Forster directed 2011 film Machine Gun Preacher and nominated in 2012 for a Golden Globe Award . For the first 24 hours of release, the song was exclusively available as part of the "Donate to Download" campaign for Sam Childers ' Angels of East Africa children's charity. The song is also the lead track on the film's soundtrack album. [64]
In November 2011 Cornell released Songbook , an acoustic live album featuring songs recorded during Cornell's 'Songbook' tour in North America. It was his first live album as a solo artist and includes stripped-down solo performances of songs from Cornell's whole career as a solo artist as well as with Soundgarden , Audioslave , Temple of the Dog plus covers of Led Zeppelin 's " Thank You " and John Lennon 's " Imagine ". The album received largely positive reviews, with AllMusic , calling it Cornell's "best solo offering to date". [65] Cornell continued his "Songbook" tour in Europe and the US during 2012 and 2013 to further acclaim. [66] [67]
In January 2015, Cornell announced via his Twitter account that he was in the studio recording a new solo album. Cornell's new studio album, Higher Truth , was released on September 18, 2015. [68]
The last solo release prior to his death, was the charity single " The Promise ", written for the ending credits for the movie of the same name about the Armenian Genocide . [69] [70]

2001–2007: Audioslave
Audioslave was formed after Zack de la Rocha left Rage Against the Machine and the remaining members were searching for another vocalist. Producer and friend Rick Rubin suggested that they contact Cornell. Rubin played the Soundgarden song "Slaves & Bulldozers" for the remaining Rage Against the Machine band members to showcase his ability. Cornell was in the writing process of a second solo album, but decided to shelve that and pursue the opportunity to work with Tom Morello , Tim Commerford and Brad Wilk when they approached him. Morello described Cornell: "He stepped to the microphone and sang the song and I couldn't believe it. It didn't just sound good. It didn't sound great. It sounded transcendent. And ... when there is an irreplaceable chemistry from the first moment, you can't deny it." [71] The quartet wrote 21 songs during 19 days of rehearsal and began working in the studio in late May 2001. [72] [73]
Their debut album, Audioslave , released in November 2002, spawned hits such as " Cochise ", " Like a Stone " and " Show Me How to Live ", and has reached triple platinum status in the United States. The band was nearly derailed before the album's release; Cornell was going through alcohol problems and a slot on the Ozzfest tour was canceled. [15] During this time, there was a rumor that Cornell had checked himself into drug rehabilitation . He later confirmed it in an interview with Metal Hammer that was conducted from a clinic payphone. [74] In a San Diego CityBeat article, Cornell explained that he went through "a horrible personal crisis" during the making of the first record, staying in rehab for two months and separating from his wife. [75] The problems were ironed out and he has remained sober since this time. The band toured through 2003, before resting in 2004 to record their second album.
Audioslave's second album, Out of Exile , was released in May 2005 and debuted at number one on the U.S. charts. The album has since gone on to achieve platinum status. The album features the singles " Out of Exile ", " Be Yourself ", " Your Time Has Come ", and " Doesn't Remind Me ". Cornell admitted to writing his most personal songs ever on this album, influenced by the positive changes in his life since 2002. [76] He also described the album as more varied than the debut and relying less on heavy guitar riffs. [75] Critics initially described Audioslave as an amalgamation of Rage Against the Machine and Soundgarden, [77] but by the band's second album, Out of Exile , noted that they had established a separate identity. The album was received more favorably than Audioslave's debut; critics noted Cornell's stronger vocals, likely the result of quitting smoking and drinking, [78] and pointed out that Out of Exile is "the sound of a band coming into its own." [79] AllMusic praised the album as "lean, hard, strong, and memorable." [80] The lyrics, however, were still a common complaint; musicOMH.com wrote that Cornell's lyrics "continue to border on the ridiculous." [81] On May 6, 2005, Audioslave played a free show in Havana , Cuba . [82] Audioslave became the first American rock group to perform a concert in Cuba, playing in front of an audience of 70,000. [83] The band traveled to Havana on May 4 to interact with Cuban musicians. [84] Cornell commented: "Hopefully, this concert will help to open the musical borders between our two countries." The 26-song set concert was the longest the band had ever played. [85]
In early 2006 the band returned, recording their third album as they had written most of the material during the tour. The band released the album, titled Revelations , in September 2006. Revelations was influenced by 1960s and 1970s funk and R&B music. [86] The first two singles were " Original Fire " and " Revelations ". Two of the songs from the third album, "Shape of Things to Come" and "Wide Awake" were also prominently featured in Michael Mann 's 2006 film, Miami Vice , prior to the release of the album. Despite the exposure to other forms of media and the positive critical buzz for their third album, Audioslave did not tour behind the release. They went into hiatus to allow Cornell to complete "You Know My Name", the theme song for the 2006 James Bond film, Casino Royale , and Morello to pursue his own solo work under the moniker of the Nightwatchman . [87]
All of Audioslave's lyrics were written by Cornell, whilst all four members were credited with writing the music. Their songwriting process was described by Wilk as "more collaborative" and "satisfying" than Rage Against the Machine's, which was "a battle creatively". Cornell, for his part, saw Soundgarden's songwriting method as inferior to Audioslave's. [88] [89] Cornell's lyrics were mostly apolitical; Audioslave's Morello referred to them as "haunted, existential poetry." [90] They were characterized by his cryptic approach, often dealing with themes of existentialism, [91] love, hedonism , [92] spirituality and Christianity. [90] Cornell's battle with addiction to prescription drugs and alcoholism was a defining factor in the writing and recording process. Even though the singer admitted that he was "never able to write effectively" while drinking, [93] and attended rehab after recording the debut album, Morello stated that Revelations was "the first record [Cornell] didn't smoke, drink or take drugs through the recording." [94] However, Morello said: "Chris was stone sober during the making of our Out of Exile album. Chris was also sober during the making of Revelations and prior to recording he gave up smoking as well. I apologize for any confusion or concern that was stirred up by the original article. Sobriety can be a matter of life or death and Chris' courage in maintaining his health for years has been an inspiration." [95]
News about Cornell's departure emerged in July 2006, when insiders stated that after the third album he would leave to pursue for a solo career. The singer immediately denied the rumors, stating: "We hear rumors that Audioslave is breaking up all the time. ... I always just ignore [them]." [87] On February 15, 2007, Cornell officially announced his departure from Audioslave, stating that "Due to irresolvable personality conflicts as well as musical differences, I am permanently leaving the band Audioslave. I wish the other three members nothing but the best in all of their future endeavors." [96] As the other three members were busy with the Rage Against the Machine reunion with de la Rocha coming back, and Morello and Cornell had each released solo albums in 2007, Audioslave officially disbanded. [97]
On January 17, 2017, it was announced that Audioslave would reunite for their first show in twelve years at Prophets of Rage 's Anti-Inaugural Ball, protesting President Donald Trump 's inauguration as President of the United States . [98] The event took place on January 20, 2017. [99]
Asked in February 2017 if there would be more Audioslave reunion shows in the future, frontman Cornell replied, "It's always a possibility. I mean, we've been talking about it for at least three or four years now. We were talking about actually picking dates, and it just ended up not working out because everybody's so busy. They have another band again, they all have separate bands that they do themselves, I have Soundgarden and a solo career that's taking up a lot of time, and I just did Temple of the Dog . So, it's really honestly as simple as we end up having a window of time where it's comfortable for everybody and we want to do it, because I definitely feel like everybody's up for it." [100]

Other musical projects

Center for Disease Control Boys
From 1986 to 1987, Cornell was also a member of the satirical Western swing band Center for Disease Control Boys . [101]

Temple of the Dog
While still in Soundgarden, Cornell recorded an album with members of what would become Pearl Jam. This collaboration went under the name Temple of the Dog , and the self-titled album was released in 1991. The album is a tribute to their mutual friend, and Cornell's former roommate, Andrew Wood . Wood, the former lead singer of Mother Love Bone , had died of a heroin overdose the year before. Jeff Ament and Stone Gossard of Mother Love Bone teamed up with Mike McCready , new vocalist Eddie Vedder , and drummer Dave Krusen in 1990, forming Pearl Jam. Cameron would eventually become Pearl Jam's drummer in 1998. Temple of the Dog has gone on to sell more than a million copies, thanks in large part to the singles " Say Hello 2 Heaven " and " Hunger Strike ", the latter of which features a duet between Cornell and Vedder. This was the first time Vedder was recorded professionally. During a 2003 Pearl Jam show at the Santa Barbara Bowl , Cornell appeared as a surprise guest. After playing a short acoustic set, Cornell joined Vedder and the rest of the band to perform "Hunger Strike" and "Reach Down". On October 6, 2009, Cornell made a surprise appearance during a Pearl Jam concert at the Gibson Amphitheater in Los Angeles. The reunited Temple of the Dog played "Hunger Strike". At the end of the concert, Cornell took a bow with the band along with Jerry Cantrell of Alice in Chains . [102]

Alice Mudgarden
Cornell, together with Mark Arm of Mudhoney , contributed vocals on the Alice in Chains song "Right Turn", from the 1992 EP, Sap , although the band given credit for this song is Alice Mudgarden . [103] [104] The song was featured in the 2001 film Black Hawk Down . [105] [106]

M.A.C.C.
In 1992, Cornell and three other former members of Temple of the Dog played under the name M.A.C.C. ( McCready , Ament , Cameron , Cornell), recording the song "Hey Baby (New Rising Sun)" for the 1993 album, Stone Free: A Tribute to Jimi Hendrix .

Collaborations
Cornell worked as a co-producer and backing vocalist on the Screaming Trees ' 1991 album, Uncle Anesthesia . He acted in a cameo role and an onstage performance in Cameron Crowe 's 1992 Seattle-based film, Singles . He also contributed his solo song "Seasons", and Soundgarden's song "Birth Ritual", to the Singles soundtrack . Cornell contributed vocals on Alice Cooper 's "Stolen Prayer" and "Unholy War" (which he also wrote) from the 1994 album, The Last Temptation . In 1997, Cornell collaborated with Eleven on a rendition of the song, " Ave Maria ", for the Christmas compilation album, A Very Special Christmas 3 . Cornell has also performed live with the band Linkin Park .
It was incorrectly believed (for many years) that Cornell had written the Eleven song "Someone to Die For" on the 2004 Spider-Man 2 soundtrack , but this was corrected in an interview in April 2007. The song is performed by Jimmy Gnecco of Ours and Brian May of Queen . Cornell had recorded a demo of the song some time earlier, which was released only to members of the Eleven street team .
Cornell co-wrote (with Brian Howes ) David Cook 's first post- American Idol album single, " Light On ", released in 2008. And in 2009, he contributed vocals on the song, "Mister Dirt", from the album, Good.Night.Melody , by Joshua David . Cornell sang one song (which he co-wrote) on Slash , Slash 's solo record released in April 2010. [107] The song is called "Promise" and it was premiered at amazon.com on March 26, 2010. [108] He contributed vocals on the song, "Lies", on the 2010 album, Third and Double , by Gabin which was subsequently released as a single in October 2010. Cornell appears on the Carlos Santana album Guitar Heaven: The Greatest Guitar Classics of All Time , where he sings on the cover of Led Zeppelin 's " Whole Lotta Love ".
In September 2011, he joined members of Pearl Jam for a Temple of the Dog live reunion at the two-day PJ20 Festival at Alpine Valley , Wisconsin. [109]
On January 30, 2015, Cornell joined Mike McCready and Barrett Martin plus Duff McKagan , the Seattle Symphony and others in a special 'Sonic Evolution' concert at Seattle's Benaroya Hall in a tribute to Mad Season . [110] The performance was released as a live album.

Musical style
Cornell's songwriting often features non-standard chord progressions and melodies that do not conform with one diatonic scale. A prominent example is "Black Hole Sun", which not only involves many kinds of open chords and several key changes in short sequences, but also unique melody phrases with large- interval jumps. [111]
A recurrent characteristic is his use of major-only chord sequences ( Sweet Euphoria , [112] Pretty Noose [113] ), which also leads to more subtle key changes.
Cornell's most concentrated example of his own songwriting style remains the Euphoria Morning album, [114] as his subsequent works, whether with Audioslave or on his later solo albums, tend toward the conventional and only occasionally contain short but inventive interludes ( e.g. , Like a Stone , [115] Disappearing Act , No Such Thing [116] ).
Cornell had a multi-octave range. He was a baritone [117] [118] [119] with an ability to sing extremely high in the tenor range, [120] as well as in the lower register of a baritone voice. He showcased this in various songs, most notably the studio and the demo versions of "Beyond the Wheel", where he can be heard spanning three octaves. He also experimented with various different vocal styles, ranging from light falsetto to brutal screams and chants. In addition to singing rock and metal mainly with Soundgarden and Audioslave, Cornell sang the blues , [121] neo-soul [122] and stripped-down acoustic numbers. [123]

Other work
Cornell made a cameo in the 1992 film Singles . [124] Cornell was the face of fashion producer John Varvatos ' 2006 ad campaign. [125] He became a restaurateur with the opening of his restaurant, Black Calavados, in Paris. [126] He was also the owner of the music publishing company You Make Me Sick I Make Music. [127]
Cornell planned to turn Phil Carlo's true crime book The Night Stalker: The Life and Crimes of Richard Ramirez , into a film, collaborating with him to produce the screenplay. [128]

Personal life
Cornell was first married to Susan Silver, the manager of Alice in Chains and Soundgarden . [129] They had a daughter, Lillian Jean, born in June 2000. [129] He and Silver divorced in 2004. [129] In December 2008, Cornell reported via his official website that he had finally won back his collection of 15 guitars after a four-year court battle with Silver. [130]
In 2004, he married Vicky Karayiannis, [131] [132] a Paris -based American publicist of Greek heritage. The couple had a daughter together, Toni, in September 2004, and a son, Christopher Nicholas, in December 2005. [133] Cornell converted to the Greek Orthodox Church through her influence. [134] In 2012, the Cornells created the Chris and Vicky Cornell Foundation [135] which works for homeless, poor, abused or neglected children. In 2013, a portion of proceeds from ticket sales went to benefit the cause. [136]
Cornell had multiple addictions [93] which he was able to manage from roughly 1980 until 1997, when Soundgarden broke up and his first marriage was failing. At that point he turned to OxyContin and other substances. He checked into rehab in 2002. [14] When asked how he beat them, he stated, "It was a long period of coming to the realization that this way (sober) is better. Going through rehab, honestly, did help ... it got me away from just the daily drudgery of depression and either trying to not drink or do drugs or doing them and you know, they give you such a simple message that any idiot can get and it's just over and over, but the bottom line is really, and this is the part that is scary for everyone, the individual kinda has to want it ... not kinda, you have to want it and to not do that crap anymore or you will never stop and it will just kill you." [137]
In a 2011 interview, Cornell said the major change with the reformed Soundgarden was a lack of alcohol: "The biggest difference I noticed ... and we haven't even really talked about it: there are no bottles of Jack Daniel's around or beers. And we never talked about it ... it's just not there." [138]

Death
Around 12:15 a.m. on May 18, 2017, [139] Cornell was found dead by his bodyguard in the bathroom of his room at the MGM Grand in Detroit after performing at a show with Soundgarden at the Fox Theatre on May 17. [140] He was lying on the floor with an exercise band around his neck. [141] Paramedics arrived at the scene just before 1 a.m. and performed CPR on him. Cornell was pronounced dead at 1:30 a.m. on May 18. [139] [142] The cause of death was determined to be suicide by hanging . Cornell was 52 years old. [143] [144] Footage of his final concert was posted to YouTube . [145]
Cornell's wife and his attorney contend that until the toxicology report is released his death should not be seen as intentional, as Cornell's increasing the dosage of Ativan may have distorted his thinking, possibly leading to suicidal ideation. His wife claims that rather than being dismissive about his future, he had earlier that day made intricate plans with her for an upcoming Memorial Day family vacation. She stated, "When we spoke after the show, I noticed he was slurring his words; he was different. When he told me he may have taken an extra Ativan or two, I contacted security and asked that they check on him." [146] [147] [148] [149]
Soundgarden's drummer, Matt Cameron , was the first of Cornell's former bandmates to comment on his death saying "my dark knight is gone" via Facebook. [150] Pearl Jam , who Cameron also drums for, released a tribute on their website with a picture of Cornell entitled "Chris". [151] Cornell was cremated on May 23, 2017. [152] His funeral is scheduled to take place on May 26, 2017, in Los Angeles, [153] and his ashes will be interred at the Hollywood Forever Cemetery . [154]

Discography
Cornell released five solo albums. Soundgarden produced six albums, five EPs and two greatest hits compilations. He released three albums with Audioslave and one album with Temple of the Dog . Despite this large discography he only released one retrospective compilation which was given a limited release. Cornell also produced the Screaming Trees album Uncle Anesthesia . [155]

Awards and nominations
WebPage index: 00012
1897
1897 ( MDCCCXCVII ) was a common year starting on Friday ( dominical letter C) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday ( dominical letter E) of the Julian calendar , the 1897th year of the Common Era (CE) and Anno Domini (AD) designations, the 897th year of the 2nd millennium , the 97th year of the 19th century , and the 8th year of the 1890s decade. As of the start of 1897, the Gregorian calendar was 12 days ahead of the Julian calendar, which remained in localized use until 1923.

Events

January–March

April–June

July–September

October–December

Date unknown

Births

January–February

March–April

May–June

July–August

September–October

November–December

Deaths

January–June

July–December

Date unknown
WebPage index: 00013
Massachusetts
Massachusetts i / ˌ m æ s ə ˈ tʃ uː s ᵻ t s / mass-ə- CHOO -sits or / ˌ m æ s ə ˈ tʃ uː z ᵻ t s / mass-ə- CHOO -zits ; officially the Commonwealth of Massachusetts , is the most populous state in the New England region of the northeastern United States . It is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean to the east, the states of Connecticut and Rhode Island to the south, New Hampshire and Vermont to the north, and New York to the west. The state is named for the Massachusett tribe, which once inhabited the area. The capital of Massachusetts and the most populous city in New England is Boston . Over 80% of Massachusetts' population lives in the Greater Boston metropolitan area, a region influential upon American history , academia , and industry . [43] Originally dependent on agriculture, fishing and trade, [44] Massachusetts was transformed into a manufacturing center during the Industrial Revolution . [45] During the 20th century, Massachusetts' economy shifted from manufacturing to services. [46] Modern Massachusetts is a global leader in biotechnology , engineering , higher education , finance , and maritime trade . [47]
Plymouth was the site of the first colony in New England, founded in 1620 by the Pilgrims , passengers of the Mayflower . In 1692, the town of Salem and surrounding areas experienced one of America's most infamous cases of mass hysteria , the Salem witch trials . [48] In 1777, General Henry Knox founded the Springfield Armory , which during the Industrial Revolution catalyzed numerous important technological advances, including interchangeable parts . [49] In 1786, Shays' Rebellion , a populist revolt led by disaffected American Revolutionary War veterans, influenced the United States Constitutional Convention . [50] In the 18th century, the Protestant First Great Awakening , which swept the Atlantic World , originated from the pulpit of Northampton preacher Jonathan Edwards . [51] In the late 18th century, Boston became known as the "Cradle of Liberty" [52] for the agitation there that led to the American Revolution .
The entire Commonwealth of Massachusetts has played a powerful commercial and cultural role in the history of the United States . Before the American Civil War , Massachusetts was a center for the abolitionist , temperance , [53] and transcendentalist [54] movements. [55] In the late 19th century, the sports of basketball and volleyball were invented in the western Massachusetts cities of Springfield and Holyoke , respectively. [56] [57] In 2004, Massachusetts became the first U.S. state to legally recognize same-sex marriage as a result of the decision in Goodridge v. Department of Public Health by the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court . [58] Many prominent American political dynasties have hailed from the state, including the Adams and Kennedy families. Harvard University in Cambridge is the oldest institution of higher learning in the United States , [59] with the largest financial endowment of any university, [60] and Harvard Law School has educated a contemporaneous majority of Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States . [61] Kendall Square in Cambridge has been called "the most innovative square mile on the planet", in reference to the high concentration of entrepreneurial start-ups and quality of innovation which have emerged in the vicinity of the square since 2010. [62] [63] Both Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , also in Cambridge , have been ranked among the most highly regarded academic institutions in the world. [64] Massachusetts' public school students place among the top nations in the world in academic performance. [65]

Etymology
The Massachusetts Bay Colony was named after the indigenous population, the Massachusett , whose name can be segmented as mass-adchu-s-et , where mass- is "large", -adchu- is "hill", -s- is a diminutive suffix meaning "small", and -et is a locative case suffix, identifying it as a place. It has been translated as "near the great hill", [66] "by the blue hills", "at the little big hill", or "at the range of hills", referring to the Blue Hills , or in particular the Great Blue Hill which is located on the boundary of Milton and Canton . [67] [68] Alternatively, Massachusett has been represented as Moswetuset —from the name of the Moswetuset Hummock (meaning "hill shaped like an arrowhead") in Quincy , where Plymouth Colony commander Myles Standish , hired English military officer, and Squanto , part of the now disappeared Patuxet band of the Wampanoag peoples , met Chief Chickatawbut in 1621. [69] [70]
The official name of the state is the " Commonwealth of Massachusetts". [71] While this designation is part of the state's official name, it has no practical implications. [72] Massachusetts has the same position and powers within the United States as other states. [73]

History

Pre-colonization
Massachusetts was originally inhabited by tribes of the Algonquian language family such as the Wampanoag , Narragansett , Nipmuc , Pocomtuc , Mahican , and Massachusett . [74] [75] While cultivation of crops like squash and corn supplemented their diets, these tribes were generally dependent on hunting, gathering and fishing for most of their food supply. [74] Villages consisted of lodges called wigwams as well as longhouses , [75] and tribes were led by male or female elders known as sachems . [76]

Colonial period
In the early 1600s, after contact had been made with Europeans , large numbers of the indigenous peoples in the northeast of what is now the United States were killed by virgin soil epidemics such as smallpox , measles , influenza , and perhaps leptospirosis . [77] [78] Between 1617 and 1619, smallpox killed approximately 90% of the Massachusetts Bay Native Americans . [79]
The first English settlers in Massachusetts, the Pilgrims, arrived via the Mayflower [80] at Plymouth in 1620, and developed friendly relations with the native Wampanoag people . [81] This was the second successful permanent English colony in the part of North America that later became the United States, after the Jamestown Colony . The event known as the "First Thanksgiving" was celebrated by the Pilgrims after their first harvest in the New World which lasted for three days. The Pilgrims were soon followed by other Puritans, who established the Massachusetts Bay Colony at present-day Boston in 1630. [82]
The Puritans, who believed the Church of England needed to be purified and experienced harassment from English authority because of their beliefs, [83] came to Massachusetts with the goal of establishing an ideal religious society. [84] Unlike the Plymouth colony, the bay colony was founded under a royal charter in 1629. [85] Both religious dissent and expansionism resulted in several new colonies being founded shortly after Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay elsewhere in New England. The Massachusetts Bay banished dissenters such as Anne Hutchinson and Roger Williams due to religious and political disagreements. In 1636, Williams founded the colony of Rhode Island and Hutchinson joined him there several years later. Religious intolerance continued. Among those who objected to this later in the century were the English Quaker preachers Alice and Thomas Curwen , who were publicly flogged and imprisoned in Boston in 1676. [86] [87]
In 1641, Massachusetts expanded inland significantly, acquiring the Connecticut River Valley settlement of Springfield , which had recently disputed with, and defected from its original administrators, the Connecticut Colony . [88] This established Massachusetts' southern border in the west, [89] though surveying problems resulted in disputed territory until 1803–04. [90]
In 1691, the colonies of Massachusetts Bay and Plymouth were united (along with present-day Maine , which had previously been divided between Massachusetts and New York ) into the Province of Massachusetts Bay . [91] Shortly after the arrival of the new province's first governor, William Phips , the Salem witch trials took place, where a number of men and women were hanged for alleged witchcraft . [92]
The most destructive earthquake yet known in New England occurred in 1755, causing considerable damage across Massachusetts. [93] [94]

The Revolutionary War
Massachusetts was a center of the movement for independence from Great Britain ; colonists in Massachusetts had long uneasy relations with the British monarchy, including open rebellion under the Dominion of New England in the 1680s. [91] Protests against British attempts to tax the colonies after the French and Indian War ended in 1763 led to the Boston Massacre in 1770, and the 1773 Boston Tea Party escalated tensions. [95] In 1774, the Intolerable Acts targeted Massachusetts with punishments for the Boston Tea Party and further decreased local autonomy, increasing local dissent. [96] Anti-Parliamentary activity by men such as Samuel Adams and John Hancock , followed by reprisals by the British government, were a primary reason for the unity of the Thirteen Colonies and the outbreak of the American Revolution in 1775. [97]
The Battles of Lexington and Concord initiated the American Revolutionary War and were fought in the eponymous Massachusetts towns. [98] Future President George Washington took over what would become the Continental Army after the battle. His first victory was the Siege of Boston in the winter of 1775–76, after which the British were forced to evacuate the city. [99] The event is still celebrated in Suffolk County as Evacuation Day . [100] On the coast, Salem became a center for privateering . Although the documentation is incomplete, about 1700 letterss of marque , issued on a per-voyage basis, were granted during the American Revolution. Nearly 800 vessels were commissioned as privateers and are credited with capturing or destroying about 600 British ships. [101]

Federal period
Bostonian John Adams , known as the "Atlas of Independence", [102] was an important figure in both the struggle for independence as well as the formation of the new United States. Adams was highly involved in the push for separation from Britain and the writing of the Constitution of Massachusetts in 1780 which, in the Elizabeth Freeman and Quock Walker cases, effectively made Massachusetts the first state to have a constitution that declared universal rights and, as interpreted by Supreme Judicial Court Chief Justice William Cushing , abolished slavery. David McCullough points out that an equally important feature was its placing for the first time the courts as a co-equal branch separate from the executive. [103] The Constitution of Vermont , adopted in 1777, represented the first partial ban on slavery. Vermont became a state in 1791 but did not fully ban slavery until 1858 with the Vermont Personal Liberty Law. The Pennsylvania Gradual Abolition Act of 1780 [104] made Pennsylvania the first state to abolish slavery by statute. Later, Adams was active in early American foreign affairs and succeeded Washington as the second United States President. His son John Quincy Adams , also from Massachusetts, [105] would go on to become the sixth United States President.
From 1786 to 1787, an armed uprising, known as Shays' Rebellion led by Revolutionary War veteran Daniel Shays wrought havoc throughout Massachusetts and ultimately attempted to seize the Federal armory . [50] The rebellion was one of the major factors in the decision to draft a stronger national constitution to replace the Articles of Confederation . [50] On February 6, 1788, Massachusetts became the sixth state to ratify the United States Constitution . [106]

19th century
In 1820, Maine separated from Massachusetts and entered the Union as the 23rd state as a result of the ratification of the Missouri Compromise . [107]
During the 19th century, Massachusetts became a national leader in the American Industrial Revolution , with factories around cities such as Lowell and Boston producing textiles and shoes, and factories around Springfield producing tools, paper, and textiles. [108] [109] The economy transformed from one based primarily on agriculture to an industrial one, initially making use of water-power and later the steam engine to power factories. Canals and railroads were used for transporting raw materials and finished goods. [110] At first, the new industries drew labor from Yankees on nearby subsistence farms, and later relied upon immigrant labor from Europe and Canada. [111] [112]
In the years leading up to the American Civil War , Massachusetts was a center of progressivist and abolitionist activity. Horace Mann made the state's school system a national model. [113] Henry David Thoreau and Ralph Waldo Emerson made major contributions to American philosophy. [114] Members of the transcendentalist movement emphasized the importance of the natural world and emotion to humanity. [114]
Although significant opposition to abolitionism existed early on in Massachusetts, resulting in anti-abolitionist riots between 1835 and 1837, [115] opposition to slavery gradually increased throughout the next few decades. [116] [117] Abolitionists John Brown and Sojourner Truth lived in Springfield and Northampton, respectively, while Frederick Douglass lived in Boston and Susan B. Anthony in Adams, Massachusetts. The works of such abolitionists contributed to Massachusetts' actions during the Civil War. Massachusetts was the first state to recruit, train, and arm a Black regiment with White officers, the 54th Massachusetts Infantry Regiment . [118] In 1852, Massachusetts became the first state to pass compulsory education laws. [119]
Alexander Graham Bell is commonly credited as the inventor of the first practical telephone . On March 10, 1876 at Boston University , he was able to communicate with his assistant Thomas A. Watson in the next room.

20th century
With the exodus of several manufacturing companies, the area's industrial economy began to decline during the early 20th century. By the 1920s, competition from the South and Midwest, followed by the Great Depression , led to the collapse of the three main industries in Massachusetts: textiles, shoemaking, and precision mechanics. [120] This decline would continue into the later half of the century; between 1950 and 1979, the number of Massachusetts residents involved in textile manufacturing declined from 264,000 to 63,000. [121] The 1969 closure of the Springfield Armory , in particular, spurred an exodus of high-paying jobs from Western Massachusetts, which suffered greatly as it de-industrialized during the last 40 years of the 20th century. [122]
Massachusetts manufactured 3.4 percent of total United States military armaments produced during World War II , ranking tenth among the 48 states. [123] In Eastern Massachusetts, following World War II, the economy was transformed from one based on heavy industry into a service-based economy. [124] Government contracts, private investment, and research facilities led to a new and improved industrial climate, with reduced unemployment and increased per capita income. Suburbanization flourished, and by the 1970s, the Route 128 corridor was dotted with high-technology companies who recruited graduates of the area's many elite institutions of higher education. [125]
The Kennedy family was prominent in Massachusetts politics in the 20th century. Children of businessman and ambassador Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. included John F. Kennedy , who was a senator and US president before his assassination in 1963, Robert F. Kennedy , who was a senator, US attorney general, and presidential candidate before his assassination in 1968, Ted Kennedy , a senator from 1962 until his death in 2009, [126] and Eunice Kennedy Shriver , a co-founder of the Special Olympics . [127] In 1966, Massachusetts became the first state to popularly elect an African American to the US senate with Edward Brooke . [128] George H. W. Bush , 41st President of the United States (1989–1993) was born in Milton in 1924. [129]
In 1987, the state received federal funding for the Central Artery/Tunnel Project. Commonly known as "the Big Dig ", it was, at the time, the biggest federal highway project ever approved. [130] The project included making the Central Artery a tunnel under downtown Boston, in addition to the re-routing of several other major highways. [131] Often controversial, with numerous claims of graft and mismanagement, and with its initial price tag of $2.5 billion increasing to a final tally of over $15 billion, the Big Dig has nonetheless changed the face of Downtown Boston. [130] It has connected areas that were once divided by elevated highway (much of the raised old Central Artery was replaced with the Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy Greenway ), and improved traffic conditions along a number of routes. [130] [131] Additionally, Massachusetts has had a diplomatic relationship with the Japanese prefecture of Hokkaido since 1988. [132]

21st century
On May 17, 2004, Massachusetts became the first state in the U.S. to legalize same-sex marriage after a Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court ruling in November 2003 determined that the exclusion of same-sex couples from the right to a civil marriage was unconstitutional. [58] This decision was eventually superseded by the U.S. Supreme Court's affirmation of same-sex marriage in the United States in 2015.
Two pressure cooker bombs exploded near the finish line of the Boston Marathon on April 15, 2013, at around 2:49 pm EDT . The explosions killed three civilians and injured an estimated 264 others. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) later identified the suspects as brothers Dzhokhar Tsarnaev and Tamerlan Tsarnaev . The ensuing manhunt ended on April 19 when thousands of law enforcement officers searched a 20-block area of nearby Watertown . Dzhokhar later said that he was motivated by extremist Islamic beliefs and learned to build explosive devices from an Inspire , the online magazine of al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula .
On November 8, 2016, Massachusetts voted in favor of The Massachusetts Marijuana Legalization Initiative , also known as Question 4. [133] It was included in the United States presidential election, 2016 ballot in Massachusetts as an indirectly initiated state statute. [134]

Geography
Massachusetts is the 7th smallest state in the United States. It is located in the New England region of the northeastern United States and has an area of 10,555 square miles (27,340 km 2 ), 25.7% of which is water. Several large bays distinctly shape its coast. Boston is the largest city, at the inmost point of Massachusetts Bay , and the mouth of the Charles River .
Despite its small size, Massachusetts features numerous topographically distinctive regions. The large coastal plain of the Atlantic Ocean in the eastern section of the state contains Greater Boston , along with most of the state's population, [43] as well as the distinctive Cape Cod peninsula . To the west lies the hilly, rural region of Central Massachusetts , and beyond that, the Connecticut River Valley . Along the western border of Western Massachusetts lies the highest elevated part of the state, the Berkshires .
The U.S. National Park Service administers a number of natural and historical sites in Massachusetts . [135] Along with twelve national historic sites, areas, and corridors, the National Park Service also manages the Cape Cod National Seashore and the Boston Harbor Islands National Recreation Area . [135] In addition, the Department of Conservation and Recreation maintains a number of parks , trails, and beaches throughout Massachusetts. [136]

Ecology
The primary biome of inland Massachusetts is temperate deciduous forest . [137] Although much of Massachusetts had been cleared for agriculture, leaving only traces of old-growth forest in isolated pockets, secondary growth has regenerated in many rural areas as farms have been abandoned. [138] Currently, forests cover around 62% of Massachusetts. [139] The areas most affected by human development include the Greater Boston area in the east and the Springfield metropolitan area in the west, although the latter includes agricultural areas throughout the Connecticut River Valley. [140] There are currently 219 endangered species in Massachusetts. [141]
A number of species are doing well in the increasingly urbanized Massachusetts. Peregrine falcons utilize office towers in larger cities as nesting areas, [142] and the population of coyotes , whose diet may include garbage and roadkill, has been increasing in recent decades. [143] White-tailed deer , raccoons , wild turkeys , and eastern gray squirrels are also found throughout Massachusetts. In more rural areas in the western part of Massachusetts, larger mammals such as moose and black bears have returned, largely due to reforestation following the regional decline in agriculture. [144]
Massachusetts is located along the Atlantic Flyway , a major route for migratory waterfowl along the eastern coast. [145] Lakes in central Massachusetts provide habitat for many species of fish and waterfowl, but some species such as the common loon are becoming rare. [146] A significant population of long-tailed ducks winter off Nantucket . Small offshore islands and beaches are home to roseate terns and are important breeding areas for the locally threatened piping plover . [147] Protected areas such as the Monomoy National Wildlife Refuge provide critical breeding habitat for shorebirds and a variety of marine wildlife including a large population of grey seals .
Freshwater fish species in Massachusetts include bass , carp , catfish , and trout , while saltwater species such as Atlantic cod , haddock , and American lobster populate offshore waters. [148] Other marine species include Harbor seals , the endangered North Atlantic right whales , as well as humpback whales , fin whales , minke whales , and Atlantic white-sided dolphins .

Climate
Most of Massachusetts has a humid continental , with cold winters and warm summers. Far southeast coastal areas are the broad transition zone to temperate climates (humid subtropical climate in some classifications). The warm to hot summers render the oceanic climate rare in this transition, only applying to exposed coastal areas such as on the peninsula of Barnstable County . The climate of Boston is quite representative for the commonwealth, characterized by summer highs of around 81 °F (27 °C) and winter highs of 35 °F (2 °C), and is quite wet. Frosts are frequent all winter, even in coastal areas due to prevailing inland winds. Due to its location near the Atlantic , Massachusetts is vulnerable to hurricanes and tropical storms .

Demographics
The United States Census Bureau estimated that the population of Massachusetts was 6,794,422 on July 1, 2015, a 3.77% increase since the 2010 United States Census . [8]
As of 2014, Massachusetts was estimated to be the third most densely populated U.S. state, with 839.4 people per square mile, [8] behind New Jersey and Rhode Island . In 2014, Massachusetts had 1,011,811 foreign-born residents or 15% of the population. [8]
Most Bay State residents live within the Boston Metropolitan Area, also known as Greater Boston , which includes Boston and its proximate surroundings but also extending to Greater Lowell and to Worcester . The Springfield metropolitan area , also known as Greater Springfield, is also a major center of population. Demographically, the center of population of Massachusetts is located in the town of Natick . [153] [154]
Like the rest of the northeastern United States , the population of Massachusetts has continued to grow in the past few decades. Massachusetts is the fastest growing state in New England and the 25th fastest growing state in the United States. [155] Population growth was largely due to a relatively high quality of life and a large higher education system in the state. [155]
Foreign immigration is also a factor in the state's population growth, causing the state's population to continue to grow as of the 2010 Census (particularly in Massachusetts gateway cities where costs of living are lower). [156] [157] 40% of foreign immigrants were from Central or South America , according to a 2005 Census Bureau study, with many of the remainder from Asia . Many residents who have settled in Greater Springfield claim Puerto Rican descent. [156] Many areas of Massachusetts showed relatively stable population trends between 2000 and 2010. [157] Exurban Boston and coastal areas grew the most rapidly, while Berkshire County in far Western Massachusetts and Barnstable County on Cape Cod were the only counties to lose population as of the 2010 Census . [157]
By gender, 48.4% were male and 51.6% were female in 2014. In terms of age, 79.2% were over 18 years old and 14.8% were over 65 years old. [8]

Race and ancestry
As of 2014, in terms of race and ethnicity, Massachusetts was 83.2% White (73.7% Non-Hispanic White ), 8.8% Black or African American, 0.5% Native American and Alaska Native , 6.3% Asian American, <0.1% Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander, 2.1% from Some Other Race, and 3.1% from Two or More Races. Hispanics and Latinos of any race made up 11.2% of the population. [8]
The state's most populous ethnic group, non-Hispanic white, has declined from 95.4% in 1970 to 73.7% in 2014. [8] [159] As of 2011, non-Hispanic whites were involved in 63.6% of all the births, [160] while 36.4% of the population of Massachusetts younger than age 1 was minorities (meaning that they had at least one parent who was not non-Hispanic white). [161]
As late as 1795, the population of Massachusetts was nearly 95% of English ancestry. [162] During the early and mid 19th century, immigrant groups began arriving in Massachusetts in large numbers; first from Ireland in the 1840s; [163] today the Irish and part-Irish are the largest ancestry group in the state at nearly 25% of the total population. Others arrived later from Quebec as well as places in Europe such as Italy, Portugal, and Poland. [164] In the early 20th century, a number of African Americans migrated to Massachusetts , although in somewhat fewer numbers than many other Northern states. [165] Later in the 20th century, immigration from Latin America increased considerably. Over 156,000 Chinese Americans made their home in Massachusetts in 2014, [166] and Boston hosts a growing Chinatown accommodating heavily traveled Chinese-owned bus lines to and from Chinatown, Manhattan in New York City . Massachusetts also has large Puerto Rican , Dominican , Haitian , Cape Verdean and Brazilian populations. Boston's South End and Jamaica Plain are both gay villages , as is nearby Provincetown, Massachusetts on Cape Cod.
The largest ancestry group in Massachusetts are the Irish (22.5% of the population), who live in significant numbers throughout the state but form more than 40% of the population along the South Shore in Norfolk and Plymouth counties (in both counties overall, Irish-Americans comprise more than 30% of the population). Italians form the second largest ethnic group in the state (13.5%), but only form a plurality in some suburbs north of Boston and a few towns in the Berkshires. English is the third largest ancestry in Massachusetts (11.4%), and have lived in the region the longest but only form a plurality in some towns in western Massachusetts. French people also form a significant part of the state's population (8%), and they primarily live in the hills of Worcester County. [167] Lowell is home to the second-largest Cambodian community of the nation. [168] There are also several populations of Native Americans in Massachusetts, the Wampanoag tribe maintains reservations at Aquinnah on Martha's Vineyard and at Mashpee on Cape Cod—with an ongoing native language revival project underway since 1993; while the Nipmuc maintain two state-recognized reservations in the central part of the state, including one at Grafton . [169]
Massachusetts has avoided many forms of racial strife seen elsewhere in the US, but examples such as the successful electoral showings of the nativist (mainly anti-Catholic ) Know Nothings in the 1850s, [170] the controversial Sacco and Vanzetti executions in the 1920s, [171] and Boston's opposition to desegregation busing in the 1970s [172] show that the ethnic history of Massachusetts was not completely harmonious.

Languages
The most common varieties of American English spoken in Massachusetts, other than General American , are the cot-caught distinct, rhotic, western Massachusetts dialect and the cot-caught merged, non-rhotic, eastern Massachusetts dialect (popularly known as a "Boston accent"). [173]
As of 2010, 78.93% (4,823,127) of Massachusetts residents age 5 and older spoke English at home as a first language , while 7.50% (458,256) spoke Spanish, 2.97% (181,437) Portuguese , 1.59% (96,690) Chinese (which includes Cantonese and Mandarin ), 1.11% (67,788) French, 0.89% (54,456) French Creole , 0.72% (43,798) Italian, 0.62% (37,865) Russian, and Vietnamese was spoken as a primary language by 0.58% (35,283) of the population over the age of five. In total, 21.07% (1,287,419) of Massachusetts' population age 5 and older spoke a first language other than English. [8] [174]

Religion
Massachusetts was founded and settled by Separatists in 1620 [83] and soon after by other types of Puritans , [81] and most people in Massachusetts today remain Christians . [8] The descendants of the Puritans belong to many different churches; in the direct line of inheritance are the various Congregational churches , the United Church of Christ and congregations of the Unitarian Universalist Association . The headquarters of the Unitarian Universalist Association , long located on Beacon Hill , is now located in South Boston . [176] [177] Many Puritan descendants also dispersed to other Protestant denominations. Some disaffiliated along with Roman Catholics and other Christian groups in the wake of modern secularization .
Today, Christians make up 57% of the state's population, with Protestants making up 21% of them. Roman Catholics make up 34% and now predominate because of massive immigration from primarily Catholic countries and regions – chiefly Ireland, Italy, Poland, Portugal, Quebec, and Latin America. Both Protestant and Roman Catholic communities have been in decline since the late 20th century, due to the rise of irreligion in New England . It is the most irreligious region of the country, along with the Western United States . A significant Jewish population immigrated to the Boston and Springfield areas between 1880 and 1920. Jews currently make up 3% of the population. Mary Baker Eddy made the Boston Mother Church of Christian Science serve as the world headquarters of this new religious movement . Buddhists , Pagans , Hindus , Seventh-day Adventists , Muslims , and Mormons can also be found. Kripalu Center in Stockbridge , the Shaolin Meditation Temple in Springfield, and the Insight Meditation Center in Barre are examples of non-Abrahamic religious centers in Massachusetts. According to 2010 data from The Association of Religion Data Archives , (ARDA) the largest single denominations are the Catholic Church with 2,940,199 adherents; the United Church of Christ with 86,639 adherents; and the Episcopal Church with 81,999 adherents. [180] 32% of the population identifies as having no religion. [181]

Economy
The United States Bureau of Economic Analysis estimates that the Massachusetts gross state product in 2013 was US$446 billion. [182] The per capita personal income in 2012 was $53,221, making it the third highest state in the nation. [183] As of January 2017, Massachusetts general minimum wage in the state was $11 per hour while the minimum wage for tipped workers is $3.75 an hour. [184]
In 2015, twelve Fortune 500 companies were located in Massachusetts: Liberty Mutual , Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company , TJX Companies , EMC Corporation , Raytheon , Staples Inc. , Global Partners , Thermo Fisher Scientific , State Street Corporation , Biogen , Eversource Energy , and Boston Scientific . [185] CNBC's list of "Top States for Business for 2014" has recognized Massachusetts as the 25th best state in the nation for business, [186] and for the second year in a row the state was ranked by Bloomberg as the most innovative state in America. [187] According to a 2013 study by Phoenix Marketing International, Massachusetts had the sixth-largest number of millionaires per capita in the United States, with a ratio of 6.73 percent. [188] Billionaires living in the state include past and present leaders (and related family) of local companies such as Fidelity Investments , New Balance , Kraft Group , Boston Scientific , and the former Continental Cablevision . [189] Boston-Logan International Airport is the busiest airport in New England, serving 33.4 million total passengers in 2015, and witnessing rapid growth in international air traffic since 2010. [190]
Sectors vital to the Massachusetts economy include higher education, biotechnology , information technology , finance, health care, tourism, and defense. The Route 128 corridor and Greater Boston continue to be a major center for venture capital investment , [191] and high technology remains an important sector. In recent years tourism has played an ever-important role in the state's economy, with Boston and Cape Cod being the leading destinations. [192] Other popular tourist destinations include Salem , Plymouth , and the Berkshires . Massachusetts is the sixth most popular tourist destination for foreign travelers. [193]
As of 2012, there were 7,755 farms in Massachusetts encompassing a total of 523,517 acres (2,120 km 2 ), averaging 67.5 acres (0.273 km 2 ) apiece. [194] Particular agricultural products of note include green house products making up more than one third of the states agricultural output, cranberries, sweet corn and apples are also large sectors of production. [195] Massachusetts is the second-largest cranberry-producing state in the union after Wisconsin . [196]
In February 2017, U.S. News & World Report ranked Massachusetts the best state in the United States based upon 60 metrics including healthcare, education, crime, infrastructure, opportunity, economy, and government. The Bay State ranked number one in education, number two in healthcare, and number five in the handling of the economy. [197]

Job growth
Massachusetts scored ninth among all other states in non-farm job growth in 2015 according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics . The state ranked 15th in percentage change with a two percent increase. [198]

Taxation
Depending on how it is calculated, state and local tax burden in Massachusetts has been estimated among U.S. states and Washington D.C. as 21st highest (11.44% or $6,163 per year for a household with nationwide median income) [199] or 25th highest overall with below-average corporate taxes (39th highest), above-average personal income taxes, (13th highest), above-average sales tax (18th highest), and below-average property taxes (46th highest). [200] In the 1970s, the Commonwealth ranked as a relatively high-tax state, gaining the pejorative nickname "Taxachusetts". This was followed by a round of tax limitations during the 1980s—a conservative period in American politics—including Proposition 2½ . [201]
As of January 1, 2016, Massachusetts has a flat-rate personal income tax of 5.1%, [202] after a 2002 voter referendum to eventually lower the rate to 5.0% [203] as amended by the legislature. [204] There is a tax exemption for income below a threshold that varies from year to year. The corporate income tax rate is 8.8%, [205] and the short-term capital gains tax rate is 12%. [206] An unusual provision allows filers to voluntarily pay at the pre-referendum 5.85% income tax rate, which is done by between one and two thousand taxpayers per year. [207]
The state imposes a 6.25% sales tax [205] on retail sales of tangible personal property—except for groceries, clothing (up to $175.00), and periodicals. [208] The sales tax is charged on clothing that costs more than $175.00, for the amount exceeding $175.00. [208] Massachusetts also charges a use tax when goods are bought from other states and the vendor does not remit Massachusetts sales tax; taxpayers report and pay this on their income tax forms or dedicated forms, though there are "safe harbor" amounts that can be paid without tallying up actual purchases (except for purchases over $1000). [208] There is no inheritance tax and limited Massachusetts estate tax related to federal estate tax collection. [206]

Energy
Massachusetts' electricity generation market was made competitive in 1998, enabling retail customers to change suppliers without changing utility companies. [209] In 2012, Massachusetts consumed 1374.4 trillion BTU , [210] making it the fifth lowest state in terms of consumption of energy per capita, and 63% of that energy came from natural gas . [210] In 2014 and 2015, Massachusetts was ranked as the most energy efficient state the United States [211] [212] while Boston is the most efficient city, [213] but it had the third highest electricity prices of any state. [210]

Transportation
Massachusetts has 10 regional metropolitan planning organizations and three non-metropolitan planning organizations covering the remainder of the state; [214] statewide planning is handled by the Massachusetts Department of Transportation .

Regional public transportation
The Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA), also known as "The T", [215] operates public transportation in the form of subway, [216] bus, [217] and ferry [218] systems in the Metro Boston area.
Fifteen other regional transit authorities provide public transportation in the form of bus services in the rest of the state. [219] Two heritage railways are also in operation: the Cape Cod Central Railroad and the Berkshire Scenic Railway . [220] [221]

Long-distance rail and bus
Amtrak operates inter-city rail , including the high-speed Acela service to cities such as Providence , New Haven , New York City, and Washington, DC from South Station . From North Station the Amtrak Downeaster serves Portland, Maine and Brunswick, Maine . [222] Amtrak also runs east-west from Boston South Station to Worcester, Springfield, and eventually Chicago, Illinois; and north-south from the Pioneer Valley to New Haven, Connecticut via Hartford. Amtrak carries more passengers between Boston and New York than all airlines combined (about 54% of market share in 2012). [223] but has infrequent trips to other cities. There, more frequent intercity service is provided by private bus carriers, including Peter Pan Bus Lines (headquartered in Springfield), Greyhound Lines , and BoltBus . Various Chinatown bus lines depart for New York from South Station in Boston.
MBTA Commuter Rail services run throughout the larger Greater Boston area, including service to Worcester , Lowell , and Plymouth . [224] This overlaps with the service areas of neighboring regional transportation authorities. As of the summer of 2013 the Cape Cod Regional Transit Authority in collaboration with the MBTA and the Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT) is operating the CapeFLYER providing passenger rail service between Boston and Cape Cod. [225] [226]
Hartford-Springfield Commuter Rail is expected to begin operation in 2018.

Ferry
The Woods Hole, Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket Steamship Authority regulates freight and passenger ferry service to the islands of Massachusetts including Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket . [227]

Rail freight
As of 2015, a number of freight railroads were operating in Massachusetts, with CSX being the largest carrier. [228] Massachusetts has a total of 892 miles (1,436 km) of freight trackage in operation. [229]

Air service
The major airport in the state is Boston-Logan International Airport . The airport served 33.5 million passengers in 2015, up from 31.6 million in 2014, [190] and is used by around 40 airlines with a total of 103 gates. [230] Logan International Airport has service to numerous cities throughout the United States, as well as international service to Canada, Mexico, the Caribbean, Europe, and Asia. [231] Logan, Hanscom Field in Bedford , and Worcester Regional Airport are operated by Massport , an independent state transportation agency. [231] Massachusetts has approximately 42 public-use airfields, and over 200 private landing spots. [232] Some airports receive funding from the Aeronautics Division of the Massachusetts Department of Transportation and the Federal Aviation Administration ; the FAA is also the primary regulator of Massachusetts air travel. [233]

Roads
There are a total of 31,300 miles (50,400 km) of interstates and other highways in Massachusetts. [234] Interstate 90 (I-90, also known as the Massachusetts Turnpike ), is the longest interstate in Massachusetts. The route travels 136 mi (219 km) generally west to east, entering Massachusetts at the New York state line in the town of West Stockbridge , and passes just north of Springfield , just south of Worcester and through Framingham before terminating near Logan International Airport in Boston. [235] Other major interstates include I-91 , which travels generally north and south along the Connecticut River ; I-93 , which travels north and south through central Boston, then passes through Methuen before entering New Hampshire; and I-95 , which connects Providence, Rhode Island with Greater Boston, forming a partial loop concurrent with Route 128 around the more urbanized areas before continuing north along the coast into New Hampshire.
I-495 forms a wide loop around the outer edge of Greater Boston. Other major interstates in Massachusetts include I-291 , I-391 , I-84 , I-195 , I-395 , I-290 , and I-190 . Major non-interstate highways in Massachusetts include U.S. Routes 1 , 3 , 6 , and 20 , and state routes 2 , 3 , 9, 24 , and 128. A great majority of interstates in Massachusetts were constructed during the mid 20th century, and at times were controversial, particularly the intent to route I-95 northeastwards from Providence, Rhode Island, directly through central Boston , first proposed in 1948. Opposition to continued construction grew, and in 1970 Governor Francis W. Sargent issued a general prohibition on most further freeway construction within the I-95/Route 128 loop in the Boston area. [236] A massive undertaking to bring I-93 underground in downtown Boston, called the Big Dig , brought the city's highway system under public scrutiny for its high cost and construction quality. [130]

Government and politics
Massachusetts has a long political history; earlier political structures included the Mayflower Compact of 1620, the separate Massachusetts Bay and Plymouth colonies, and the combined colonial Province of Massachusetts . The Massachusetts Constitution was ratified in 1780 while the Revolutionary War was in progress, four years after the Articles of Confederation was drafted, and eight years before the present United States Constitution was ratified on June 21, 1788. Drafted by John Adams , the Massachusetts Constitution is currently the oldest functioning written constitution in continuous effect in the world. [237] [238] [239]
Massachusetts politics since the second half of the 20th century have generally been dominated by the Democratic Party , and the state has a reputation for being the most liberal state in the country. [240] In 1974, Elaine Noble became the first openly lesbian or gay candidate elected to a state legislature in US history. [241] The state housed the first openly gay member of the United States House of Representatives , Gerry Studds , in 1972 [242] and in 2004, Massachusetts became the first state to allow same-sex marriage . [58]

Government
The Government of Massachusetts is divided into three branches: Executive, Legislative, and Judicial. The governor of Massachusetts heads the executive branch; duties of the governor include signing or vetoing legislation, filling judicial and agency appointments, granting pardons, preparing an annual budget, and commanding the Massachusetts National Guard . [243] Massachusetts governors, unlike those of most other states, are addressed as His/Her Excellency. [243] The current governor is Charlie Baker , [244] a Republican from Swampscott . [245] The executive branch also includes the Executive Council, which is made up of eight elected councilors and the Lieutenant Governor seat, [243] which is currently occupied by Karyn Polito . [244]
Abilities of the Council include confirming gubernatorial appointments and certifying elections. [243] The Massachusetts House of Representatives and Massachusetts Senate comprise the legislature of Massachusetts, known as the Massachusetts General Court . [243] The House consists of 160 members while the Senate has 40 members. [243] Leaders of the House and Senate are chosen by the members of those bodies; the leader of the House is known as the Speaker while the leader of the Senate is known as the President. [243] Each branch consists of several committees. [243] Members of both bodies are elected to two-year terms. [246]
The Judicial branch is headed by the Supreme Judicial Court, which serves over a number of lower courts. [243] The Supreme Judicial Court is made up of a chief justice and six associate justices. [243] Judicial appointments are made by the governor and confirmed by the executive council. [243]
The Congressional delegation from Massachusetts is entirely Democratic . [247] Currently, the US senators are Democrats Elizabeth Warren and Ed Markey . The members of the state's delegation to the US House of Representatives are Richard Neal , Jim McGovern , Niki Tsongas , Joseph Kennedy III , Katherine Clark , Seth Moulton , Mike Capuano , Stephen Lynch , and Bill Keating . [248]
Federal court cases are heard in the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts , and appeals are heard by the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit . [249] In U.S. presidential elections since 2012, Massachusetts has been allotted 11 votes in the electoral college , out of a total of 538. [250] Like most states, Massachusetts's electoral votes are granted in a winner-take-all system. [251]

Politics
Throughout the mid 20th century, Massachusetts has gradually shifted from a Republican -leaning state to one largely dominated by Democrats ; the 1952 victory of John F. Kennedy over incumbent Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr. is seen as a watershed moment in this transformation. His younger brother Edward M. Kennedy held that seat until his death from a brain tumor in 2009. [253] Massachusetts has since gained a reputation as being a politically liberal state and is often used as an archetype of modern liberalism , hence the usage of the phrase " Massachusetts liberal ". [254]
Massachusetts routinely votes for the Democratic Party, with the core concentrations in the Boston metro area, the Cape and Islands, and Western Massachusetts outside Hampden County. Pockets of Republican strength are in the central areas along the I-495 crescent, Hampden County, and communities on the south and north shores, [255] but the state as a whole has not given its Electoral College votes to a Republican in a presidential election since Ronald Reagan carried it in 1984 . Additionally, Massachusetts provided Reagan with his smallest margins of victory in both the 1980 [256] and 1984 elections. [257]
As of the 2014 election, the Democratic Party holds a significant majority over the Republican Party. Only 35 of the 160 seats in the state house [258] and 6 of the 40 seats in the state senate belong to the Republican Party. [259]
Although Republicans held the governor's office continuously from 1991 to 2007 and from 2015 onwards, [244] they have been among the most moderate Republican leaders in the nation. [260] [261] In the 2004 election , the state gave Massachusetts senator John Kerry 61.9% of the vote, his best showing in any state. [262] In 2008 , President Barack Obama carried the state with 61.8% of the vote. [263]
In the 2010 special election for the U.S. Senate, Republican Scott Brown defeated Democrat Martha Coakley by a 52% to 47% margin only to lose the seat in the 2012 Senate election to Elizabeth Warren , the first female senator to represent Massachusetts. [265] [266]
A number of contemporary national political issues have been influenced by events in Massachusetts, such as the decision in 2003 by the state Supreme Judicial Court allowing same-sex marriage [267] and a 2006 bill which mandated health insurance for all Bay Staters. [268] In 2008, Massachusetts voters passed an initiative decriminalizing possession of small amounts of marijuana . [269] Voters in Massachusetts also approved a ballot measure in 2012 that legalized the medical use of marijuana. [270]

Cities, towns, and counties
There are 50 cities and 301 towns in Massachusetts, grouped into 14 counties . [272] The fourteen counties, moving roughly from west to east, are Berkshire , Franklin , Hampshire , Hampden , Worcester , Middlesex , Essex , Suffolk , Norfolk , Bristol , Plymouth , Barnstable , Dukes , and Nantucket . Eleven communities which call themselves "towns" are, by law, cities since they have traded the town meeting form of government for a mayor-council or manager-council form. [273]
Boston is the state capital and largest city in Massachusetts. The population of the city proper is 645,966, [274] and Greater Boston , with a population of 4,628,910, is the 10th largest metropolitan area in the nation. [275] Other cities with a population over 100,000 include Worcester , Springfield , Lowell , and Cambridge . Plymouth is the largest municipality in the state by land area. [272]
Massachusetts, along with the five other New England states, features the local governmental structure known as the New England town . [276] In this structure, incorporated towns—as opposed to townships or counties—hold many of the responsibilities and powers of local government. [276] Most of the county governments were abolished by the state of Massachusetts beginning in 1997 including Middlesex County , [277] the largest county in the state by population. [278] [279] The voters of these now defunct counties elect only Sheriffs and Registers of Deeds, who are part of the state government. Other counties have been reorganized, and a few still retain county councils. [280]

Education
Massachusetts was the first state in North America to require municipalities to appoint a teacher or establish a grammar school with the passage of the Massachusetts Education Law of 1647, [281] and 19th century reforms pushed by Horace Mann laid much of the groundwork for contemporary universal public education [282] [283] which was established in 1852. [119] Massachusetts is home to the oldest school in continuous existence in North America ( The Roxbury Latin School , founded in 1645), as well as the country's oldest public elementary school ( The Mather School , founded in 1639), [284] its oldest high school ( Boston Latin School , founded in 1635), [285] its oldest continuously operating boarding school ( The Governor's Academy , founded in 1763), [286] its oldest college ( Harvard University , founded in 1636), [287] and its oldest women's college ( Mount Holyoke College , founded in 1837). [288]
Massachusetts' per-student public expenditure for elementary and secondary schools was eighth in the nation in 2012, at $14,844. [289] In 2013, Massachusetts scored highest of all the states in math and third highest in reading on the National Assessment of Educational Progress . [290]
Massachusetts is home to 121 institutions of higher education. [291] Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , both located in Cambridge , consistently rank among the world's best private universities and universities in general. [292] In addition to Harvard and MIT, several other Massachusetts universities currently rank in the top 50 at the national level in the widely cited rankings of U.S. News and World Report : Tufts University (#27), Boston College (#31), Brandeis University (#34), Boston University (#39) and Northeastern University (#39). Massachusetts is also home to three of the top five U.S. News and World Report ' s best Liberal Arts Colleges: Williams College (#1), Amherst College (#2), and Wellesley College (#4). [293] The public University of Massachusetts (nicknamed UMass ) features five campuses in the state, with its flagship campus in Amherst that enrolls over 25,000 students. [294] [295]

Arts, culture, and recreation
Massachusetts has contributed to American arts and culture. Drawing from its Native American and Yankee roots, along with later immigrant groups, Massachusetts has produced a number of writers, artists, and musicians. A number of major museums and important historical sites are also located there, and events and festivals throughout the year celebrate the state's history and heritage. [296]
Massachusetts was an early center of the Transcendentalist movement, which emphasized intuition, emotion, human individuality and a deeper connection with nature. [114] Ralph Waldo Emerson , who was born in Boston but spent much of his later life in Concord , largely created the philosophy with his 1836 work Nature , and continued to be a key figure in the movement for the remainder of his life. Emerson's friend, Henry David Thoreau , who was also involved in Transcendentalism, recorded his year spent alone in a small cabin at nearby Walden Pond in the 1854 work Walden; or, Life in the Woods . [297]
Other famous authors and poets born or strongly associated with Massachusetts include Nathaniel Hawthorne , John Updike , Emily Dickinson , Henry Wadsworth Longfellow , E.E. Cummings , Sylvia Plath , H.P. Lovecraft , and Theodor Seuss Geisel , better known as "Dr. Seuss". [298] [299] [300] Famous painters from Massachusetts include Winslow Homer and Norman Rockwell ; [300] many of the latter's works are on display at the Norman Rockwell Museum in Stockbridge . [301]
Massachusetts is also an important center for the performing arts. Both the Boston Symphony Orchestra and Boston Pops Orchestra are based in Massachusetts. [302] Other orchestras in Massachusetts include the Cape Cod Symphony Orchestra in Barnstable and the Springfield Symphony Orchestra . [303] [304] Tanglewood , in western Massachusetts, is a music venue that is home to both the Tanglewood Music Festival and Tanglewood Jazz Festival , as well as the summer host for the Boston Symphony Orchestra. [305]
Other performing arts and theater organizations in Massachusetts include the Boston Ballet , the Boston Lyric Opera , [302] and the Lenox -based Shakespeare & Company . In addition to classical and folk music, Massachusetts has produced musicians and bands spanning a number of contemporary genres, such as the classic rock band Aerosmith , the proto-punk band The Modern Lovers , the new wave band The Cars , and the alternative rock band Pixies . [306] Film events in the state include the Boston Film Festival , the Boston International Film Festival , and a number of smaller film festivals in various cities throughout Massachusetts. [307]
Massachusetts is home to a large number of museums and historical sites. The Museum of Fine Arts, Boston , the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston , and the DeCordova contemporary art and sculpture museum in Lincoln are all located within Massachusetts, [308] and the Maria Mitchell Association in Nantucket includes several observatories, museums, and an aquarium. [309] Historically themed museums and sites such as the Springfield Armory National Historic Site in Springfield , [135] Boston's Freedom Trail and nearby Minute Man National Historical Park , both of which preserve a number of sites important during the American Revolution , [135] [310] the Lowell National Historical Park , which focuses on some of the earliest mills and canals of the industrial revolution in the US, [135] the Black Heritage Trail in Boston, which includes important African-American and abolitionist sites in Boston, [311] and the New Bedford Whaling National Historical Park [135] all showcase various periods of Massachusetts' history.
Plimoth Plantation and Old Sturbridge Village are two open-air or "living" museums in Massachusetts, recreating life as it was in the 17th and early 19th centuries, respectively. [312] [313]
Boston's annual St. Patrick's Day parade and "Harborfest", a week-long Fourth of July celebration featuring a fireworks display and concert by the Boston Pops as well as a turnaround cruise in Boston Harbor by the USS Constitution , are popular events. [314] The New England Summer Nationals , an auto show in Worcester, draws tens of thousands of attendees every year. [315] The Boston Marathon is also a popular event in the state drawing more than 30,000 runners and tens of thousands of spectators annually. [316]
Long-distance hiking trails in Massachusetts include the Appalachian Trail , the New England National Scenic Trail , the Metacomet-Monadnock Trail , the Midstate Trail , and the Bay Circuit Trail. [317] Other outdoor recreational activities in Massachusetts include sailing and yachting, freshwater and deep-sea fishing, [318] whale watching , [319] downhill and cross-country skiing, [320] and hunting. [321]

Media
There are two major television media markets located in Massachusetts. The Boston/Manchester market is the fifth largest in the United States. [322] The other market surrounds the Springfield area. [323] WGBH-TV in Boston is a major public television station and produces national programs such as Nova , Frontline , and American Experience . [324] [325]
The Boston Globe , Boston Herald , Springfield Republican , and the Worcester Telegram & Gazette are Massachusetts's largest daily newspapers. [326] In addition, there are many community dailies and weeklies. There are a number of major AM and FM stations which serve Massachusetts, [327] along with many more regional and community-based stations. Some colleges and universities also operate campus television and radio stations, and print their own newspapers. [328] [329] [330]

Health
Massachusetts generally ranks highly among states in most health and disease prevention categories. In 2014, the United Health Foundation ranked the state as third healthiest overall. [331] Massachusetts has the most doctors per 100,000 residents, [332] the second-lowest infant mortality rate , [333] and the lowest percentage of uninsured residents (for both children as well as the total population). [334] According to Businessweek , commonwealth residents have an average life expectancy of 78.4 years, the fifth longest in the country. [335] 37.2% of the population is overweight and 21.7% is obese, [336] and Massachusetts ranks sixth highest in the percentage of residents who are considered neither obese nor overweight (41.1%). [336] Massachusetts also ranks above average in the prevalence of binge drinking , which is the 20th highest in the country. [337]
The nation's first Marine Hospital was erected by federal order in Boston in 1799. [338] [339] There are currently a total of 143 hospitals in the state. [340] According to 2015 rankings by U.S. News & World Report , Massachusetts General Hospital the hospital ranked in the top three in two specialties. [341] Massachusetts General was founded in 1811 and serves as the largest teaching hospital for nearby Harvard University . [342]
The state of Massachusetts is a center for medical education and research including Harvard's Brigham and Women's Hospital , Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center , and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute [343] as well as the New England Baptist Hospital , Tufts Medical Center , and Boston Medical Center which is the primary teaching hospital for Boston University . [344] The University of Massachusetts Medical School is located in Worcester . [345] The Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences has two of its three campuses in Boston and Worcester. [346]

Sports
Massachusetts is home to five major league professional sports teams: seventeen-time NBA Champions Boston Celtics , [347] eight-time World Series winners Boston Red Sox , [348] six-time Stanley Cup winners Boston Bruins , [349] and five-time Super Bowl winners New England Patriots . [350] The New England Revolution is the Major League Soccer team for Massachusetts and the Boston Cannons are the Major League Lacrosse team. [351] The Boston Breakers are the Women's Professional Soccer in Massachusetts. Massachusetts is also the home of the Cape Cod Baseball League .
In the late 19th century, the Olympic sports of basketball [56] and volleyball [57] were invented in the Western Massachusetts cities of Springfield [56] and Holyoke , [57] respectively. The Basketball Hall of Fame , is a major tourist destination in the City of Springfield and the Volleyball Hall of Fame is located in Holyoke. [57] The American Hockey League (AHL), the NHL's development league, is headquartered in Springfield. [352]
Several universities in Massachusetts are notable for their collegiate athletics. The state is home to two Division 1 FBS teams, Boston College of the Atlantic Coast Conference , and FBS Independent University of Massachusetts at Amherst . FCS play includes Harvard University , which competes in the famed Ivy League , and College of the Holy Cross of the Patriot League . Boston University , Northeastern University , UMASS Lowell , and Merrimack College also participate in Division I athletics. [353] [354] Many other Massachusetts colleges compete in lower divisions such as Division III , where MIT , Tufts University , Amherst College , Williams College , and others field competitive teams.
Massachusetts is also the home of rowing events such as the Eastern Sprints on Lake Quinsigamond and the Head of the Charles Regatta . [355] A number of major golf events have taken place in Massachusetts, including nine U.S. Opens and two Ryder Cups . [356] [357]
Massachusetts has produced several successful Olympians including Butch Johnson , Todd Richards , Albina Osipowich , Aly Raisman , and Susan Rojcewicz . [358]

See also

Ecology

Government

History and archives
WebPage index: 00014
Dunkirk evacuation
The Dunkirk evacuation , code-named Operation Dynamo , also known as the Miracle of Dunkirk , was the evacuation of Allied soldiers from the beaches and harbour of Dunkirk , France, between 26 May and 4 June 1940, during World War II . The operation was decided upon when large numbers of British, French, Belgian, and Canadian troops were cut off and surrounded by the German army during the Battle of France . In a speech to the House of Commons , British Prime Minister Winston Churchill called the events in France "a colossal military disaster", saying "the whole root and core and brain of the British Army " had been stranded at Dunkirk and seemed about to perish or be captured. [5] In his We shall fight on the beaches speech on 4 June, he hailed their rescue as a "miracle of deliverance". [6]
After Nazi Germany invaded Poland in September 1939, France and the British Empire declared war on Germany. The British Expeditionary Force (BEF) was sent to aid in the defence of France. After the Phoney War , Germany invaded Belgium and the Netherlands on 10 May 1940, and three of their Panzer corps attacked France through the Ardennes and rapidly drove to the English Channel . By 21 May, the German forces had trapped the BEF, the remains of the Belgian forces, and three French armies in an area along the northern coast of France. Commander of the BEF, General The 6th Viscount Gort , immediately saw that evacuation across the Channel was the best course of action and began planning a withdrawal to Dunkirk, the closest location with good port facilities. On 22 May 1940, a halt order was issued by the German High Command, with Adolf Hitler 's approval. This gave the trapped Allied forces time to construct defensive works and pull back large numbers of troops toward Dunkirk, to fight the Battle of Dunkirk . From 28–31 May 1940, in the Siege of Lille , the remaining 40,000 men of the once-formidable French First Army fought a delaying action against seven German divisions , including three armoured divisions .
On the first day of the evacuation, only 7,669 men were evacuated, but by the end of the eighth day, a total of 338,226 soldiers had been rescued by a hastily assembled fleet of over 800 boats. Many of the troops were able to embark from the harbour's protective mole onto 39 British destroyers and other large ships, while others had to wade out from the beaches, waiting for hours in the shoulder-deep water. Some were ferried from the beaches to the larger ships by what came to be known as the little ships of Dunkirk , a flotilla of hundreds of merchant marine boats, fishing boats , pleasure craft , and lifeboats called into service for the emergency. The BEF lost 68,000 soldiers during the French campaign and had to abandon nearly all of their tanks, vehicles, and other equipment.
In his speech to the House of Commons on 4 June, Churchill reminded the country that "we must be very careful not to assign to this deliverance the attributes of a victory. Wars are not won by evacuations." [7]

Background
In 1939, after Nazi Germany invaded Poland , marking the beginning of the Second World War, the United Kingdom sent British troops – the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) – to aid in the defence of France, landing troops at Cherbourg , Nantes , and Saint-Nazaire . By May 1940 the force consisted of ten divisions in three corps under the command of General John Vereker, 6th Viscount Gort . [8] [9] Working with the BEF were the Belgian Army and the French First , Seventh , and Ninth Armies. [10]
During the 1930s, the French had constructed the Maginot Line , a series of fortifications along their border with Germany. This line had been designed to deter a German invasion across the Franco-German border and funnel an attack into Belgium, which could then be met by the best divisions of the French Army . Thus, any future war would take place outside of French territory avoiding a repeat of the First World War . [11] [12] The area immediately to the north of the Maginot Line was covered by the heavily wooded Ardennes region, [13] which French General Philippe Pétain declared to be "impenetrable" as long as "special provisions" were taken. He believed that any enemy force emerging from the forest would be vulnerable to a pincer attack and destroyed. The French commander-in-chief, Maurice Gamelin , also believed the area to be of a limited threat, noting that it "never favoured large operations". [14] With this in mind, the area was left lightly defended. [11]
The initial plan for the German invasion of France called for an encirclement attack through the Netherlands and Belgium, avoiding the Maginot Line. [15] Erich von Manstein , then Chief of Staff of the German Army Group A , prepared the outline of a different plan and submitted it to the OKH (German High Command) via his superior, Generaloberst Gerd von Rundstedt . [16] [17] Manstein's plan suggested that Panzer divisions should attack through the Ardennes, then establish bridgeheads on the Meuse River and rapidly drive to the English Channel . The Germans would thus cut off the Allied armies in Belgium and Flanders . This part of the plan later became known as the Sichelschnitt ("sickle cut"). [17] [18] Adolf Hitler approved a modified version of Manstein's ideas, today known as the Manstein Plan , after meeting with him on 17 February. [19]
On 10 May, Germany attacked Belgium and the Netherlands . [20] Army Group B , under Generaloberst Fedor von Bock , attacked into Belgium, while the three Panzer corps of Army Group A under Rundstedt swung around to the south and drove for the Channel. [21] The BEF advanced from the Belgian border to positions along the River Dyle within Belgium, where they fought elements of Army Group B starting on 10 May. [22] [23] They were ordered to begin a fighting withdrawal to the Scheldt River on 14 May when the Belgian and French positions on their flanks failed to hold. [24] During a visit to Paris on 17 May, British Prime Minister Winston Churchill was astonished to learn from Gamelin that the French had committed all their troops to the ongoing engagements and had no strategic reserves. [25] On 19 May, Gort met with French General Gaston Billotte , commander of the French First Army and overall coordinator of the Allied forces. Billotte revealed that the French had no troops between the Germans and the sea. Gort immediately saw that evacuation across the Channel was the best course of action, and began planning a withdrawal to Dunkirk, the closest location with good port facilities. [26] Surrounded by marshes, Dunkirk boasted old fortifications and the longest sand beach in Europe, where large groups could assemble. [27] After continued engagements and a failed Allied attempt on 21 May at Arras to cut through the German spearhead, [28] the BEF was trapped, along with the remains of the Belgian forces and the three French armies, in an area along the northern French coast. [29] [30]

Prelude
Without telling the French, the British began planning on 20 May for Operation Dynamo, the evacuation of the BEF. [27] [31] Dynamo took its name from the dynamo room that provided electricity in the naval headquarters below Dover Castle , where Vice Admiral Bertram Ramsay planned the operation and briefed Churchill as it was under way. [32] Ships began gathering at Dover for the evacuation. [33] On 20 May, the BEF sent Brigadier Gerald Whitfield to Dunkirk to start evacuating unnecessary personnel. Overwhelmed by what he later described as "a somewhat alarming movement towards Dunkirk by both officers and men", due to a shortage of food and water, he had to send many along without thoroughly checking their credentials. Even officers ordered to stay behind to aid the evacuation disappeared onto the boats. [34]
On 22 May, Churchill ordered the BEF to attack southward in co-ordination with the French First Army under General Georges Blanchard to reconnect with the remainder of the French forces. [35] This proposed action was dubbed the Weygand Plan after General Maxime Weygand , appointed Supreme Commander after Gamelin's dismissal on 18 May. [36] On 25 May, Gort had to abandon any hope of achieving this objective and withdrew on his own initiative, along with Blanchard's forces behind the Lys Canal, part of a canal system that reached the sea at Gravelines . [37] Sluice gates had already been opened all along the canal to flood the system and create a barrier (the Canal Line) against the German advance. [38]

Battle of Dunkirk
By 24 May, the Germans had captured the port of Boulogne and surrounded Calais. [29] The engineers of the 2nd Panzer Division under Generalmajor Rudolf Veiel built five bridges over the Canal Line and only one British battalion barred the way to Dunkirk. [39] On 23 May, Rundstedt had ordered the panzer units to halt, concerned about the vulnerability of his flanks and the question of supply to his forward troops. [40] [41] [42] He was also concerned that the marshy ground around Dunkirk would prove unsuitable for tanks and he wished to conserve them for later operations (in some units, tank losses were 30–50 percent). [43] [44] Hitler was also apprehensive, and on a visit to Army Group A headquarters on 24 May, he endorsed the order. [43]
Göring urged Hitler to let the Luftwaffe (aided by Army Group B [45] ) finish off the British, to the consternation of Halder, who noted in his diary that the Luftwaffe was dependent upon the weather and air crews were worn out after two weeks of battle. [46] Rundstedt issued another order, which was sent uncoded. It was picked up by the RAF Y service at 12:42: "By order of the Fuhrer ... attack north-west of Arras is to be limited to the general line Lens-Bethune-Aire-St Omer-Gravelines. The Canal will not be crossed." [47] [48] Later that day, Hitler issued Directive 13, which called for the Luftwaffe to defeat the trapped Allied forces and stop their escape. [49] At 15:30 on 26 May, Hitler ordered the panzer groups to continue their advance, but most units took another 16 hours to attack. [50] The delay gave the Allies time to prepare defences vital for the evacuation and prevented the Germans from stopping the Allied retreat from Lille. [51]
The Halt Order has been the subject of much discussion by historians. [52] [53] Guderian considered the failure to order a timely assault on Dunkirk to be one of the major German mistakes on the Western Front . [54] Rundstedt called it "one of the great turning points of the war", [55] and Manstein described it as "one of Hitler's most critical mistakes". [56] B. H. Liddell Hart interviewed many of the generals after the war and put together a picture of Hitler's strategic thinking on the matter. Hitler believed that once Britain's troops left Europe, they would never return. [57]

Evacuation

26–27 May
The retreat was undertaken amid chaotic conditions, with abandoned vehicles blocking the roads and a flood of refugees heading in the opposite direction. [58] [59] Due to wartime censorship and the desire to keep up British morale, the full extent of the unfolding disaster at Dunkirk was not initially publicised. A special service attended by King George VI was held in Westminster Abbey on 26 May, which was declared a national day of prayer. [60] [61] The Archbishop of Canterbury led prayers "for our soldiers in dire peril in France". Similar prayers were offered in synagogues and churches throughout the UK that day, confirming to the public their suspicion of the desperate plight of the troops. [62] Just before 7 pm on 26 May, Churchill ordered Dynamo to begin, by which time 28,000 men had already departed. [27] Initial plans called for the recovery of 45,000 men from the BEF within two days, at which time German troops were expected to block further evacuation. Only 25,000 men escaped during this period, including 7,669 on the first day. [63] [64]
On 27 May, the first full day of the evacuation, one cruiser , eight destroyers , and 26 other craft were active. [65] Admiralty officers combed nearby boatyards for small craft that could ferry personnel from the beaches out to larger craft in the harbour, as well as larger vessels that could load from the docks. An emergency call was put out for additional help, and by 31 May nearly four hundred small craft were voluntarily and enthusiastically taking part in the effort. [66] The same day, the Luftwaffe heavily bombed Dunkirk, both the town and the dock installations. As the water supply was knocked out, the resulting fires could not be extinguished. [67] An estimated thousand civilians were killed, one-third of the remaining population of the town. [68] The Luftwaffe was met by 16 squadrons of the Royal Air Force, who claimed 38 kills on 27 May while losing 14 aircraft. [67] [69] Altogether, over 3,500 sorties were flown in support of Operation Dynamo. [69] The RAF continued to take a heavy toll on the German bombers throughout the week. Soldiers being bombed and strafed while awaiting transport were for the most part unaware of the efforts of the RAF to protect them, as most of the dogfights took place far from the beaches. As a result, many British soldiers bitterly accused the airmen of doing nothing to help. [70]
On 25 and 26 May, the Luftwaffe focused their attention on Allied pockets holding out at Calais, Lille , and Amiens , and did not attack Dunkirk. [68] Calais, held by the BEF, surrendered on 26 May. [71] (Remnants of the French First Army, surrounded at Lille , fought off seven German divisions (several of them armoured) until 31 May, when the remaining 35,000 soldiers were forced to surrender, having run out of food and ammunition.) [72] [73]

28 May – 4 June
The Belgian Army surrendered on 28 May, [74] leaving a large gap to the east of Dunkirk. Several British divisions were rushed in to cover that side. [75] On 30 May, Churchill received word that all British divisions were now behind the defensive lines, along with more than half of the French First Army. [72] By this time, the perimeter ran along a series of canals about 7 miles (11 km) from the coast, in marshy country not suitable for tanks. [76] With the docks in the harbour rendered unusable by German air attacks, senior naval officer Captain (later Admiral) William Tennant initially ordered men to be evacuated from the beaches. When this proved too slow, he re-routed the evacuees to two long stone and concrete breakwaters, called the East and West Mole, as well as the beaches. Almost 200,000 troops embarked on ships from the East Mole (which stretched nearly a mile out to sea) over the next week. [77] On 28 May, 17,804 soldiers arrived at British ports. [64] On 29 May, 47,310 British troops were rescued. [64]
The next day, an additional 53,823 men were embarked, [7] including the first French soldiers. [78] Lord Gort and 68,014 men were evacuated on 31 May, [79] leaving Major-General Harold Alexander in command of the rearguard. [80] A further 64,429 Allied soldiers departed on 1 June, [64] before the increasing air attacks prevented further daylight evacuation. [81] The British rearguard of 4,000 men left on the night of 2–3 June. [82] An additional 75,000 French troops were retrieved over the nights of 2–4 June, [64] [83] before the operation finally ended. The remainder of the rearguard—40,000 French troops—surrendered on 4 June. [82] Churchill made a point of stating in his We shall fight on the beaches address in the House on 4 June, that the evacuation had been made possible through the efforts of the RAF. [70]

Navy

Evacuation routes
Three routes were allocated to the evacuating vessels. The shortest was Route Z, a distance of 39 nautical miles (72 km), but it entailed hugging the French coast and thus ships using it were subject to bombardment from on-shore batteries, particularly in daylight hours. [84] [85] Route X, although the safest from shore batteries, travelled through a particularly heavily mined portion of the Channel. Ships on this route travelled 55 nautical miles (102 km) north out of Dunkirk, proceeded through the Ruytingen Pass, [86] and headed towards the North Goodwin Lightship before heading south around the Goodwin Sands to Dover. [84] [85] The route was safest from surface attacks, but the nearby minefields and sand banks meant it could not be used at night. [87] The longest of the three was Route Y, a distance of 87 nautical miles (161 km); using this route increased the sailing time to four hours, double the time required for Route Z. This route followed the French coast as far as Bray-Dunes , then turned north-east until reaching the Kwinte Buoy. [88] Here, after making an almost 270 degree turn, the ships sailed west to the North Goodwin Lightship and headed south around the Goodwin Sands to Dover. [84] [85] Ships on Route Y were the most likely to be attacked by German surface vessels, submarines, and the Luftwaffe. [89]

Ships
The Royal Navy provided the anti-aircraft cruiser HMS Calcutta , 39 destroyers, and many other craft. The Merchant Navy supplied passenger ferries, hospital ships, and other vessels. Britain's Belgian, Dutch, and French allies provided vessels as well. Admiral Ramsay arranged for around a thousand copies to be made of the required charts, had buoys laid around the Goodwin Sands and down to Dunkirk, and organised the flow of shipping. [87] Larger ships such as destroyers were able to carry about 900 men per trip. The soldiers mostly travelled on the upper decks for fear of being trapped below if the ship sank. [91] After the loss on 29 May of 19 British and French navy ships plus three of the larger requisitioned vessels, the Admiralty withdrew their eight best destroyers for the future defence of the country. [92]

Little ships
A wide variety of small vessels from all over the south of England were pressed into service to aid in the Dunkirk evacuation. They included speedboats, Thames vessels, car ferries, pleasure craft , and many other types of small craft. [94] The most useful proved to be the motor lifeboats , which had a reasonably good capacity and speed. [94] Some boats were requisitioned without the owner's knowledge or consent. Agents of the Ministry of Shipping , accompanied by a naval officer, scoured the Thames for likely looking vessels, had them checked for seaworthiness, and took them downriver to Sheerness , where naval crews were to be placed aboard. Due to shortages of personnel, many small craft crossed the Channel with civilian crews. [95]
The first of the "little ships" arrived at Dunkirk on 28 May. [91] The wide sand beaches meant that large vessels could not get anywhere near the shore, and even small craft had to stop about 100 yards (91 m) from the waterline and wait for the soldiers to wade out. [96] In many cases, personnel would abandon their boat upon reaching a larger ship, and subsequent evacuees had to wait for boats to drift ashore with the tide before they could make use of them. [97] In most areas on the beaches, soldiers queued up with their units and patiently awaited their turn to leave. But at times, panicky soldiers had to be warned off at gunpoint when they attempted to rush to the boats out of turn. [98] In addition to ferrying out on boats, soldiers at De Panne and Bray-Dunes constructed improvised jetties by driving rows of abandoned vehicles onto the beach at low tide, anchoring them with sandbags, and connecting them with wooden walkways. [99]

Aftermath

Analysis
Before the operation was completed, the prognosis had been gloomy, with Churchill warning the House of Commons on 28 May to expect "hard and heavy tidings". [100] Subsequently, Churchill referred to the outcome as a "miracle", and the British press presented the evacuation as a "disaster turned to triumph" so successfully, that Churchill had to remind the country, in a speech to the House of Commons on 4 June, that "we must be very careful not to assign to this deliverance the attributes of a victory. Wars are not won by evacuations." [7]
Three British divisions and a host of logistic and labour troops were cut off to the south of the Somme by the German "race to the sea". At the end of May, a further two divisions began moving to France with the hope of establishing a Second BEF . The majority of the 51st (Highland) Division was forced to surrender on 12 June, but almost 192,000 Allied personnel, 144,000 of them British, were evacuated through various French ports from 15–25 June under the codename Operation Ariel. [101] The Germans marched into Paris on 14 June and France surrendered eight days later. [102]
More than 100,000 evacuated French troops were quickly and efficiently shuttled to camps in various parts of south-western England, where they were temporarily lodged before being repatriated. [103] British ships ferried French troops to Brest, Cherbourg, and other ports in Normandy and Brittany , although only about half of the repatriated troops were deployed against the Germans before the surrender of France. For many French soldiers, the Dunkirk evacuation represented only a few weeks' delay before being killed or captured by the German army after their return to France. [104] Of the French soldiers evacuated from France in June 1940, about 3,000 joined Charles de Gaulle 's Free French army in Britain. [105]
In France, the unilateral British decision to evacuate through Dunkirk rather than counter-attack to the south, and the perceived preference of the Royal Navy for evacuating British forces at the expense of the French, led to some bitter resentment. According to Churchill, French Admiral François Darlan originally ordered that the British forces should receive preference, but on 31 May, he intervened at a meeting in Paris to order that the evacuation should proceed on equal terms and that the British would form the rearguard. [106] In fact, the 35,000 men who finally surrendered after covering the final evacuations were mostly French soldiers of 2nd Light Mechanized Division and the 68th Infantry Division . [107] [108] Their resistance allowed the evacuation effort to be extended to 4 June, on which date another 26,175 Frenchmen were transported to England. [64]
The evacuation was presented to the German public as an overwhelming and decisive German victory. On 5 June 1940, Hitler stated "Dunkirk has fallen! 40,000 French and English troops are all that remains of the formerly great armies. Immeasurable quantities of material have been captured. The greatest battle in the history of the world has come to an end". [a] [109] Oberkommando der Wehrmacht (OKW, the German armed forces high command) announced the event as "the greatest annihilation battle of all time". [110]

Casualties
The BEF lost 68,000 soldiers (dead, wounded, missing, or captured) from 10 May until the surrender of France on 22 June. [111] 3,500 British were killed [112] and 13,053 wounded. [113] All the heavy equipment had to be abandoned. Left behind in France were 2,472 guns, 20,000 motorcycles, and almost 65,000 other vehicles; also abandoned were 416,000 short tons (377,000 t ) of stores, more than 75,000 short tons (68,000 t) of ammunition and 162,000 short tons (147,000 t) of fuel. [114] Almost all of the 445 British tanks that had been sent to France with the BEF were abandoned. [115]
Six British and three French destroyers were sunk, along with nine other major vessels. In addition, 19 destroyers were damaged. [116] Over 200 British and Allied sea craft were sunk, with a similar number damaged. [117] The Royal Navy's most significant losses in the operation were six destroyers:
The French Navy lost three destroyers:
The RAF lost 145 aircraft, of which at least 42 were Spitfires , while the Luftwaffe lost 156 aircraft in operations in the nine days of Operation Dynamo. [122] The Royal Navy claimed the destruction of 35 Luftwaffe aircraft during the period from 27 May to 1 June and damage to another 21 aircraft. [123] Aircraft losses from 10 May until the fall of France were 959 for the British and 1,279 for the Germans. [124]
For every seven soldiers who escaped through Dunkirk, one man was left behind as a prisoner of war . The majority of these prisoners were sent on forced marches into Germany. Many of the prisoners were marched to the city of Trier , with the march taking as long as 20 days. Others were marched to the river Scheldt and were sent by barge to the Ruhr . The prisoners were then sent by rail to prisoner of war camps in Germany. [125] The majority (those below the rank of corporal) then worked in German industry and agriculture for the remainder of the war. [126]
The missing dead of the BEF are commemorated on the Dunkirk Memorial .

Dunkirk jack
The St George's Cross defaced with the arms of Dunkirk flown from the jack staff is the warranted house flag of the Association of Dunkirk Little Ships. It is known as the Dunkirk jack . The flag is flown only by civilian vessels that took part in the Dunkirk rescue operation. [127] [ third-party source needed ]

See also

Notes

Citations

Bibliography

Further reading

External links
WebPage index: 00015
Augustine of Canterbury
Augustine of Canterbury (born first third of the 6th century – died probably 26 May 604) was a Benedictine monk who became the first Archbishop of Canterbury in the year 597. He is considered the "Apostle to the English" and a founder of the English Church. [3]
Augustine was the prior of a monastery in Rome when Pope Gregory the Great chose him in 595 to lead a mission, usually known as the Gregorian mission , to Britain to Christianize King Æthelberht and his Kingdom of Kent from Anglo-Saxon paganism . Kent was probably chosen because Æthelberht had married a Christian princess, Bertha , daughter of Charibert I the King of Paris , who was expected to exert some influence over her husband. Before reaching Kent, the missionaries had considered turning back, but Gregory urged them on, and in 597, Augustine landed on the Isle of Thanet and proceeded to Æthelberht's main town of Canterbury .
King Æthelberht converted to Christianity and allowed the missionaries to preach freely, giving them land to found a monastery outside the city walls. Augustine was consecrated as a bishop and converted many of the king's subjects, including thousands during a mass baptism on Christmas Day in 597. Pope Gregory sent more missionaries in 601, along with encouraging letters and gifts for the churches, although attempts to persuade the native Celtic bishops to submit to Augustine's authority failed. Roman bishops were established at London and Rochester in 604, and a school was founded to train Anglo-Saxon priests and missionaries. Augustine also arranged the consecration of his successor, Laurence of Canterbury . The archbishop probably died in 604 and was soon revered as a saint .

Background to the mission
After the withdrawal of the Roman legions from their province of Britannia in 410, the inhabitants were left to defend themselves against the attacks of the Saxons . Before the Roman withdrawal, Britannia had been converted to Christianity and produced the ascetic Pelagius . [4] [5] Britain sent three bishops to the Council of Arles in 314, and a Gaulish bishop went to the island in 396 to help settle disciplinary matters. [6] Material remains testify to a growing presence of Christians, at least until around 360. [7] After the Roman legions departed, pagan tribes settled the southern parts of the island while western Britain, beyond the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms, remained Christian. This native British Church developed in isolation from Rome under the influence of missionaries from Ireland [4] [5] and was centred on monasteries instead of bishoprics. Other distinguishing characteristics were its calculation of the date of Easter and the style of the tonsure haircut that clerics wore. [5] [8] Evidence for the survival of Christianity in the eastern part of Britain during this time includes the survival of the cult of Saint Alban and the occurrence in place names of eccles , derived from the Latin ecclesia , meaning "church". [9] There is no evidence that these native Christians tried to convert the Anglo-Saxons. [10] [11] The invasions destroyed most remnants of Roman civilisation in the areas held by the Saxons and related tribes, including the economic and religious structures. [12]
It was against this background that Pope Gregory I decided to send a mission, often called the Gregorian mission, to convert the Anglo-Saxons to Christianity in 595. [13] [14] The Kingdom of Kent was ruled by Æthelberht, who married a Christian princess named Bertha before 588, [15] and perhaps earlier than 560. [16] Bertha was the daughter of Charibert I, one of the Merovingian kings of the Franks . As one of the conditions of her marriage, she brought a bishop named Liudhard with her to Kent. [17] Together in Canterbury, they restored a church that dated to Roman times [18] —possibly the current St Martin's Church . Æthelberht was a pagan at this point but allowed his wife freedom of worship. One biographer of Bertha states that under his wife's influence, Æthelberht asked Pope Gregory to send missionaries. [17] The historian Ian N. Wood feels that the initiative came from the Kentish court as well as the queen. [19] Other historians, however, believe that Gregory initiated the mission, although the exact reasons remain unclear. Bede , an 8th-century monk who wrote a history of the English church, recorded a famous story in which Gregory saw fair-haired Saxon slaves from Britain in the Roman slave market and was inspired to try to convert their people. [b] [21] More practical matters, such as the acquisition of new provinces acknowledging the primacy of the papacy, and a desire to influence the emerging power of the Kentish kingdom under Æthelberht, were probably involved. [18] The mission may have been an outgrowth of the missionary efforts against the Lombards who, as pagans and Arian Christians, were not on good relations with the Catholic church in Rome. [22]
Aside from Æthelberht's granting of freedom of worship to his wife, the choice of Kent was probably dictated by a number of other factors. Kent was the dominant power in southeastern Britain. Since the eclipse of King Ceawlin of Wessex in 592, Æthelberht was the leading Anglo-Saxon ruler; Bede refers to Æthelberht as having imperium (overlordship) south of the River Humber . Trade between the Franks and Æthelberht's kingdom was well established, and the language barrier between the two regions was apparently only a minor obstacle, as the interpreters for the mission came from the Franks. Lastly, Kent's proximity to the Franks allowed support from a Christian area. [23] There is some evidence, including Gregory's letters to Frankish kings in support of the mission, that some of the Franks felt that they had a claim to overlordship over some of the southern British kingdoms at this time. The presence of a Frankish bishop could also have lent credence to claims of overlordship, if Bertha's Bishop Liudhard was felt to be acting as a representative of the Frankish church and not merely as a spiritual advisor to the queen. Frankish influence was not merely political; archaeological remains attest to a cultural influence as well. [24]
In 595, Gregory chose Augustine, who was the prior of the Abbey of St Andrew's in Rome, to head the mission to Kent. [13] The pope selected monks to accompany Augustine and sought support from the Frankish royalty and clergy in a series of letters, of which some copies survive in Rome. He wrote to King Theuderic II of Burgundy and to King Theudebert II of Austrasia , as well as their grandmother Brunhild , seeking aid for the mission. Gregory thanked King Chlothar II of Neustria for aiding Augustine. Besides hospitality, the Frankish bishops and kings provided interpreters and Frankish priests to accompany the mission. [25] By soliciting help from the Frankish kings and bishops, Gregory helped to assure a friendly reception for Augustine in Kent, as Æthelbert was unlikely to mistreat a mission which visibly had the support of his wife's relatives and people. [26] Moreover, the Franks appreciated the chance to participate in mission that would extend their influence in Kent. Chlothar, in particular, needed a friendly realm across the Channel to help guard his kingdom's flanks against his fellow Frankish kings. [27]
Sources make no mention of why Pope Gregory chose a monk to head the mission. Pope Gregory once wrote to Æthelberht complimenting Augustine's knowledge of the Bible , so Augustine was evidently well educated. Other qualifications included administrative ability, for Gregory was the abbot of St Andrews as well as being pope, which left the day-to-day running of the abbey to Augustine, the prior. [28]

Arrival and first efforts
Augustine was accompanied by Laurence of Canterbury, his eventual successor to the archbishopric , and a group of about 40 companions, some of whom were monks. [15] Soon after leaving Rome, the missionaries halted, daunted by the nature of the task before them. They sent Augustine back to Rome to request papal permission to return. Gregory refused and sent Augustine back with letters encouraging the missionaries to persevere. [29] In 597, Augustine and his companions landed in Kent. [15] They achieved some initial success soon after their arrival: [22] [28] Æthelberht permitted the missionaries to settle and preach in his capital of Canterbury where they used the church of St Martin's for services. [30] Neither Bede nor Gregory mentions the date of Æthelberht's conversion, [31] but it probably took place in 597. [30] [c] In the early medieval period, large-scale conversions required the ruler's conversion first, and Augustine is recorded as making large numbers of converts within a year of his arrival in Kent. [30] Also, by 601, Gregory was writing to both Æthelberht and Bertha, calling the king his son and referring to his baptism. [d] A late medieval tradition, recorded by the 15th-century chronicler Thomas Elmham , gives the date of the king's conversion as Whit Sunday , or 2 June 597; there is no reason to doubt this date, although there is no other evidence for it. [30] Against a date in 597 is a letter of Gregory's to Patriarch Eulogius of Alexandria in June 598, which mentions the number of converts made by Augustine, but does not mention any baptism of the king. However, it is clear that by 601 the king had been converted. [32] His baptism likely took place at Canterbury. [33]
Augustine established his episcopal see at Canterbury. [22] It is not clear when and where Augustine was consecrated as a bishop. Bede, writing about a century later, states that Augustine was consecrated by the Frankish Archbishop Ætherius of Arles , Gaul (France) after the conversion of Æthelberht. Contemporary letters from Pope Gregory, however, refer to Augustine as a bishop before he arrived in England. A letter of Gregory's from September 597 calls Augustine a bishop, and one dated ten months later says Augustine had been consecrated on Gregory's command by bishops of the German lands. [34] The historian R. A. Markus discusses the various theories of when and where Augustine was consecrated, and suggests he was consecrated before arriving in England, but argues the evidence does not permit deciding exactly where this took place. [35]
Soon after his arrival, Augustine founded the monastery of Saints Peter and Paul , which later became St Augustine's Abbey , [22] on land donated by the king. [36] This foundation has often been claimed as the first Benedictine abbey outside Italy, and that by founding it, Augustine introduced the Rule of St. Benedict into England, but there is no evidence the abbey followed the Benedictine Rule at the time of its foundation. [37] In a letter Gregory wrote to the patriarch of Alexandria in 598, he claimed that more than 10,000 Christians had been baptised; the number may be exaggerated but there is no reason to doubt that a mass conversion took place. [15] [28] However, there were probably some Christians already in Kent before Augustine arrived, remnants of the Christians who lived in Britain in the later Roman Empire. [11] Little literary traces remain of them, however. [38] One other effect of the king's conversion by Augustine's mission was that the Frankish influence on the southern kingdoms of Britain was decreased. [39]
After these conversions, Augustine sent Laurence back to Rome with a report of his success, along with questions about the mission. [40] Bede records the letter and Gregory's replies in chapter 27 of his Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum ; this section of the History is usually known as the Libellus responsionum . [41] [42] Augustine asked for Gregory's advice on a number of issues, including how to organise the church, the punishment for church robbers, guidance on who was allowed to marry whom, and the consecration of bishops. Other topics were relations between the churches of Britain and Gaul, childbirth and baptism, and when it was lawful for people to receive communion and for a priest to celebrate mass. [42]
Further missionaries were sent from Rome in 601. They brought a pallium for Augustine and a present of sacred vessels, vestments , relics , and books. [e] The pallium was the symbol of metropolitan status, and signified that Augustine was now an archbishop unambiguously associated with the Holy See. Along with the pallium, a letter from Gregory directed the new archbishop to consecrate 12 suffragan bishops as soon as possible and to send a bishop to York . Gregory's plan was that there would be two metropolitans, one at York and one at London, with 12 suffragan bishops under each archbishop. As part of this plan, Augustine was expected to transfer his archiepiscopal see to London from Canterbury. The move from Canterbury to London never happened; no contemporary sources give the reason, [47] but it was probably because London was not part of Æthelberht's domains. Instead, London was part of the kingdom of Essex , ruled by Æthelberht's nephew Saebert of Essex , who converted to Christianity in 604. [18] [48] The historian S. Brechter has suggested that the metropolitan see was indeed moved to London, and that it was only with the abandonment of London as a see after the death of Æthelberht that Canterbury became the archiepiscopal see. This theory contradicts Bede's version of events, however. [49]

Additional work
In 604, Augustine founded two more bishoprics in Britain. Two men who had come to Britain with him in 601 were consecrated, Mellitus as Bishop of London and Justus as Bishop of Rochester . [18] [50] [51] Bede relates that Augustine, with the help of the king, "recovered" a church built by Roman Christians in Canterbury. [52] [f] It is not clear if Bede meant that Augustine rebuilt the church or that Augustine merely reconsecrated a building that had been used for pagan worship. Archaeological evidence seems to support the latter interpretation; in 1973 the remains of an aisled building dating from the Romano-British period were uncovered just south of the present Canterbury Cathedral . [52] The historian Ian Wood argues that the existence of the Libellus points to more contact between Augustine and the native Christians because the topics covered in the work are not restricted to conversion from paganism, but also dealt with relations between differing styles of Christianity. [55]
Augustine failed to extend his authority to the Christians in Wales and Dumnonia to the west. Gregory had decreed that these Christians should submit to Augustine and that their bishops should obey him, [56] apparently believing that more of the Roman governmental and ecclesiastical organisation survived in Britain than was actually the case. [57] According to the narrative of Bede, the Britons in these regions viewed Augustine with uncertainty, and their suspicion was compounded by a diplomatic misjudgement on Augustine's part. [58] In 603, Augustine and Æthelberht summoned the British bishops to a meeting south of the Severn. These guests retired early to confer with their people, [59] who, according to Bede, advised them to judge Augustine based upon the respect he displayed at their next meeting. When Augustine failed to rise from his seat on the entrance of the British bishops, [60] they refused to recognise him as their archbishop. [59] [61] There were, however, deep differences between Augustine and the British church that perhaps played a more significant role in preventing an agreement. At issue were the tonsure, the observance of Easter, and practical and deep-rooted differences in approach to asceticism, missionary endeavours, and how the church itself was organised. [58] Some historians believe that Augustine had no real understanding of the history and traditions of the British church, damaging his relations with their bishops. [61] Also, there were political dimensions involved, as Augustine's efforts were sponsored by the Kentish king, and at this period the Wessex and Mercian kingdoms were expanding to the west, into areas held by the Britons. [62]

Further success
Gregory also instructed Augustine on other matters. Temples were to be consecrated for Christian use, [63] and feasts, if possible, moved to days celebrating Christian martyrs. One religious site was revealed to be a shrine of a local St Sixtus, whose worshippers were unaware of details of the martyr's life or death. They may have been native Christians, but Augustine did not treat them as such. When Gregory was informed, he told Augustine to stop the cult and use the shrine for the Roman St Sixtus . [64]
Gregory legislated on the behaviour of the laity and the clergy. He placed the new mission directly under papal authority and made it clear that English bishops would have no authority over Frankish counterparts nor vice versa. Other directives dealt with the training of native clergy and the missionaries' conduct. [65]
The King's School, Canterbury claims Augustine as its founder, which would make it the world's oldest existing school, but the first documentary records of the school date from the 16th century. [66] Augustine did establish a school, and soon after his death Canterbury was able to send teachers out to support the East Anglian mission. [67] Augustine received liturgical books from the pope, but their exact contents are unknown. They may have been some of the new mass books that were being written at this time. The exact liturgy that Augustine introduced to England remains unknown, but it would have been a form of the Latin language liturgy in use at Rome. [68]

Death and legacy
Before his death, Augustine consecrated Laurence of Canterbury as his successor to the archbishopric, probably to ensure an orderly transfer of office. [69] Although at the time of Augustine's death, 26 May 604, [22] the mission barely extended beyond Kent, his undertaking introduced a more active missionary style into the British Isles. Despite the earlier presence of Christians in Ireland and Wales, no efforts had been made to try to convert the Saxon invaders. Augustine was sent to convert the descendants of those invaders, and eventually became the decisive influence in Christianity in the British Isles. [58] [70] Much of his success came about because of Augustine's close relationship with Æthelberht, which gave the archbishop time to establish himself. [71] Augustine's example also influenced the great missionary efforts of the Anglo-Saxon Church. [72] [73]
Augustine's body was originally buried in the portico of what is now St Augustine's, Canterbury, [36] but it was later exhumed and placed in a tomb within the abbey church, which became a place of pilgrimage and veneration. After the Norman Conquest the cult of St Augustine was actively promoted. [22] After the Conquest, his shrine in St Augustine's Abbey held a central position in one of the axial chapels, flanked by the shrines of his successors Laurence and Mellitus. [74] King Henry I of England granted St. Augustine's Abbey a six-day fair around the date on which Augustine's relics were translated to his new shrine, from 8 September through 13 September. [75]
A life of Augustine was written by Goscelin around 1090, but this life portrays Augustine in a different light than Bede's account. Goscelin's account has little new historical content, mainly being filled with miracles and imagined speeches. [76] Building on this account, later medieval writers continued to add new miracles and stories to Augustine's life, often quite fanciful. [77] These authors included William of Malmesbury , who claimed that Augustine founded Cerne Abbey , [78] the author (generally believed to be John Brompton ) of a late medieval chronicle containing invented letters from Augustine, [79] and a number of medieval writers who included Augustine in their romances . [80] Another problem with investigating Augustine's saintly cult is the confusion resulting because most medieval liturgical documents mentioning Augustine do not distinguish between Augustine of Canterbury and Augustine of Hippo , a fourth-century saint. Medieval Scandinavian liturgies feature Augustine of Canterbury quite often, however. [81] During the English Reformation , Augustine's shrine was destroyed and his relics were lost.
Augustine's shrine was re-established in March 2012 at the church of St. Augustine in Ramsgate , Kent, very close to the mission's landing site. [82] [83] St Augustine's Cross , a Celtic cross erected in 1884, marks the spot in Ebbsfleet, Thanet , East Kent , where Augustine is said to have landed. [84]

See also

Notes

Citations
WebPage index: 00016
List of historical anniversaries
Condensed list of historical anniversaries .

External links
WebPage index: 00017
Modern rock
Modern rock is rock music made from the 1980s to present day. Some radio stations use the term to distinguish themselves from classic rock , which is based in 1960s-1980s rock music.

Radio format
Modern rock is a rock format commonly found on commercial radio ; the format consists primarily of the alternative rock genre. [1] Generally beginning with late 1970s punk but referring especially to alternative rock music since the 1980s, the phrase "modern rock" is used in the USA to differentiate the music from classic rock , which focuses on music recorded in the 1960s through to the early 1980s.
A few modern rock radio stations existed during the 1980s, such as KROQ-FM in Los Angeles, 91X ( XETRA-FM ) in San Diego, WHTG FM 106.3 (now, WKMK ) on the Jersey Shore , WLIR on Long Island and WFNX in Boston . [1] Modern rock was solidified as a radio format in 1988 with Billboard's creation of the Modern Rock Tracks chart. The chart was based on weighted reports from college radio stations and commercial stations such as those listed above. [2] The 1988 episode of the VH1 show I Love the '80s discussed INXS , The Cure , Morrissey , Depeche Mode , and Erasure as modern rock artists representative of that year. But it was the breakthrough success of the grunge bands Nirvana and Pearl Jam in 1991 that resulted in a large number of American radio stations switching to the format. [1] Modern rock is considered by some to be a specific genre of alternative rock. [3]
The format has gone through two distinct periods, dividing the line from classic modern rock and the current alternative rock format used today. Up until grunge went mainstream, the format featured a wide variety of up-tempo danceable music from a diverse group of artists that were being played in rock discos and clubs. [2] This was a legacy from new wave music and the Second British Invasion that immediately proceeded it. [2] Out of all the artists that had songs hit the top 30 in the first modern rock chart, only seven of them were American. [2] Between 1992 and 1994, most of the female, foreign and dance music had largely disappeared from the chart. [2] While the chart still featured a variety of alternative rock music, it was largely guitar rock created by male Americans. [2] By 1996, the modern rock chart was largely identical to the mainstream rock chart; it was therefore surveying what was then mainstream rock music. [2]
For most of the 2000s, modern rock radio stations mostly featured songs that were crossed over from the active rock format. This was often famous for the second wave of post-grunge and nu metal scenes that derived from grunge and alternative metal music, respectively, in the 1990s. During the early 2000s, these two genres made up most of the modern rock format, despite the format being a heavily diverse format genre-wise (for example, in 2003, it was not uncommon to hear diverse artists like Jack Johnson , Muse , Coheed and Cambria , The Postal Service , The Mars Volta , Junior Senior , Snow Patrol , Story of the Year , The Black Keys , and Kings of Leon all played on the same modern rock station). By the mid-2000s, the two genres were dropped, and the revivals of genres such as post-punk , garage rock , noise rock , and dance-punk (often tagged in as the post-punk revival of that time) took its place but the post-grunge and nu metal genres still had some success.
Today, modern rock serves as an indie-driven radio format featuring new, young and recent indie rock bands and artists. Ranging from genres like reggae , folk , hip hop and EDM , common indie rock artists heard on the format today include Imagine Dragons , Young the Giant , Of Monsters and Men , Atlas Genius , The Neighbourhood , Twenty One Pilots , The 1975 and Bastille . Indie rock remains the main equivalent in modern rock radio as of February 2014.

See also
WebPage index: 00018
Mainstream Rock (chart)
Mainstream Rock is a music chart in Billboard magazine which ranks the most-played songs on mainstream rock radio stations, a category that combines the formats of active rock and heritage rock .

History
The Rock Albums & Top Tracks charts were introduced in the March 21, 1981, issue of Billboard . The 50- and 60-position charts ranked airplay on album rock radio stations. [1] Because album-oriented rock stations focused on playing tracks from albums rather than specifically released singles, these charts were designed to measure the airplay of any and all tracks from an album. Rock Albums was a survey of the top albums on rock radio, while Top Tracks listed the top individual songs being played. Mike Harrison of Billboard explained that when major artists release albums, more than one song from the album can become popular at the same time. [1] The first number-one song on the Top Tracks chart was " I Can't Stand It " by Eric Clapton . [1]
In September 1984, the Rock Albums chart was discontinued and Top Tracks was renamed Top Rock Tracks. [2] It reduced from a 60-song tally to 50 songs on October 20, 1984, following a major revamp to the magazine. Coinciding with an increase in its reporting panel of album rock stations, the name of the chart was changed again with the issue dated April 12, 1986, to Album Rock Tracks. [3] In November 1991, instead of reporting panels, Billboard changed its methodology of measuring airplay by using monitored airplay as provided by Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems to compile many of its charts. As a result, this data showed that many songs could spend months to over a year on the Album Rock Tracks chart. Billboard decided to drop to a 40-position chart (still its current format), and songs that fell out of the top 20 and after spending 20 weeks on the chart were moved to a new 10-position recurrent chart. [4] The recurrent chart was scrapped two years later, but not the methodology.
To differentiate between classic and alternative album rock radio formats, Billboard changed the name of the chart to Mainstream Rock Tracks beginning with issue dated April 13, 1996. [5] The Mainstream Rock Tracks chart did not appear in the print edition of Billboard from its issue dated August 2, 2003, [6] being accessible only through the magazine's subscription-based website, Billboard.biz. In late 2013, the chart was reintroduced to its primary website and magazine.
When R&R ceased publication in June 2009, Billboard incorporated its rock charts, Active Rock and Heritage Rock into its own publication. The radio station reporters of the two charts combine to make up the Mainstream Rock chart. [7] Active rock stations concentrate on current hits over classic rock standards while heritage rock stations put a greater emphasis on classic rock with a few newer tracks mixed in. [8] The individual Active Rock and Heritage Rock components were discontinued by Billboard at the end of November 2013 due to a growing lack of difference between the two charts. [9]

Chart achievements
Shown below are the songs which have spent ten or more weeks at number one on this chart.
21 weeks
20 weeks
17 weeks
16 weeks
15 weeks
14 weeks
13 weeks
12 weeks
11 weeks
10 weeks
WebPage index: 00019
List of five-wicket hauls in women's Twenty20 International cricket
A women's Twenty20 International (T20I) is an international cricket match between two teams, each having T20I status, as determined by the International Cricket Council (ICC). [2] In a women's Twenty20 match, the two teams play a single innings , each of which is restricted to a maximum of 20 overs . [3] The Twenty20 format was originally introduced by the England and Wales Cricket Board for the men's county cricket competition with the first matches contested on 13 June 2003 between the English counties in the Twenty20 Cup . [4] The first women's Twenty20 International match took place on 5 August 2004 when New Zealand defeated England by nine runs at the County Cricket Ground in Hove . [5] [6] This match was held six months before the first men's Twenty20 International , contested between Australia and New Zealand in February 2005. [7]
A five-wicket haul (also known as a "five-for" or "fifer") [8] [9] refers to a bowler taking five or more wickets in a single innings. This is regarded as a notable achievement, [10] especially in the Twenty20 format, as bowlers can bowl no more than four overs in an innings. [11] The first five-wicket haul in a women's T20I match was taken by New Zealand's Amy Satterthwaite against England on 16 August 2007. [12] Satterthwaite took six wickets for 17 runs, [13] the best bowling figures in an innings by a player in the international women's format and the sole six-wicket haul. [1] The most recent five-wicket haul was taken by Molly Strano of Australia against New Zealand in the second match of the three match series at Kardinia Park in Geelong , the first time the venue had hosted an international cricket match. [14] [15] [16] The White Ferns won the rain affected match, the only occurrence which did not result in a victory to the team taking the five-wicket haul. [17] Taking five wickets for just eight runs, the most economical five-wicket haul with an economy rate of 2.00 was taken by Suné Luus of South Africa against Ireland during the 2016 ICC Women's World Twenty20 at the M. A. Chidambaram Stadium in Chennai . [18] [19] Julie Hunter of Australia took the least economical five-wicket haul, bowling with an economy rate of 6.60 against the West Indies in October 2012. [20] The youngest player to take five wickets in an innings is Shaquana Quintyne of the West Indies aged 17 [21] while the oldest at 29 years of age is India 's Jhulan Goswami . [22]
As of 19 May 2017 [update] , from a total of 383 matches, [23] 12 five-wicket hauls have been taken by 11 different players in women's T20Is. [24] Anisa Mohammed of the West Indies is the only bowler to have achieved the feat twice. [25] [26] Five-wicket hauls have been taken by players from six of the ten teams that hold Twenty20 International status. Players from Bangladesh , Ireland, Pakistan , Sri Lanka and the Netherlands , the only other nation to have played a women's T20I, have yet to achieve the milestone. West Indies leads the list with four, followed by Australia, England and India with two five-wicket hauls each. [27] Five-wicket hauls have been taken at eight different grounds, with Kensington Oval in Bridgetown , Barbados leading the list with three followed by R. Premadasa Stadium in Colombo , Sri Lanka, and the County Ground in Somerset , England, with two each. [28]

Key

Five-wicket hauls

Notes
WebPage index: 00020
Media of Indonesia
The media of Indonesia consist of several different types of communications media: television , radio , cinema , newspapers , magazines , and Internet -based Web sites .

History
Media freedom in Indonesia increased considerably after the end of President Suharto 's rule, during which the Ministry of Information monitored and controlled domestic media and restricted foreign media. Long suppressed and harassed by the New Order , the Indonesian press is now among the freest and liveliest in Asia. [1] The trend toward somewhat greater pluralism and openness had begun in the late New Order, when the regime allowed the founding of a number of new television and radio stations. [1] (The television stations all had to be Jakarta -based at first. [1] ) Many of the new television stations enjoyed penetration rates of around 70 to 80 percent of the population within a few years. [1] Although the television licenses were all given to various Suharto family members, cronies , and other wealthy conglomerates, competition for advertising revenue and a large potential national audience meant that some of these stations were tempted to push the boundaries, especially regarding the ban on news programs other than those produced by the state-run Televisi Republik Indonesia (TVRI) . [1] These stations were very lucrative, so it became difficult for the regime to punish its own cronies by shutting down a station if it crossed the line by broadcasting independently produced news. [1] Surya Citra Televisi (SCTV) and Rajawali Citra Televisi Indonesia (RCTI) news programs, in particular, were very popular with viewers across the country as an alternative, albeit still relatively tame, to the stultifying TVRI. [1]
In 2003 the authorities reported that more than 2,000 illegal TV and radio stations were broadcasting across the country. [ citation needed ] The government urged them to apply for licences, or face closure. [ citation needed ]

News media
The number of printed publications has increased significantly since 1998. [ citation needed ] There are hundreds of new magazines, newspapers, and tabloids. [ citation needed ] More than 50 principal daily newspapers are published throughout the archipelago, the majority in Java. [1] Those with the largest readership are Kompas (Jakarta), circulation of 523,000; Suara Merdeka ( Semarang ), circulation of 200,000; Berita Buana (Jakarta), circulation of 150,000; Pikiran Rakyat ( Bandung ), circulation of 150,000; and Sinar Indonesia Baru ( Medan ), also with a circulation of 150,000. [1] The largest English-language dailies, both published in Jakarta with print runs of 40,000, are the Jakarta Post and the Jakarta Globe . [1] As of 2003, newspapers have a penetration rate of 8.6 percent. [2] The principal weekly news magazines are Tempo , which also produces an English-language edition, and Gatra . [1] All of these newspapers and magazines have online editions as well. [1]
Several leading Indonesian newspaper such as Kompas can be obtained at digital newspaper printing services in several foreign countries. [ citation needed ] Some large newspapers also use remote digital printing to solve the distribution problems in remote areas in Indonesia. [ citation needed ]
ANTARA is the official news agency of the government of Indonesia.
The National Press Monument has a collection of over a million newspapers and magazines, [3] as well as a variety of exhibitions and artefacts related to the history of the press in Indonesia.

Television
Television is regulated by the government through the Directorate General of Radio, Television, and Film . [1] Television and radio traditionally have been dominated by government networks, but private commercial channels have been emerging since the introduction of RCTI in the Jakarta area in 1988. [4] By early in the new century, the improved communications system had brought television signals to every village in the country, and most Indonesians could choose from 11 channels. [4] In addition to the state-owned TVRI , there were 10 national private channels, the best known are Indosiar , RCTI, SCTV, Metro TV , and Trans 7 . [4] Some channels have a specific orientation, for instance, Global TV , which initially offered broadcasts from MTV Indonesia , and MNCTV (formerly Indonesian Educational Television, or TPI), which originally carried only educational programming but expanded into quiz programs, sports, reality shows, and other popular entertainment. [4] There were also 54 local television stations in 2009, such as Bali TV in Bali , Jak TV in Jakarta, and Pacific TV in Manado . [4]

Radio
Radio, like television, is regulated by the government through the Directorate General of Radio, Television, and Film. [1] There are about 3,000 live radio stations throughout Indonesia, but only a few broadcast nationally. [4] Examples include Jakarta News , Sonora , and Prambors in the nation's capital; JJFM , Radio DJ , and Radio Istra in Surabaya ; Swaragama in Yogyakarta ; and Global FM Bali in Denpasar . [4] Private radio stations carry their own news bulletins and foreign broadcasters can supply programmes. [ citation needed ] Radio Republik Indonesia (RRI) is the state radio network of Indonesia. It has a national news network, as well as regional stations in major cities throughout the country. Voice of Indonesia is its division for overseas broadcasting.
There are now also several digital radio stations in Jakarta and Surabaya, based on Digital Audio Broadcasting (DAB) and Hybrid HD-Radio ( IBOC ). [ citation needed ] There are also several Indonesian radio stations that stream live on the internet.

Internet
In 2016, 88 million Indonesians used the Internet, of which 93% used smartphones, 5% tablets and 11% computers. Broadband reached 8% of the households. [5]

Media freedom
Since the transition to democracy, thousands of new print publications and radio stations have started up across the country, and more television broadcasters, including regional stations, have licenses. [1] The government cannot revoke these publishing and broadcasting licenses based on what the outlets write and say. [1] President Abdurrahman Wahid further weakened the government's ability to control the media when he abolished the Ministry of Information at the outset of his administration. [1] The censorship board for motion pictures ( Indonesian Film Censorship Board , Lembaga Sensor Film ) remained in existence, however, mainly to police "public morality" (nudity, sexuality) rather than political statements, and President Megawati Sukarnoputri reestablished the Ministry of Information on her ascension to power. [1] In the absence of significant government repression, spurious defamation lawsuits by private individuals have become the principal means of stifling media scrutiny. [1] The most prominent of these cases involved businessman Tomy Winata , who sued Tempo editor-in-chief Bambang Harymurti . [1] Harymurti was convicted and given a one-year prison sentence, which the Supreme Court overturned. [1]

See also
WebPage index: 00021
Writing system
A writing system is any conventional method of visually representing verbal communication . While both writing and speech are useful in conveying messages , writing differs in also being a reliable form of information storage and transfer . [1] The processes of encoding and decoding writing systems involve shared understanding between writers and readers of the meaning behind the sets of characters that make up a script. Writing is usually recorded onto a durable medium , such as paper or electronic storage , although non-durable methods may also be used, such as writing on a computer display , in sand, or by skywriting .
The general attributes of writing systems can be placed into broad categories such as alphabets , syllabaries , or logographies . Any particular system can have attributes of more than one category. In the alphabetic category, there is a standard set of letters (basic written symbols or graphemes ) of consonants and vowels that encode based on the general principle that the letters (or letter pair/groups) represent speech sounds . In a syllabary, each symbol correlates to a syllable or mora . In a logography, each character represents a word, morpheme , or other semantic units. Other categories include abjads , which differ from alphabets in that vowels are not indicated, and abugidas or alphasyllabaries, with each character representing a consonant–vowel pairing. Alphabets typically use a set of 20-to-35 symbols to fully express a language, whereas syllabaries can have 80-to-100, and logographies can have several hundreds of symbols.
Most systems will typically have an ordering of its symbol elements so that groups of them can be coded into larger clusters like words or acronyms (generally lexemes ), giving rise to many more possibilities ( permutations ) in meanings than the symbols can convey by themselves. Systems will also enable the stringing together of these smaller groupings (sometimes referred to by the generic term 'character strings') in order to enable a full expression of the language. The reading step can be accomplished purely in the mind as an internal process, or expressed orally . A special set of symbols known as punctuation is used to aid in structure and organization of many writing systems and can be used to help capture nuances and variations in the message's meaning that are communicated verbally by cues in timing , tone , accent , inflection or intonation . A writing system will also typically have a method for formatting recorded messages that follows the spoken version's rules like its grammar and syntax so that the reader will have the meaning of the intended message accurately preserved.
Writing systems were preceded by proto-writing , which used pictograms , ideograms and other mnemonic symbols. Proto-writing lacked the ability to capture and express a full range of thoughts and ideas. The invention of writing systems, which dates back to the beginning of the Bronze Age in the late Neolithic Era of the late 4th millennium BC , enabled the accurate durable recording of human history in a manner that was not prone to the same types of error to which oral history is vulnerable. Soon after, writing provided a reliable form of long distance communication. With the advent of publishing , it provided the medium for an early form of mass communication .
The creation of a new alphabetic writing system for a language with an existing logographic writing system is called alphabetization, as when the People’s Republic of China studied the prospect of alphabetizing the Chinese languages with Latin script , Cyrillic script , Arabic script , and even numbers, [2] although the most common instance of it, converting to Latin script, is usually called romanization .

General properties
Writing systems are distinguished from other possible symbolic communication systems in that a writing system is always associated with at least one spoken language . In contrast, visual representations such as drawings, paintings, and non-verbal items on maps, such as contour lines, are not language-related. Some symbols on information signs, such as the symbols for male and female, are also not language related, but can grow to become part of language if they are often used in conjunction with other language elements. Some other symbols, such as numerals and the ampersand , are not directly linked to any specific language, but are often used in writing and thus must be considered part of writing systems.
Every human community possesses language, which many regard as an innate and defining condition of humanity. However, the development of writing systems, and the process by which they have supplanted traditional oral systems of communication, have been sporadic, uneven and slow. Once established, writing systems generally change more slowly than their spoken counterparts. Thus they often preserve features and expressions which are no longer current in the spoken language. One of the great benefits of writing systems is that they can preserve a permanent record of information expressed in a language.
All writing systems require:

Basic terminology
In the examination of individual scripts, the study of writing systems has developed along partially independent lines. Thus, the terminology employed differs somewhat from field to field.

Text, writing, reading and orthography
The generic term text [4] refers to an instance of written or spoken material with the latter been transcribed in some way. The act of composing and recording a text may be referred to as writing , [5] and the act of viewing and interpreting the text as reading . [6] Orthography refers to the method and rules of observed writing structure (literal meaning, "correct writing"), and particularly for alphabetic systems, includes the concept of spelling .

Grapheme and phoneme
A grapheme is a specific base unit of a writing system. Graphemes are the minimally significant elements which taken together comprise the set of "building blocks" out of which texts made up of one or more writing systems may be constructed, along with rules of correspondence and use. The concept is similar to that of the phoneme used in the study of spoken languages. For example, in the Latin -based writing system of standard contemporary English, examples of graphemes include the majuscule and minuscule forms of the twenty-six letters of the alphabet (corresponding to various phonemes), marks of punctuation (mostly non-phonemic), and a few other symbols such as those for numerals (logograms for numbers).
An individual grapheme may be represented in a wide variety of ways, where each variation is visually distinct in some regard, but all are interpreted as representing the "same" grapheme. These individual variations are known as allographs of a grapheme (compare with the term allophone used in linguistic study). For example, the minuscule letter a has different allographs when written as a cursive , block , or typed letter. The choice of a particular allograph may be influenced by the medium used, the writing instrument , the stylistic choice of the writer, the preceding and following graphemes in the text, the time available for writing, the intended audience, and the largely unconscious features of an individual's handwriting .

Glyph, sign and character
The terms glyph , sign and character are sometimes used to refer to a grapheme. Common usage varies from discipline to discipline; compare cuneiform sign , Maya glyph , Chinese character . The glyphs of most writing systems are made up of lines (or strokes) and are therefore called linear , but there are glyphs in non-linear writing systems made up of other types of marks, such as Cuneiform and Braille .

Complete and partial writing systems
Writing systems may be regarded as complete according to the extent to which they are able to represent all that may be expressed in the spoken language, while a partial writing system is limited in what it can convey. [7]

Writing systems, languages and conceptual systems
Writing systems can be independent from languages, we can have multiple writing systems for a language, e.g., Hindi and Urdu ; [8] and we can have one writing system for multiple languages, e.g., the Arabic script . Chinese characters were also borrowed by variant countries as their early writing systems, e.g., the early writing systems of Vietnamese language until the beginning of the 20th century.
To represent a conceptual system , we use one or more languages, e.g., mathematics is a conceptual system [9] and we may use first-order logic and a natural language together in representation.

History
Writing systems were preceded by proto-writing , systems of ideographic and/or early mnemonic symbols. The best known examples are:
The invention of the first writing systems is roughly contemporary with the beginning of the Bronze Age in the late Neolithic [ dubious – discuss ] of the late 4th millennium BC . The Sumerian archaic cuneiform script and the Egyptian hieroglyphs are generally considered the earliest writing systems, both emerging out of their ancestral proto-literate symbol systems from 3400 to 3200 BC with earliest coherent texts from about 2600 BC . It is generally agreed that Sumerian writing was an independent invention; however, it is debated whether Egyptian writing was developed completely independently of Sumerian, or was a case of cultural diffusion .
A similar debate exists for the Chinese script , which developed around 1200 BC. Chinese script are probably an independent invention, because there is no evidence of contact between China and the literate civilizations of the Near East, [10] and because of the distinct differences between the Mesopotamian and Chinese approaches to logography and phonetic representation. [11]
The pre-Columbian Mesoamerican writing systems (including among others Olmec and Maya scripts ) are generally believed to have had independent origins.
A hieroglyphic writing system used by pre-colonial Mi'kmaq , that was observed by missionaries from the 17th to 19th centuries, is thought to have developed independently. Although, there is some debate over whether or not this was a fully formed system or just a series of mnemonic pictographs.
It is thought that the first consonantal alphabetic writing appeared before 2000 BC, as a representation of language developed by Semitic tribes in the Sinai-peninsula (see History of the alphabet ). Most other alphabets in the world today either descended from this one innovation, many via the Phoenician alphabet , or were directly inspired by its design.
The first true alphabet is the Greek script which consistently represents vowels since 800 BC. [12] [13] The Latin alphabet , a direct descendant, is by far the most common writing system in use. [14]

Functional classification
Several approaches have been taken to classify writing systems, the most common and basic one is a broad division into three categories: logographic , syllabic , and alphabetic (or segmental ); however, all three may be found in any given writing system in varying proportions, often making it difficult to categorise a system uniquely. The term complex system is sometimes used to describe those where the admixture makes classification problematic. Modern linguists regard such approaches, including Diringer's [15]
as too simplistic, often considering the categories to be incomparable. Hill [16] split writing into three major categories of linguistic analysis, one of which covers discourses and is not usually considered writing proper:
DeFrancis, [17] criticizing Sampson's [18] introduction of semasiographic writing and featural alphabets stresses the phonographic quality of writing proper
Faber [19] categorizes phonographic writing by two levels, linearity and coding:

Logographic systems
A logogram is a single written character which represents a complete grammatical word. Most Chinese characters are classified as logograms.
As each character represents a single word (or, more precisely, a morpheme ), many logograms are required to write all the words of language. The vast array of logograms and the memorization of what they mean are major disadvantages of logographic systems over alphabetic systems. However, since the meaning is inherent to the symbol, the same logographic system can theoretically be used to represent different languages. In practice, the ability to communicate across languages only works for the closely related varieties of Chinese , as differences in syntax reduce the crosslinguistic portability of a given logographic system. Japanese uses Chinese logograms extensively in its writing systems, with most of the symbols carrying the same or similar meanings. However, the grammatical differences between Japanese and Chinese are significant enough that a long Chinese text is not readily understandable to a Japanese reader without any knowledge of basic Chinese grammar , though short and concise phrases such as those on signs and newspaper headlines are much easier to comprehend.
While most languages do not use wholly logographic writing systems, many languages use some logograms. A good example of modern western logograms are the Hindu-Arabic numerals : everyone who uses those symbols understands what 1 means whether he or she calls it one , eins , uno , yi , ichi , ehad , ena , or jedan . Other western logograms include the ampersand & , used for and , the at sign @ , used in many contexts for at , the percent sign % and the many signs representing units of currency ( $ , ¢ , € , £ , ¥ and so on.)
Logograms are sometimes called ideograms , a word that refers to symbols which graphically represent abstract ideas, but linguists avoid this use, as Chinese characters are often semantic – phonetic compounds, symbols which include an element that represents the meaning and a phonetic complement element that represents the pronunciation. Some nonlinguists distinguish between lexigraphy and ideography, where symbols in lexigraphies represent words and symbols in ideographies represent words or morphemes.
The most important (and, to a degree, the only surviving) modern logographic writing system is the Chinese one, whose characters have been used with varying degrees of modification in varieties of Chinese , Japanese , Korean , Vietnamese , and other east Asian languages . Ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs and the Mayan writing system are also systems with certain logographic features, although they have marked phonetic features as well and are no longer in current use. Vietnamese speakers switched to the Latin alphabet in the 20th century and the use of Chinese characters in Korean is increasingly rare. The Japanese writing system includes several distinct forms of writing including logography.

Syllabic systems: syllabary
Another type of writing system with systematic syllabic linear symbols, the abugidas , is discussed below as well.
As logographic writing systems use a single symbol for an entire word, a syllabary is a set of written symbols that represent (or approximate) syllables , which make up words . A symbol in a syllabary typically represents a consonant sound followed by a vowel sound, or just a vowel alone.
In a "true syllabary", there is no systematic graphic similarity between phonetically related characters (though some do have graphic similarity for the vowels). That is, the characters for /ke/ , /ka/ and /ko/ have no similarity to indicate their common "k" sound (voiceless velar plosive). More recent creations such as the Cree syllabary embody a system of varying signs, which can best be seen when arranging the syllabogram set in an onset – coda or onset– rime table.
Syllabaries are best suited to languages with relatively simple syllable structure, such as Japanese. The English language , on the other hand, allows complex syllable structures, with a relatively large inventory of vowels and complex consonant clusters , making it cumbersome to write English words with a syllabary. To write English using a syllabary, every possible syllable in English would have to have a separate symbol, and whereas the number of possible syllables in Japanese is around 100, in English there are approximately 15,000 to 16,000.
However, syllabaries with much larger inventories do exist. The Yi script , for example, contains 756 different symbols (or 1,164, if symbols with a particular tone diacritic are counted as separate syllables, as in Unicode ). The Chinese script , when used to write Middle Chinese and the modern varieties of Chinese , also represents syllables, and includes separate glyphs for nearly all of the many thousands of syllables in Middle Chinese ; however, because it primarily represents morphemes and includes different characters to represent homophonous morphemes with different meanings, it is normally considered a logographic script rather than a syllabary.
Other languages that use true syllabaries include Mycenaean Greek ( Linear B ) and Indigenous languages of the Americas such as Cherokee . Several languages of the Ancient Near East used forms of cuneiform , which is a syllabary with some non-syllabic elements.

Segmental systems: Alphabets
An alphabet is a small set of letters (basic written symbols), each of which roughly represents or represented historically a phoneme of a spoken language . The word alphabet is derived from alpha and beta , the first two symbols of the Greek alphabet .
The first type of alphabet that was developed was the abjad . An abjad is an alphabetic writing system where there is one symbol per consonant. Abjads differ from other alphabets in that they have characters only for consonantal sounds. Vowels are not usually marked in abjads.
All known abjads (except maybe Tifinagh ) belong to the Semitic family of scripts, and derive from the original Northern Linear Abjad . The reason for this is that Semitic languages and the related Berber languages have a morphemic structure which makes the denotation of vowels redundant in most cases.
Some abjads, like Arabic and Hebrew, have markings for vowels as well. However, they use them only in special contexts, such as for teaching. Many scripts derived from abjads have been extended with vowel symbols to become full alphabets. Of these, the most famous example is the derivation of the Greek alphabet from the Phoenician abjad. This has mostly happened when the script was adapted to a non-Semitic language.
The term abjad takes its name from the old order of the Arabic alphabet 's consonants 'alif, bā', jīm, dāl, though the word may have earlier roots in Phoenician or Ugaritic . "Abjad" is still the word for alphabet in Arabic , Malay and Indonesian .
An abugida is an alphabetic writing system whose basic signs denote consonants with an inherent vowel and where consistent modifications of the basic sign indicate other following vowels than the inherent one.
Thus, in an abugida there may or may not be a sign for "k" with no vowel, but also one for "ka" (if "a" is the inherent vowel), and "ke" is written by modifying the "ka" sign in a way that is consistent with how one would modify "la" to get "le". In many abugidas the modification is the addition of a vowel sign, but other possibilities are imaginable (and used), such as rotation of the basic sign, addition of diacritical marks and so on.
The contrast with "true syllabaries " is that the latter have one distinct symbol per possible syllable, and the signs for each syllable have no systematic graphic similarity. The graphic similarity of most abugidas comes from the fact that they are derived from abjads, and the consonants make up the symbols with the inherent vowel and the new vowel symbols are markings added on to the base symbol.
In the Ge'ez script , for which the linguistic term abugida was named, the vowel modifications do not always appear systematic, although they originally were more so. Canadian Aboriginal syllabics can be considered abugidas, although they are rarely thought of in those terms. The largest single group of abugidas is the Brahmic family of scripts, however, which includes nearly all the scripts used in India and Southeast Asia .
The name abugida is derived from the first four characters of an order of the Ge'ez script used in some contexts. It was borrowed from Ethiopian languages as a linguistic term by Peter T. Daniels .

Featural systems
A featural script represents finer detail than an alphabet. Here symbols do not represent whole phonemes, but rather the elements (features) that make up the phonemes, such as voicing or its place of articulation . Theoretically, each feature could be written with a separate letter; and abjads or abugidas, or indeed syllabaries, could be featural, but the only prominent system of this sort is Korean hangul . In hangul, the featural symbols are combined into alphabetic letters, and these letters are in turn joined into syllabic blocks, so that the system combines three levels of phonological representation.
Many scholars, e.g. John DeFrancis , reject this class or at least labeling hangul as such. [ citation needed ] The Korean script is a conscious script creation by literate experts, which Daniels calls a "sophisticated grammatogeny ". [ citation needed ] These include stenographies and constructed scripts of hobbyists and fiction writers (such as Tengwar ), many of which feature advanced graphic designs corresponding to phonologic properties. The basic unit of writing in these systems can map to anything from phonemes to words. It has been shown that even the Latin script has sub-character "features". [20]

Ambiguous systems
Most writing systems are not purely one type. The English writing system, for example, includes numerals and other logograms such as #, $, and &, and the phonemic letter clusters are a complex match to sound [ clarification needed ] . As mentioned above, all logographic systems have phonetic components as well, whether along the lines of a syllabary, such as Chinese ("logo-syllabic"), or an abjad, as in Egyptian ("logo-consonantal").
Some scripts, however, are truly ambiguous. The semi-syllabaries of ancient Spain were syllabic for plosives such as p , t , k , but alphabetic for other consonants. In some versions, vowels were written redundantly after syllabic letters, conforming to an alphabetic orthography. Old Persian cuneiform was similar. Of 23 consonants (including null), seven were fully syllabic, thirteen were purely alphabetic, and for the other three, there was one letter for /C u / and another for both /C a / and /C i /. However, all vowels were written overtly regardless; as in the Brahmic abugidas, the /C a / letter was used for a bare consonant.
The zhuyin phonetic glossing script for Chinese divides syllables in two or three, but into onset , medial , and rime rather than consonant and vowel. Pahawh Hmong is similar, but can be considered to divide syllables into either onset-rime or consonant-vowel (all consonant clusters and diphthongs are written with single letters); as the latter, it is equivalent to an abugida but with the roles of consonant and vowel reversed. Other scripts are intermediate between the categories of alphabet, abjad and abugida, so there may be disagreement on how they should be classified.

Graphic classification
Perhaps the primary graphic distinction made in classifications is that of linearity . Linear writing systems are those in which the characters are composed of lines, such as the Latin alphabet and Chinese characters . Chinese characters are considered linear whether they are written with a ball-point pen or a calligraphic brush, or cast in bronze. Similarly, Egyptian hieroglyphs and Maya glyphs were often painted in linear outline form, but in formal contexts they were carved in bas-relief . The earliest examples of writing are linear: the Sumerian script of c. 3300 BC was linear, though its cuneiform descendants were not. Non-linear systems, on the other hand, such as braille , are not composed of lines, no matter what instrument is used to write them.
Cuneiform was probably the earliest non-linear writing. Its glyphs were formed by pressing the end of a reed stylus into moist clay, not by tracing lines in the clay with the stylus as had been done previously. The result was a radical transformation of the appearance of the script.
Braille is a non-linear adaptation of the Latin alphabet that completely abandoned the Latin forms. The letters are composed of raised bumps on the writing substrate , which can be leather ( Louis Braille 's original material), stiff paper, plastic or metal.
There are also transient non-linear adaptations of the Latin alphabet, including Morse code , the manual alphabets of various sign languages , and semaphore, in which flags or bars are positioned at prescribed angles. However, if "writing" is defined as a potentially permanent means of recording information, then these systems do not qualify as writing at all, since the symbols disappear as soon as they are used. (Instead, these transient systems serve as signals .)

Directionality
Scripts are also graphically characterized by the direction in which they are written. Egyptian hieroglyphs were written either left to right or right to left, with the animal and human glyphs turned to face the beginning of the line. The early alphabet could be written in multiple directions: [21] horizontally (side to side), or vertically (up or down). Prior to standardization, alphabetical writing was done both left-to-right (LTR or sinistrodextrally) and right-to-left (RTL or dextrosinistrally). It was most commonly written boustrophedonically : starting in one (horizontal) direction, then turning at the end of the line and reversing direction.
The Greek alphabet and its successors settled on a left-to-right pattern, from the top to the bottom of the page. Other scripts, such as Arabic and Hebrew , came to be written right-to-left. Scripts that incorporate Chinese characters have traditionally been written vertically (top-to-bottom), from the right to the left of the page, but nowadays are frequently written left-to-right, top-to-bottom, due to Western influence, a growing need to accommodate terms in the Latin script , and technical limitations in popular electronic document formats. Chinese characters sometimes, as in signage, especially when signifying something old or traditional, may also be written from right to left. The Old Uyghur alphabet and its descendants are unique in being written top-to-bottom, left-to-right; this direction originated from an ancestral Semitic direction by rotating the page 90° counter-clockwise to conform to the appearance of vertical Chinese writing. Several scripts used in the Philippines and Indonesia , such as Hanunó'o , are traditionally written with lines moving away from the writer, from bottom to top, but are read horizontally left to right. While Ogham is written bottom to top and read vertically, commonly on the corner of a stone.

On computers
In computers and telecommunication systems, writing systems are generally not codified as such, [ clarification needed ] but graphemes and other grapheme-like units that are required for text processing are represented by " characters " that typically manifest in encoded form. There are many character encoding standards and related technologies , such as ISO/IEC 8859-1 (a character repertoire and encoding scheme oriented toward the Latin script), CJK (Chinese, Japanese, Korean) and bi-directional text . Today, many such standards are re-defined in a collective standard, the ISO / IEC 10646 " Universal Character Set ", and a parallel, closely related expanded work, The Unicode Standard . Both are generally encompassed by the term Unicode . In Unicode, each character, in every language's writing system, is (simplifying slightly) given a unique identification number, known as its code point . Computer operating systems use code points to look up characters in the font file, so the characters can be displayed on the page or screen.
A keyboard is the device most commonly used for writing via computer. Each key is associated with a standard code which the keyboard sends to the computer when it is pressed. By using a combination of alphabetic keys with modifier keys such as Ctrl , Alt , Shift and AltGr , various character codes are generated and sent to the CPU . The operating system intercepts and converts those signals to the appropriate characters based on the keyboard layout and input method , and then delivers those converted codes and characters to the running application software , which in turn looks up the appropriate glyph in the currently used font file, and requests the operating system to draw these on the screen .

See also
WebPage index: 00022
Alexa Internet
Alexa Internet, Inc. is a California-based company that provides commercial web traffic data and analytics. It is a wholly owned subsidiary of Amazon.com .
Founded as an independent company in 1996, Alexa was acquired by Amazon in 1999. Its toolbar collects data on browsing behavior and transmits them to the Alexa website, where they are stored and analyzed. This is the basis for the company's web traffic reporting. According to its website, Alexa provides traffic data, global rankings, and other information on 30 million websites. [4] As of 2015, its website has been visited by over 6.5 million people monthly. [3]

Operations and history

1996–1999
Alexa Internet was founded in April 1996 by American web entrepreneurs Brewster Kahle and Bruce Gilliat . [5] The company's name was chosen in homage to the Library of Alexandria of Ptolemaic Egypt , drawing a parallel between the largest repository of knowledge in the ancient world and the potential of the Internet to become a similar store of knowledge. [6] Alexa initially offered a toolbar that gave Internet users suggestions on where to go next, based on the traffic patterns of its user community. The company also offered context for each site visited: to whom it was registered, how many pages it had, how many other sites pointed to it, and how frequently it was updated. [7] Alexa's operations grew to include archiving of web pages as they are crawled . This database served as the basis for the creation of the Internet Archive accessible through the Wayback Machine . [8] In 1998, the company donated a copy of the archive, two terabytes in size, to the Library of Congress . [6]
Alexa continues to supply the Internet Archive with Web crawls. In 1999, as the company moved away from its original vision of providing an "intelligent" search engine, Alexa was acquired by Amazon.com for approximately US$250 million in Amazon stock . [9]

2000–2009
Alexa began a partnership with Google in early 2002, and with the web directory DMOZ in January 2003. [1] In May 2006, Google was replaced with Bing (at the time known as Windows Live Search ) as a provider of search results. [10]
In December 2006, Amazon released Alexa Image Search. Built in-house, it was the first major application built on the company's Web platform. In December 2005, Alexa opened its extensive search index and Web-crawling facilities to third-party programs through a comprehensive set of Web services and APIs . These could be used, for instance, to construct vertical search engines that could run on Alexa's own servers or elsewhere. In May 2007, Alexa changed their API to limit comparisons to three websites, reduce the size of embedded graphs in Flash , and add mandatory embedded BritePic advertisements.
In April 2007, the company filed a lawsuit, Alexa v. Hornbaker, to stop trademark infringement by the Statsaholic service. [11] In the lawsuit, Alexa alleged that Ron Hornbaker was stealing traffic graphs for profit, and that the primary purpose of his site was to display graphs that were generated by Alexa's servers. [12] Hornbaker removed the term Alexa from his service name on March 19, 2007. [13] On November 27, 2008, Amazon announced that Alexa Web Search was no longer accepting new customers, and that the service would be deprecated or discontinued for existing customers on January 26, 2009. [14] Thereafter, Alexa became a purely analytics-focused company.
On March 31, 2009, Alexa launched a major website redesign. The redesigned site provided new web traffic metrics—including average page views per individual user, bounce rate, and user time on site. [15] In the following weeks, Alexa added more features, including visitor demographics, clickstream and search traffic statistics. [16] Alexa introduced these new features to compete with other web analytics services.

Tracking

Toolbar
Alexa ranks sites based primarily on tracking a sample set of Internet traffic—users of its toolbar for the Internet Explorer , Firefox and Google Chrome web browsers. [17] [18] The Alexa Toolbar includes a popup blocker , a search box, links to Amazon.com and the Alexa homepage, and the Alexa ranking of the site that the user is visiting. It also allows the user to rate the site and view links to external, relevant sites. In early 2005, Alexa stated that there had been 10 million downloads of the toolbar, though the company did not provide statistics about active usage. Originally, web pages were only ranked amongst users who had the Alexa Toolbar installed, and could be biased if a specific audience subgroup was reluctant to take part in the rankings. This caused some controversies over how representative Alexa's user base was of typical Internet behavior, [19] especially for less-visited sites. [18] In 2007, Michael Arrington provided examples of Alexa rankings known to contradict data from the comScore web analytics service, including ranking YouTube ahead of Google. [20]
Until 2007, a third-party -supplied plugin for the Firefox browser [21] served as the only option for Firefox users after Amazon abandoned its A9 toolbar. [22] On July 16, 2007, Alexa released an official toolbar for Firefox called Sparky. [23] On 16 April 2008, many users reported drastic shifts in their Alexa rankings. Alexa confirmed this later in the day with an announcement that they had released an updated ranking system, claiming that they would now take into account more sources of data "beyond Alexa Toolbar users". [24] [25]

Certified statistics
Using the Alexa Pro service, website owners can sign up for "certified statistics", which allows Alexa more access to a site's traffic data. [26] Site owners input JavaScript code on each page of their website that, if permitted by the user's security and privacy settings, runs and sends traffic data to Alexa, allowing Alexa to display—or not display, depending on the owner's preference—more accurate statistics such as total pageviews and unique pageviews.

Privacy and malware assessments
A number of antivirus companies have assessed Alexa's toolbar. The toolbar for Internet Explorer 7 was at one point flagged as malware by Microsoft Defender . [27] Symantec classifies the toolbar as "trackware", [28] while McAfee classifies it as adware , deeming it a "potentially unwanted program." [29] McAfee Site Advisor rates the Alexa site as "green", finding "no significant problems" but warning of a "small fraction of downloads ... that some people consider adware or other potentially unwanted programs." [30] Though it is possible to delete a paid subscription within an Alexa account, it is not possible to delete an account that is created at Alexa through any web interface, though any user may contact the company via its support webpage. [31]

See also
WebPage index: 00023
LAMP (software bundle)
LAMP is an archetypal model of web service stacks , named as an acronym of the names of its original four open-source components: the Linux operating system , the Apache HTTP Server , the MySQL relational database management system (RDBMS), and the PHP programming language . The LAMP components are largely interchangeable and not limited to the original selection. As a solution stack, LAMP is suitable for building dynamic web sites and web applications . [1]
Since its creation, the LAMP model has been adapted to other componentry, though typically consisting of free and open-source software . For example, an equivalent installation on the Microsoft Windows family of operating systems is known as WAMP .

Overview
Originally popularized from the phrase "Linux, Apache, MySQL, and PHP", the acronym "LAMP" now refers to a generic software stack model. The modularity of a LAMP stack may vary, but this particular software combination has become popular because it is entirely free and open-source software . [ citation needed ] This means that each component can be interchanged and adapted without overt vendor lock-in , and that the complete software stack is available free of cost. The components of the LAMP stack are present in the software repositories of most Linux distributions , providing a LAMP stack with some automation [ clarification needed ] . [ citation needed ]
The LAMP bundle can be combined with many other free and open-source software packages, such as the following:
As another example, the software which Wikipedia and other Wikimedia projects use for their underlying infrastructure is a customized LAMP stack with additions such as Linux Virtual Server (LVS) for load balancing and Ceph and Swift for distributed object storages. [ citation needed ]

Variants
With the growing use of the archetypal LAMP, variations and retronyms appeared for other combinations of operating system, web server, database, and software language. For example, an equivalent installation on the Microsoft Windows operating system family is known as WAMP. An alternative running IIS in place of Apache is called WIMP . Variants involving other operating systems include MAMP ( OS X ), SAMP ( Solaris ), FAMP ( FreeBSD ), iAMP ( iSeries ) and XAMPP (cross-platform).
The web server or database management system also varies. LEMP is a version where Apache has been replaced with the more lightweight web server Nginx . [2] A version where MySQL has been replaced by PostgreSQL is called LAPP, or sometimes by keeping the original acronym, LAMP (Linux / Apache / Middleware (Perl, PHP, Python, Ruby) / PostgreSQL). [3]

Software components

Linux
Linux is a Unix-like computer operating system assembled under the model of free and open source software development and distribution. Most Linux distributions , as collections of software based around the Linux kernel and often around a package management system , provide complete LAMP setups through their packages . According to W3Techs in October 2013, 58.5% of web server market share was shared between Debian and Ubuntu , while RHEL , Fedora and CentOS together shared 37.3%. [4]

Apache
The role of LAMP's web server has been traditionally supplied by Apache, and has since included other web servers such as Nginx .
The Apache HTTP Server has been the most popular web server on the public Internet. In June 2013, Netcraft estimated that Apache served 54.2% of all active websites and 53.3% of the top servers across all domains. [5] In June 2014, Apache was estimated to serve 52.27% of all active websites, followed by nginx with 14.36%. [6]
Apache is developed and maintained by an open community of developers under the auspices of the Apache Software Foundation . Released under the Apache License , Apache is open-source software . A wide variety of features are supported, and many of them are implemented as compiled modules which extend the core functionality of Apache. These can range from server-side programming language support to authentication schemes.

MySQL and alternatives
MySQL's original role as the LAMP's relational database management system (RDBMS) has since been alternately provisioned by other RDBMSs such as MariaDB or PostgreSQL , or even NoSQL databases such as MongoDB .
MySQL is a multithreaded , multi-user , SQL database management system (DBMS), [7] acquired by Sun Microsystems in 2008, which was then acquired by Oracle Corporation in 2010. [8] [9] Since its early years, the MySQL team has made its source code available under the terms of the GNU General Public License , as well as under a variety of proprietary agreements.
MariaDB is a community-developed fork of MySQL, led by its original developers. PostgreSQL is also an ACID-compliant relational database, unrelated to MySQL.
MongoDB is a widely used open-source NoSQL database that eschews the traditional table-based relational database structure in favor of JSON -like documents with dynamic schemas (calling the format BSON ), making the integration of data in certain types of applications easier and faster.

PHP and alternatives
PHP's role as the LAMP's application programming language has also been performed by other languages such as Perl and Python .
PHP is a server-side scripting language designed for web development but also used as a general-purpose programming language . PHP code is interpreted by a web server via a PHP processor module, which generates the resulting web page. PHP commands can optionally be embedded directly into an HTML source document rather than calling an external file to process data. It has also evolved to include a command-line interface capability and can be used in standalone graphical applications . [10]
PHP is free software released under the terms of PHP License , which is incompatible with the GNU General Public License (GPL) due to the restrictions PHP License places on the usage of the term PHP . [11]
Perl is a family of high-level , general-purpose, interpreted, dynamic programming languages . The languages in this family include Perl 5 and Perl 6 . [12] They provide advanced text processing facilities without the arbitrary data-length limits of many contemporary Unix commandline tools , [13] facilitating manipulation of text files . Perl 5 gained widespread popularity in the late 1990s as a CGI scripting language for the Web, in part due to its parsing abilities. [14]
Python is a widely used general-purpose high-level programming language. [15] Python supports multiple programming paradigms , including object-oriented , imperative , functional and procedural paradigms. It features a dynamic type system, automatic memory management , a standard library , and strict use of whitespace . [16] Like other dynamic languages , Python is often used as a scripting language , but is also used in a wide range of non-scripting contexts.

High availability and load balancing
Specific solutions are required for websites that serve large numbers of requests, or provide services that demand high uptime . High-availability approaches for the LAMP stack may involve multiple web and database servers, combined with additional components that perform logical aggregation of resources provided by each of the servers, as well as distribution of the workload across multiple servers. The aggregation of web servers may be provided by placing a load balancer in front of them, for example by using Linux Virtual Server (LVS). For the aggregation of database servers, MySQL provides internal replication mechanisms that implement a master/slave relationship between the original database (master) and its copies (slaves). [17]
Such high-availability setups may also improve the availability of LAMP instances by providing various forms of redundancy , making it possible for a certain number of components (separate servers) to experience downtime without interrupting the users of services provided by a LAMP instance as a whole. Such redundant setups may also handle hardware failures resulting in data loss on individual servers in a way that prevents collectively stored data from actually becoming lost. Beside higher availability, such LAMP setups are capable of providing almost linear improvements in performance for services having the number of internal database read operations much higher than the number of write/update operations. [17]

See also
WebPage index: 00024
Wiki
A wiki ( i / ˈ w ɪ k i / WIK -ee ) is a website that provides collaborative modification of its content and structure directly from the web browser . In a typical wiki, text is written using a simplified markup language and often edited with the help of a rich-text editor . [1] A wiki is run using wiki software , otherwise known as a wiki engine. There are dozens of different wiki engines in use, both standalone and part of other software, such as bug tracking systems . Some wiki engines are open source , whereas others are proprietary. Some permit control over different functions (levels of access); for example, editing rights may permit changing, adding or removing material. Others may permit access without enforcing access control. Other rules may also be imposed to organize content. A wiki engine is a type of content management system , but it differs from most other such systems, including blog software , in that the content is created without any defined owner or leader, and wikis have little implicit structure, allowing structure to emerge according to the needs of the users. [2]
The online encyclopedia project Wikipedia is by far the most popular wiki-based website, and is one of the most widely viewed sites of any kind in the world, having been ranked in the top ten since 2007. [3] Wikipedia is not a single wiki but rather a collection of hundreds of wikis, one for each language. There are at least tens of thousands of other wikis in use, both public and private, including wikis functioning as knowledge management resources, notetaking tools, community websites and intranets . The English-language Wikipedia has the largest collection of articles; as of September 2016, it had over five million articles. Ward Cunningham , the developer of the first wiki software, WikiWikiWeb , originally described it as "the simplest online database that could possibly work". [4] " Wiki " (pronounced [ˈwiki] [note 1] ) is a Hawaiian word meaning "quick". [5] [6] [7]

Characteristics
Ward Cunningham and co-author Bo Leuf , in their book The Wiki Way: Quick Collaboration on the Web , described the essence of the Wiki concept as follows: [8]
A wiki enables communities of editors and contributors to write documents collaboratively. All that people require to contribute is a computer, Internet access, a web browser and a basic understanding of a simple markup language (e.g., HTML ). A single page in a wiki website is referred to as a "wiki page", while the entire collection of pages, which are usually well-interconnected by hyperlinks , is "the wiki". A wiki is essentially a database for creating, browsing, and searching through information. A wiki allows non-linear, evolving, complex and networked text, while also allowing for editor argument, debate and interaction regarding the content and formatting. [9] A defining characteristic of wiki technology is the ease with which pages can be created and updated. Generally, there is no review by a moderator or gatekeeper before modifications are accepted and thus lead to changes on the website. Many wikis are open to alteration by the general public without requiring registration of user accounts. Many edits can be made in real-time and appear almost instantly online. However, this feature facilitates abuse of the system. Private wiki servers require user authentication to edit pages, and sometimes even to read them. Maged N. Kamel Boulos , Cito Maramba and Steve Wheeler write that the open wikis produce a process of Social Darwinism . " 'Unfit' sentences and sections are ruthlessly culled, edited and replaced if they are not considered 'fit', which hopefully results in the evolution of a higher quality and more relevant page. While such openness may invite 'vandalism' and the posting of untrue information, this same openness also makes it possible to rapidly correct or restore a 'quality' wiki page." [10]

Editing
Some wikis have an "edit" button or link directly on the page being viewed, if the user has permission to edit the page. This leads to an "editing page" where participants structure and format wiki pages with a simplified markup language, sometimes known as wiki markup or wikitext. For example, starting lines of text with an asterisks creates a bulleted list . The style and syntax of wikitexts can vary greatly among wiki implementations, [ example needed ] some of which also allow HTML tags. Wikis favour plain-text editing, with fewer and simpler conventions than HTML, for indicating style and structure. Although limiting access to HTML and Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) of wikis limits user ability to alter the structure and formatting of wiki content, there are some benefits. Limited access to CSS promotes consistency in the look and feel, and having JavaScript disabled prevents a user from implementing code that may limit other users' access.
Wikis can make WYSIWYG editing available to users, usually by means of JavaScript control that translates graphically entered formatting instructions into the corresponding HTML tags or wikitext. In those implementations, the markup of a newly edited, marked-up version of the page is generated and submitted to the server transparently , shielding the user from this technical detail. An example of this is the VisualEditor on Wikipedia. However, WYSIWYG controls do not always provide all of the features available in wikitext, and some users prefer not to use a WYSIWYG editor. Hence, many of these sites offer some means to edit the wikitext directly.
Some wikis keep a record of changes made to wiki pages; often, every version of the page is stored. This means that authors can revert to an older version of the page, should it be necessary because a mistake has been made, such as the content accidentally being deleted, or the page has been vandalized to include offensive or malicious text or other content. Many implementations, like MediaWiki , allow users to supply an edit summary when they edit a page; this is a short piece of text summarizing the changes they have made (e.g., "corrected grammar" or "fixed formatting in table"). It is not inserted into the article's main text, but is stored along with that revision of the page (often in a log or "history" window), allowing users to explain what has been done and why, and enabling other users to see which changes have been made; this is similar to a log message when making changes to a revision-control system.

Navigation
Within the text of most pages, there are usually a large number of hypertext links to other pages within the wiki. This form of non-linear navigation is more "native" to a wiki than structured/formalized navigation schemes. Users can also create any number of index or table-of-contents pages, with hierarchical categorization or whatever form of organization they like. These may be challenging to maintain "by hand", as multiple authors and users may create and delete pages in an ad hoc , unorganized manner. Wikis can provide one or more ways to categorize or tag pages to support the maintenance of such index pages. Some wikis, including the original, have a backlink feature, which displays all pages that link to a given page. It is also typically possible in a wiki to create links to pages that do not yet exist, as a way to invite others to share what they know about a subject new to the wiki. Wiki users can typically "tag" pages with categories or keywords, to make it easier for other users to find the article. For example, a user creating a new article on cold weather cycling might "tag" this page under the categories of commuting, winter sports and bicycling. This would make it easier for other users to find the article.

Linking and creating pages
Links are created using a specific syntax, the so-called "link pattern". Originally, most wikis [ citation needed ] used CamelCase to name pages and create links. These are produced by capitalizing words in a phrase and removing the spaces between them (the word "CamelCase" is itself an example). While CamelCase makes linking easy, it also leads to links in a form that deviates from the standard spelling. To link to a page with a single-word title, one must abnormally capitalize one of the letters in the word (e.g. "WiKi" instead of "Wiki"). CamelCase-based wikis are instantly recognizable because they have many links with names such as "TableOfContents" and "BeginnerQuestions." It is possible for a wiki to render the visible anchor of such links "pretty" by reinserting spaces, and possibly also reverting to lower case. However, this reprocessing of the link to improve the readability of the anchor is limited by the loss of capitalization information caused by CamelCase reversal. For example, "RichardWagner" should be rendered as "Richard Wagner", whereas "PopularMusic" should be rendered as "popular music". There is no easy way to determine which capital letters should remain capitalized. As a result, many wikis now have "free linking" using brackets, and some disable CamelCase by default.

Searching
Most wikis offer at least a title search , and sometimes a full-text search . The scalability of the search depends on whether the wiki engine uses a database. Some wikis, such as PmWiki , use flat files . [11] MediaWiki's first versions used flat files, but it was rewritten by Lee Daniel Crocker in the early 2000s (decade) to be a database application. Indexed database access is necessary for high speed searches on large wikis. Alternatively, external search engines such as Google Search can sometimes be used on wikis with limited searching functions in order to obtain more precise results.

History
WikiWikiWeb was the first wiki. [12] Ward Cunningham started developing WikiWikiWeb in Portland, Oregon, in 1994, and installed it on the Internet domain c2.com on March 25, 1995. It was named by Cunningham, who remembered a Honolulu International Airport counter employee telling him to take the " Wiki Wiki Shuttle " bus that runs between the airport's terminals. According to Cunningham, "I chose wiki-wiki as an alliterative substitute for 'quick' and thereby avoided naming this stuff quick-web." [13] [14]
Cunningham was, in part, inspired by Apple's HyperCard , which he had used. Hypercard, however, was single-user. [15] Apple had designed a system allowing users to create virtual "card stacks" supporting links among the various cards. Cunningham developed Vannevar Bush 's ideas by allowing users to "comment on and change one another's text." [1] [16] Cunningham says his goals were to link together the experiences of multiple people to create a new literature to document programming patterns , and to harness people's natural desire to talk and tell stories with a technology that would feel comfortable to those not used to "authoring". [15]
Wikipedia became the most famous wiki site, entering the top ten most popular websites in 2007. In the early 2000s (decade), wikis were increasingly adopted in enterprise as collaborative software. Common uses included project communication, intranets, and documentation, initially for technical users. Some companies use wikis as their only collaborative software and as a replacement for static intranets, and some schools and universities use wikis to enhance group learning . There may be greater use of wikis behind firewalls than on the public Internet. On March 15, 2007, the word wiki was listed in the online Oxford English Dictionary . [17]

Alternative definitions
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the word "wiki" was used to refer to both user-editable websites and the software that powers them; the latter definition is still occasionally in use. [2] Wiki inventor Ward Cunningham wrote in 2014 [18] that the word "wiki" should not be used to refer to a single website, but rather to a mass of user-editable pages and or sites, so that a single website is not "a wiki" but "an instance of wiki". He wrote that the concept of wiki federation, in which the same content can be hosted and edited in more than one location in a manner similar to distributed version control , meant that the concept of a single discrete "wiki" no longer made sense. [19]

Implementations
Wiki software is a type of collaborative software that runs a wiki system, allowing web pages to be created and edited using a common web browser. It may be implemented as a series of scripts behind an existing web server , or as a standalone application server that runs on one or more web servers. The content is stored in a file system , and changes to the content are stored in a relational database management system . A commonly implemented software package is MediaWiki , which runs Wikipedia . Alternatively, personal wikis run as a standalone application on a single computer. WikidPad is an example. One application, TiddlyWiki , simply makes use of an even single local HTML file with JavaScript inside.
Wikis can also be created on a " wiki farm ", where the server-side software is implemented by the wiki farm owner. PBwiki , Socialtext , and Wikia are popular examples of such services. Some wiki farms can also make private, password-protected wikis. Note that free wiki farms generally contain advertising on every page. For more information, see Comparison of wiki farms .

Trust and security

Controlling changes
Wikis are generally designed with the philosophy of making it easy to correct mistakes, rather than making it difficult to make them. Thus, while wikis are very open, they provide a means to verify the validity of recent additions to the body of pages. The most prominent, on almost every wiki, is the "Recent Changes" page—a specific list numbering recent edits, or a list of edits made within a given time frame. [20] Some wikis can filter the list to remove minor edits and edits made by automatic importing scripts (" bots "). [21] From the change log, other functions are accessible in most wikis: the revision history shows previous page versions and the diff feature highlights the changes between two revisions. Using the revision history, an editor can view and restore a previous version of the article. The diff feature can be used to decide whether or not this is necessary. A regular wiki user can view the diff of an edit listed on the "Recent Changes" page and, if it is an unacceptable edit, consult the history, restoring a previous revision; this process is more or less streamlined, depending on the wiki software used. [22]
In case unacceptable edits are missed on the "recent changes" page, some wiki engines provide additional content control. It can be monitored to ensure that a page, or a set of pages, keeps its quality. A person willing to maintain pages will be warned of modifications to the pages, allowing him or her to verify the validity of new editions quickly. [23] A watchlist is a common implementation of this. Some wikis also implement "patrolled revisions", in which editors with the requisite credentials can mark some edits as not vandalism. A "flagged revisions" system can prevent edits from going live until they have been reviewed. [24]

Trustworthiness and reliability of content
Critics of publicly editable wiki systems argue that these systems could be easily tampered with by malicious individuals ("vandals") or even by well-meaning but unskilled users who introduce errors into the content. While proponents argue that the community of users can catch malicious content and correct it. [1] Lars Aronsson , a data systems specialist, summarizes the controversy as follows: "Most people, when they first learn about the wiki concept, assume that a Web site that can be edited by anybody would soon be rendered useless by destructive input. It sounds like offering free spray cans next to a grey concrete wall. The only likely outcome would be ugly graffiti and simple tagging, and many artistic efforts would not be long lived. Still, it seems to work very well." [12] High editorial standards in medicine and health sciences articles, in which users typically use peer-reviewed journals or university textbooks as sources, have led to the idea of expert-moderated wikis. [25] Some wikis allow one to link to specific versions of articles, which has been useful to the scientific community, in that expert peer reviewers could analyse articles, improve them and provide links to the trusted version of that article. [26] Noveck points out that "participants are accredited by members of the wiki community, who have a vested interest in preserving the quality of the work product, on the basis of their ongoing participation." On controversial topics that have been subject to disruptive editing, a wiki may restrict editing to registered users. [27]

Security
The open philosophy of wiki – allowing anyone to edit content – does not ensure that every editor's intentions are well-mannered. For example, vandalism (changing wiki content to something offensive, adding nonsense or deliberately adding incorrect information, such as hoax information) can be a major problem. On larger wiki sites, such as those run by the Wikimedia Foundation , vandalism can go unnoticed for some period of time. Wikis, because of their open nature, are susceptible to intentional disruption, known as " trolling ". Wikis tend to take a soft-security [28] [ unreliable source ] approach to the problem of vandalism, making damage easy to undo rather than attempting to prevent damage. Larger wikis often employ sophisticated methods, such as bots that automatically identify and revert vandalism and JavaScript enhancements that show characters that have been added in each edit. In this way vandalism can be limited to just "minor vandalism" or "sneaky vandalism", where the characters added/eliminated are so few that bots do not identify them and users do not pay much attention to them. [29] [ unreliable source ] An example of a bot that reverts vandalism on Wikipedia is ClueBot NG. ClueBot NG can revert edits, often within minutes, if not seconds. The bot uses machine learning in lieu of heuristics . [30]
The amount of vandalism a wiki receives depends on how open the wiki is. For instance, some wikis allow unregistered users, identified by their IP addresses , to edit content, while others limit this function to just registered users. Most wikis allow anonymous editing without an account, [31] but give registered users additional editing functions; on most wikis, becoming a registered user is a short and simple process. Some wikis require an additional waiting period before gaining access to certain tools. For example, on the English Wikipedia , registered users can rename pages only if their account is at least four days old and has made at least ten edits. Other wikis such as the Portuguese Wikipedia use an editing requirement instead of a time requirement, granting extra tools after the user has made a certain number of edits to prove their trustworthiness and usefulness as an editor. Vandalism of Wikipedia is common (though policed and usually reverted) because it is extremely open, allowing anyone with a computer and Internet access to edit it, although this makes it grow rapidly. In contrast, Citizendium requires an editor's real name and short autobiography, affecting the growth of the wiki but sometimes helping stop vandalism.
Edit wars can also occur as users repetitively revert a page to the version they favor. In some cases, editors with opposing views of which content should appear or what formatting style should be used will change and re-change each other's edits. This results in the page being "unstable" from a general users' perspective, because each time a general user comes to the page, it may look different. Some wiki software allows an administrator to stop such edit wars by locking a page from further editing until a decision has been made on what version of the page would be most appropriate. [9] Some wikis are in a better position than others to control behavior due to governance structures existing outside the wiki. For instance, a college teacher can create incentives for students to behave themselves on a class wiki they administer by limiting editing to logged-in users and pointing out that all contributions can be traced back to the contributors. Bad behavior can then be dealt with in accordance with university policies. [11] The issue of wiki vandalism is debated. In some cases, when an editor deletes an entire article and replaces it with nonsense content, it may be a "test edit", made by the user as she or he is experimenting with the wiki system. Some editors may not realize that they have damaged the page, or if they do realize it, they may not know how to undo the mistake or restore the content.

Potential malware vector
Malware can also be problem for wikis, as users can add links to sites hosting malicious code. For example, a German Wikipedia article about the Blaster Worm was edited to include a hyperlink to a malicious website. Users of vulnerable Microsoft Windows systems who followed the link would be infected. [9] A countermeasure is the use of software that prevents users from saving an edit that contains a link to a site listed on a blacklist of malware sites. [32]

Communities

Applications
The English Wikipedia has the largest user base among wikis on the World Wide Web [33] and ranks in the top 10 among all Web sites in terms of traffic. [34] Other large wikis include the WikiWikiWeb , Memory Alpha , Wikivoyage and Susning.nu , a Swedish-language knowledge base. Medical and health-related wiki examples include Ganfyd , an online collaborative medical reference that is edited by medical professionals and invited non-medical experts. [10] Many wiki communities are private, particularly within enterprises . They are often used as internal documentation for in-house systems and applications. Some companies use wikis to allow customers to help produce software documentation. [35] A study of corporate wiki users found that they could be divided into "synthesizers" and "adders" of content. Synthesizers' frequency of contribution was affected more by their impact on other wiki users, while adders' contribution frequency was affected more by being able to accomplish their immediate work. [36] from a study of 1000s of wiki deployments,Jonathan Grudin concluded careful stakeholder analysis and education are crucial to successful wiki deployment. [37]
In 2005, the Gartner Group, noting the increasing popularity of wikis, estimated that they would become mainstream collaboration tools in at least 50% of companies by 2009. [38] [ needs update ] Wikis can be used for project management . [39] [40] [ unreliable source ] Wikis have also been used in the academic community for sharing and dissemination of information across institutional and international boundaries. [41] In those settings, they have been found useful for collaboration on grant writing , strategic planning , departmental documentation, and committee work. [42] In the mid-2000s (decade), the increasing trend among industries toward collaboration was placing a heavier impetus upon educators to make students proficient in collaborative work, inspiring even greater interest in wikis being used in the classroom. [9]
Wikis have found some use within the legal profession, and within government. Examples include the Central Intelligence Agency 's Intellipedia , designed to share and collect intelligence , dKospedia, which was used by the American Civil Liberties Union to assist with review of documents pertaining to internment of detainees in Guantánamo Bay ; [43] and the wiki of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit , used to post court rules and allow practitioners to comment and ask questions. The United States Patent and Trademark Office operates Peer-to-Patent , a wiki to allow the public to collaborate on finding prior art relevant to examination of pending patent applications. Queens , New York has used a wiki to allow citizens to collaborate on the design and planning of a local park. Cornell Law School founded a wiki-based legal dictionary called Wex, whose growth has been hampered by restrictions on who can edit. [27]

City wikis
A city wiki (or local wiki) is a wiki used as a knowledge base and social network for a specific geographical locale. [44] [45] [46] The term 'city wiki' or its foreign language equivalent (e.g. German 'Stadtwiki') is sometimes also used for wikis that cover not just a city, but a small town or an entire region. A city wiki contains information about specific instances of things, ideas, people and places. Much of this information might not be appropriate for encyclopedias such as Wikipedia (e.g., articles on every retail outlet in a town), but might be appropriate for a wiki with more localized content and viewers. A city wiki could also contain information about the following subjects, that may or may not be appropriate for a general knowledge wiki, such as:

WikiNodes
WikiNodes are pages on wikis that describe related wikis. They are usually organized as neighbors and delegates. A neighbor wiki is simply a wiki that may discuss similar content or may otherwise be of interest. A delegate wiki is a wiki that agrees to have certain content delegated to that wiki. [47] One way of finding a wiki on a specific subject is to follow the wiki-node network from wiki to wiki; another is to take a Wiki "bus tour", for example: Wikipedia's Tour Bus Stop .

Participants
The four basic types of users who participate in wikis are reader, author, wiki administrator and system administrator. The system administrator is responsible for installation and maintenance of the wiki engine and the container web server. The wiki administrator maintains wiki content and is provided additional functions pertaining to pages (e.g. page protection and deletion), and can adjust users' access rights by, for instance, blocking them from editing. [48]

Growth factors
A study of several hundred wikis showed that a relatively high number of administrators for a given content size is likely to reduce growth; [49] that access controls restricting editing to registered users tends to reduce growth; that a lack of such access controls tends to fuel new user registration; and that higher administration ratios (i.e. admins/user) have no significant effect on content or population growth. [50]

Conferences
Active conferences and meetings about wiki-related topics include:
Former wiki-related events include:

Rules
Wikis typically have a set of rules governing user behavior. Wikipedia, for instance, has a labyrinthine set of policies and guidelines summed up in its five pillars: Wikipedia is an encyclopedia; Wikipedia has a neutral point of view; Wikipedia is free content; Wikipedians should interact in a respectful and civil manner; and Wikipedia does not have firm rules. Many wikis have adopted a set of commandments. For instance, Conservapedia commands, among other things, that its editors use " B.C. " rather than " B.C.E. " when referring to years prior to C.E. 1 and refrain from "unproductive activity." [55] One teacher instituted a commandment for a class wiki, " Wiki unto others as you would have them wiki unto you ." [11]

Legal environment
Joint authorship of articles, in which different users participate in correcting, editing, and compiling the finished product, can also cause editors to become tenants in common of the copyright, making it impossible to republish without permission of all co-owners, some of whose identities may be unknown due to pseudonymous or anonymous editing. [9] However, where persons contribute to a collective work such as an encyclopedia, there is no joint ownership if the contributions are separate and distinguishable. [56] Despite most wikis' tracking of individual contributions, the action of contributing to a wiki page is still arguably one of jointly correcting, editing, or compiling, which would give rise to joint ownership. Some copyright issues can be alleviated through the use of an open content license. Version 2 of the GNU Free Documentation License includes a specific provision for wiki relicensing; Creative Commons licenses are also popular. When no license is specified, an implied license to read and add content to a wiki may be deemed to exist on the grounds of business necessity and the inherent nature of a wiki, although the legal basis for such an implied license may not exist in all circumstances. [ citation needed ]
Wikis and their users can be held liable for certain activities that occur on the wiki. If a wiki owner displays indifference and forgoes controls (such as banning copyright infringers) that he could have exercised to stop copyright infringement, he may be deemed to have authorized infringement, especially if the wiki is primarily used to infringe copyrights or obtains direct financial benefit, such as advertising revenue, from infringing activities. [9] In the United States, wikis may benefit from Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act , which protects sites that engage in " Good Samaritan " policing of harmful material, with no requirement on the quality or quantity of such self-policing. [57] However, it has also been argued that a wiki's enforcement of certain rules, such as anti-bias, verifiability, reliable sourcing, and no-original-research policies, could pose legal risks. [58] When defamation occurs on a wiki, theoretically all users of the wiki can be held liable, because any of them had the ability to remove or amend the defamatory material from the "publication." It remains to be seen whether wikis will be regarded as more akin to an internet service provider , which is generally not held liable due to its lack of control over publications' contents, than a publisher. [9] It has been recommended that trademark owners monitor what information is presented about their trademarks on wikis, since courts may use such content as evidence pertaining to public perceptions. Joshua Jarvis notes, "Once misinformation is identified, the trade mark owner can simply edit the entry." [59]

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00025
Criticism of Wikipedia
Criticism of Wikipedia —of its content, procedures, and operations, and of the Wikipedia community —covers many subjects, topics, and themes about the nature of Wikipedia as an open source encyclopedia of subject entries that almost anyone can edit. Wikipedia has been criticized for the uneven handling, acceptance, and retention of articles about controversial subjects. The principal concerns of its critics are the factual reliability of the content; the readability of the prose; and a clear article layout; the existence of systemic bias ; of gender bias ; and of racial bias among the editorial community that is Wikipedia. Further concerns are that the organization allows the participation of anonymous editors (leading to editorial vandalism); the existence of social stratification (allowing cliques); and over-complicated rules (allowing editorial quarrels), the conditions of which permit the misuse of Wikipedia.
Wikipedia is described as unreliable at times. In "Wikipedia: The Dumbing Down of World Knowledge" (2010), Edwin Black characterized the editorial content of articles as a mixture of "truth, half-truth, and some falsehoods". [1] Similarly, in "Wisdom?: More like Dumbness of the Crowds" (2011), Oliver Kamm said that the encyclopedic articles usually are dominated by the editors with the loudest and most persistent editorial voices (talk pages and edit summaries), usually by an interest group with an ideological "axe to grind" on the subject, topic, or theme of the article in question. [2] Politics and ideology entries are also criticized on Wikipedia. In two works published in 2012, "The 'Undue Weight' of Truth on Wikipedia" by Timothy Messer–Kruse, and "You Just Type in What You are Looking for: Undergraduates' Use of Library Resources vs. Wikipedia" by Mónica Colón–Aguirre and Rachel A. Fleming–May, the authors analyzed and criticized the undue-weight policy (relative importance of a given source), and concluded that Wikipedia is not about providing correct and definitive information about a subject, [3] but instead presenting, as editorially dominant, the perspective taken by most authors of the sources for the article. This allegedly uneven application of the undue-weight policy creates omissions (of fact and of interpretation) that might give the reader false impressions about the subject matter, based upon the factually incomplete content of the Wikipedia article. [3] [4] [5]
Wikipedia is also sometimes characterized as having a hostile editing environment. In Common Knowledge?: An Ethnography of Wikipedia (2014), Dariusz Jemielniak , a steward for Wikimedia Foundation projects, stated that the complexity of the rules and laws governing editorial content and editors' behavior is a licence for the "office politics" of disruptive editors and drives away new, potentially constructive editors. [6] [7] In a follow-up article, "The Unbearable Bureaucracy of Wikipedia" (2014), Jemielniak said that abridging and rewriting the editorial rules and laws of Wikipedia for clarity of purpose and simplicity of application would resolve the bureaucratic bottleneck of too many rules. [6] [7] In "The Rise and Decline of an Open Collaboration System: How Wikipedia's Reaction to Popularity is Causing its Decline" (2013), Aaron Halfaker stated that the over-complicated rules and laws of Wikipedia unintentionally provoked the decline in editorial participation that began in 2009—frightening away new editors who otherwise would contribute to Wikipedia. [8]

Criticism of content
Wikipedia is described as unreliable at times. Edwin Black has characterized the editorial content of articles as a mixture of "truth, half-truth, and some falsehoods". [1] and Oliver Kamm has said that articles are usually dominated by the editors with the loudest and most persistent editorial voices (talk pages and edit summaries), usually by an interest group with an ideological "axe to grind" on the subject, topic, or theme of the article in question. [2]
Wikipedia articles on politics and ideology have also been criticized. Two works published in 2012 are critical of the undue-weight policy (relative importance of a given source), and concluded that, because the purpose of Wikipedia is not to provide correct and definitive information about a subject, [3] but to present, as the consensus opinion, the majority opinion advanced by the authors of the entry's sources. The uneven application of the undue-weight policy creates omissions (of fact and of interpretation) that might give the reader false impressions about the subject matter, based upon the incompleteness of the Wikipedia article. [3] [9] [5]
Wikipedia is sometimes characterized as having a hostile editing environment. In Common Knowledge?: An Ethnography of Wikipedia (2014), Dariusz Jemielniak , a steward for Wikimedia Foundation projects, stated that the complexity of the rules and laws governing editorial content and the behavior of the editors is a burden for new editors and a licence for the "office politics" of disruptive editors. [6] [10] In a follow-up article, Jemielniak said that abridging and rewriting the editorial rules and laws of Wikipedia for clarity of purpose and simplicity of application would resolve the bureaucratic bottleneck of too many rules. [10] In The Rise and Decline of an Open Collaboration System: How Wikipedia's Reaction to Popularity is Causing its Decline (2013), Aaron Halfaker stated that the over-complicated rules and laws of Wikipedia unintentionally provoked the decline in editorial participation that began in 2009—frightening away new editors who otherwise would contribute to Wikipedia. [8]
There have also been works that describe the possible misuse of Wikipedia. In "Wikipedia or Wickedpedia?" (2008), the Hoover Institution said that Wikipedia is an unreliable resource for correct knowledge, information, and facts about a subject, because, as an open source website, the editorial content of the articles is readily subjected to manipulation and propaganda . [11] The 2014 edition of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 's official student handbook, Academic Integrity at MIT , informs students that Wikipedia is not a reliable academic source, stating, "the bibliography published at the end of the Wikipedia entry may point you to potential sources. However, do not assume that these sources are reliable—use the same criteria to judge them as you would any other source. Do not consider the Wikipedia bibliography as a replacement for your own research ." [12]

Accuracy of information

Not authoritative
Wikipedia acknowledges that the encyclopedia should not be used as a primary source for research, either academic or informational. The British librarian Philip Bradley said that "the main problem is the lack of authority . With printed publications, the publishers have to ensure that their data are reliable, as their livelihood depends on it. But with something like this, all that goes out the window." [13] Likewise, Robert McHenry , editor-in-chief of Encyclopædia Britannica from 1992 to 1997, said that readers of Wikipedia articles cannot know who wrote the article they are reading—it might have been written by an expert in the subject matter or by an amateur. [14] In November 2015, Wikipedia co-founder Larry Sanger told Zach Schwartz in Vice : "I think Wikipedia never solved the problem of how to organize itself in a way that didn't lead to mob rule" and that since he left the project, "People that I would say are trolls sort of took over. The inmates started running the asylum." [15]

Comparative study of science articles
In "Internet Encyclopaedias Go Head-to-head", a 2005 article published in the Nature scientific journal, the results of a blind experiment (single-blind study), which compared the factual and informational accuracy of entries from Wikipedia and the Encyclopædia Britannica , were reported. The 42-entry sample included science articles and biographies of scientists, which were compared for accuracy by anonymous academic reviewers; they found that the average Wikipedia entry contained four errors and omissions, while the average Encyclopædia Britannica entry contained three errors and omissions. The study concluded that Wikipedia and Britannica were comparable in terms of the accuracy of its science entries". [17] Nevertheless, the reviewers had two principal criticisms of the Wikipedia science entries: (i) thematically confused content, without an intelligible structure (order, presentation, interpretation); and (ii) that undue weight is given to controversial, fringe theories about the subject matter. [18]
The dissatisfaction of the Encyclopædia Britannica editors led to Nature publishing additional survey documentation that substantiated the results of the comparative study. [19] Based upon the additional documents, Encyclopædia Britannica denied the validity of the study, stating it was flawed, because the Britannica extracts were compilations that sometimes included articles written for the youth version of the encyclopedia. [20] In turn, Nature acknowledged that some Britannica articles were compilations, but denied that such editorial details invalidated the conclusions of the comparative study of the science articles. [21]
The editors of Britannica also said that while the Nature study showed that the rate of error between the two encyclopedias was similar, the errors in a Wikipedia article usually were errors of fact, while the errors in a Britannica article were errors of omission. According to the editors of Britannica , Britannica was more accurate than Wikipedia in that respect. [20] Subsequently, Nature magazine rejected the Britannica response with a rebuttal of the editors' specific objections about the research method of the study. [22] [23]

Lack of methodical fact-checking
Inaccurate information that is not obviously false may persist in Wikipedia for a long time before it is challenged. The most prominent cases reported by mainstream media involved biographies of living people.
The Wikipedia Seigenthaler biography incident demonstrated that the subject of a biographical article must sometimes fix blatant lies about his own life. In May 2005, an anonymous user edited the biographical article on American journalist and writer John Seigenthaler so that it contained several false and defamatory statements. [24] [25] The inaccurate claims went unnoticed from May until September 2005 when they were discovered by Victor S. Johnson Jr. , a friend of Seigenthaler. Wikipedia content is often mirrored at sites such as Answers.com , which means that incorrect information can be replicated alongside correct information through a number of web sources. Such information can develop a misleading authority because of its presence at such sites. [26]
In another example, on March 2, 2007, MSNBC.com reported that then- New York Senator and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton had been incorrectly listed for 20 months in her Wikipedia biography as valedictorian of her class of 1969 at Wellesley College , when in fact she was not (though she did speak at commencement ). [27] The article included a link to the Wikipedia edit, [28] where the incorrect information was added on July 9, 2005. The inaccurate information was removed within 24 hours after the MSNBC.com report appeared. [29]
Attempts to perpetrate hoaxes may not be confined to editing existing Wikipedia articles, but can also include creating new articles. In October 2005, Alan Mcilwraith , a former call center worker from Scotland , created a Wikipedia article in which he wrote that he was a highly decorated war hero. The article was quickly identified as a hoax by other users and deleted. [30] [ better source needed ]
There have also been instances of users deliberately inserting false information into Wikipedia in order to test the system and demonstrate its alleged unreliability. Gene Weingarten , a journalist, ran such a test in 2007, in which he inserted false information into his own Wikipedia article; it was removed 27 hours later by a Wikipedia editor. [31] Wikipedia considers the deliberate insertion of false and misleading information to be vandalism . [32]

Neutral point of view and conflicts of interest
Wikipedia regards the concept of a neutral point of view as one of its non-negotiable principles; however, it acknowledges that such a concept has its limitations—its NPOV policy states that articles should be "as far as possible" written "without editorial bias". Mark Glaser, a journalist, also wrote that this may be an impossible ideal due to the inevitable biases of editors. [33]
In August 2007, a tool called WikiScanner—developed by Virgil Griffith, a visiting researcher from the Santa Fe Institute in New Mexico —was released to match edits to the encyclopedia by non-registered users with an extensive database of IP addresses . [34] News stories appeared about IP addresses from various organizations such as the Central Intelligence Agency , the National Republican Congressional Committee , the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee , Diebold, Inc. and the Australian government being used to make edits to Wikipedia articles, sometimes of an opinionated or questionable nature. Another story stated that an IP address from the BBC itself had been used to vandalize the article on George W. Bush . [35] The BBC quoted a Wikipedia spokesperson as praising the tool: "We really value transparency and the scanner really takes this to another level. Wikipedia Scanner may prevent an organisation or individuals from editing articles that they're really not supposed to." [36] Not everyone hailed WikiScanner as a success for Wikipedia. Oliver Kamm , in a column for The Times , argued instead that: [2]
WikiScanner only reveals conflicts of interest when the editor does not have a Wikipedia account and their IP address is used instead. Conflict of interest editing done by editors with accounts is not detected, since those edits are anonymous to everyone except some Wikipedia administrators . [37]

Scientific disputes
The 2005 Nature study also gave two brief examples of challenges that Wikipedian science writers purportedly faced on Wikipedia. The first concerned the addition of a section on violence to the schizophrenia article, which exhibited the view of one of the article's regular editors, neuropsychologist Vaughan Bell , that it was little more than a "rant" about the need to lock people up, and that editing it stimulated him to look up the literature on the topic. [17]
Another dispute involved the climate researcher William Connolley , a Wikipedia editor who was opposed by others. The topic in this second dispute was the greenhouse effect , and The New Yorker reported that this dispute, which was far more protracted, had led to arbitration , which took three months to produce a decision. The outcome of arbitration, as reported by Nature , was a six-month parole for Connolley, during which he was restricted to undoing edits on articles once per day. [38]

Exposure to political operatives and advocates
While Wikipedia policy requires articles to have a neutral point of view, it is not immune from attempts by outsiders (or insiders) with an agenda to place a spin on articles. In January 2006 it was revealed that several staffers of members of the U.S. House of Representatives had embarked on a campaign to cleanse their respective bosses' biographies on Wikipedia, as well as inserting negative remarks on political opponents. References to a campaign promise by Martin Meehan to surrender his seat in 2000 were deleted, and negative comments were inserted into the articles on United States Senator Bill Frist and Eric Cantor , a congressman from Virginia . Numerous other changes were made from an IP address assigned to the House of Representatives. [39] In an interview, Wikipedia de facto leader Jimmy Wales remarked that the changes were "not cool". [40]
Larry Delay and Pablo Bachelet wrote that from their perspective, some articles dealing with Latin American history and groups (such as the Sandinistas and Cuba ) lack political neutrality and are written from a sympathetic Marxist perspective which treats socialist dictatorships favorably at the expense of alternate positions. [41] [42] [43]
In 2008, the pro-Israel group Committee for Accuracy in Middle East Reporting in America (CAMERA) organized an e-mail campaign to encourage readers to correct perceived Israel-related biases and inconsistencies in Wikipedia. [44] CAMERA argued the excerpts were unrepresentative and that it had explicitly campaigned merely "toward encouraging people to learn about and edit the online encyclopedia for accuracy". [45] Defenders of CAMERA and the competing group, Electronic Intifada , went into mediation. [44] Israeli diplomat David Saranga said that Wikipedia is generally fair in regard to Israel. When it was pointed out that the entry on Israel mentioned the word "occupation" nine times, whereas the entry on the Palestinian People mentioned "terror" only once, he responded, "It means only one thing: Israelis should be more active on Wikipedia. Instead of blaming it, they should go on the site much more, and try and change it." [46]
Political commentator Haviv Rettig Gur, reviewing widespread perceptions in Israel of systemic bias in Wikipedia articles, has argued that there are deeper structural problems creating this bias: anonymous editing favors biased results, especially if the editors organize concerted campaigns of defamation as has been done in articles dealing with Arab-Israeli issues, and current Wikipedia policies, while well-meant, have proven ineffective in handling this. [47]
On August 31, 2008, The New York Times ran an article detailing the edits made to the biography of Alaska governor Sarah Palin in the wake of her nomination as the running mate of Arizona Senator John McCain . During the 24 hours before the McCain campaign announcement, 30 edits , many of them flattering details, were made to the article by Wikipedia single-purpose user identity Young_Trigg. [48] This person has later acknowledged working on the McCain campaign, and having several Wikipedia user accounts. [49]
In November 2007, libelous accusations were made against two politicians from southwestern France, Jean-Pierre Grand and Hélène Mandroux-Colas , on their Wikipedia biographies. Jean-Pierre Grand asked the president of the French National Assembly and the Prime Minister of France to reinforce the legislation on the penal responsibility of Internet sites and of authors who peddle false information in order to cause harm. [50] Senator Jean Louis Masson then requested the Minister of Justice to tell him whether it would be possible to increase the criminal responsibilities of hosting providers, site operators, and authors of libelous content; the minister declined to do so, recalling the existing rules in the LCEN law. [51]
On August 25, 2010, the Toronto Star reported that the Canadian "government is now conducting two investigations into federal employees who have taken to Wikipedia to express their opinion on federal policies and bitter political debates." [52]
In 2010, Al Jazeera 's Teymoor Nabili suggested that the article Cyrus Cylinder had been edited for political purposes by "an apparent tussle of opinions in the shadowy world of hard drives and 'independent' editors that comprise the Wikipedia industry." He suggested that after the Iranian presidential election, 2009 and the ensuing "anti-Iranian activities" a "strenuous attempt to portray the cylinder as nothing more than the propaganda tool of an aggressive invader" was visible. The edits following his analysis of the edits during 2009 and 2010, represented "a complete dismissal of the suggestion that the cylinder, or Cyrus' actions, represent concern for human rights or any kind of enlightened intent," in stark contrast to Cyrus ' own reputation as documented in the Old Testament and the people of Babylon. [53]

Commandeering or sanitizing articles
Articles of particular interest to an editor or group of editors are sometimes modified based on these editors' respective points of views. [54] Some companies and organizations—such as Sony , Diebold , Nintendo , Dell , the United States' Central Intelligence Agency , and the Church of Scientology —as well as individuals, such as United States Congressional staffers , were all shown to have modified the Wikipedia pages about themselves in order to present a point of view that describes them positively; these organizations may have editors who revert negative changes as soon as these changes are submitted. [55] [56]

Editing for financial rewards
In January 2007 Rick Jelliffe stated in a story carried by CBS [57] and IDG News Service [58] [59] that Microsoft had offered him compensation in exchange for his future editorial services on Wikipedia's articles related to OOXML (Office Open Extensible Markup Language). A Microsoft spokesperson, quoted by CBS, commented that "Microsoft and the writer, Rick Jelliffe, had not determined a price and no money had changed hands—but they had agreed that the company would not be allowed to review his writing before submission". Also quoted by CBS, Jimmy Wales expressed his disapproval of Microsoft's involvement: "We were very disappointed to hear that Microsoft was taking that approach".

Quality of the presentation

Quality of articles on U.S. history
In the essay, “Can History be Open Source?: Wikipedia and the Future of the Past” (2006), the academic historian Roy Rosenzweig criticized the encyclopedic content and writing style used in Wikipedia, for not distinguishing subjects that are important from subjects that are merely sensational. That Wikipedia is “surprisingly accurate in reporting names, dates, and events in U.S. history”, and that most of the factual errors he found “were small and inconsequential”, some of which “simply repeat widely held, but inaccurate, beliefs”, which are also repeated in the Microsoft Encarta encyclopedia and in the Encyclopædia Britannica ; yet Rosenzweig’s major criticism is that:
Rosenzweig also criticized the “waffling—encouraged by the [neutral point of view] policy—[which] means that it is hard to discern any overall interpretive stance in Wikipedia history [articles]”, and quoted the historical conclusion of the biography of William Clarke Quantrill , a Confederate guerrilla in the United States Civil War, as an example of weasel-word waffling:
In American National Biography Online , the historian James M. McPherson contrasted the content and writing style of Wikipedia's biography of United States President Abraham Lincoln to that of the U.S. Civil War article, and found that each entry was essentially accurate in covering the major episodes of President Lincoln’s life. The "richer contextualization" of McPherson's work, as well as "his artful use of quotations to capture Lincoln’s voice" and "his ability to convey a profound message in a handful of words," were contrasted with Wikipedia's history-article prose. The prose of the Wikipedia articles was "both verbose and dull" and thus difficult to read, because "the skill and confident judgment of a seasoned historian” are absent from the antiquarian writing style of Wikipedia, as opposed to the writing style used by professional historians in the American Heritage magazine. It was also mentioned that while Wikipedia usually provides many references, these are not the most accurate references. [60]

Quality of medical articles
In the article "Wikipedia Cancer Information Accurate," a study of medical articles, Yaacov Lawrence of the Kimmel Cancer Center of Thomas Jefferson University found that the cancer entries were mostly accurate. However, Wikipedia's articles were written in college-level prose, as opposed to in the easier-to-understand ninth-grade-level prose found in the Physician Data Query (PDQ) of the National Cancer Institute . According to Lawrence, "Wikipedia’s lack of readability may reflect its varied origins and haphazard editing.” [61]
In its 2007 article "Fact or Fiction? Wikipedia’s Variety of Contributors is Not Only a Strength," the magazine The Economist stated that the quality of the writing in Wikipedia articles usually indicates the quality of the editorial content: "Inelegant or ranting prose usually reflects muddled thoughts and incomplete information.” [62]

The Wall Street Journal
In the September 12, 2006, edition of The Wall Street Journal , Jimmy Wales debated with Dale Hoiberg , editor-in-chief of Encyclopædia Britannica . [63] Hoiberg focused on a need for expertise and control in an encyclopedia and cited Lewis Mumford that overwhelming information could "bring about a state of intellectual enervation and depletion hardly to be distinguished from massive ignorance." Wales emphasized Wikipedia's differences, and asserted that openness and transparency lead to quality. Hoiberg said that he "had neither the time nor space to respond to [criticisms]" and "could corral any number of links to articles alleging errors in Wikipedia", to which Wales responded: "No problem! Wikipedia to the rescue with a fine article", and included a link to the Wikipedia article about criticism of Wikipedia. [63]

Systemic bias in coverage
Wikipedia has been accused of systemic bias, which is to say its general nature leads, without necessarily any conscious intention, to the propagation of various prejudices. Although many articles in newspapers have concentrated on minor factual errors in Wikipedia articles, there are also concerns about large-scale, presumably unintentional effects from the increasing influence and use of Wikipedia as a research tool at all levels. In an article in the Times Higher Education magazine (London) philosopher Martin Cohen describes Wikipedia as having "become a monopoly" with "all the prejudices and ignorance of its creators," which he calls a "youthful cab-driver's" perspective. [64] Cohen concludes that "[t]o control the reference sources that people use is to control the way people comprehend the world. Wikipedia may have a benign, even trivial face, but underneath may lie a more sinister and subtle threat to freedom of thought ." [64] That freedom is undermined by what he sees as what matters on Wikipedia, "not your sources but the 'support of the community'." [64]
Researchers from Washington University developed a statistical model to measure systematic bias in the behavior of Wikipedia's users regarding controversial topics. The authors focused on behavioral changes of the encyclopedia's administrators after assuming the post, writing that systematic bias occurred after the fact. [65]
Critics also point to the tendency to cover topics in a detail disproportionate to their importance. For example, Stephen Colbert once mockingly praised Wikipedia for having a longer entry on ' lightsabers ' than it does on the ' printing press '. [66] In an interview with The Guardian , Dale Hoiberg, the editor-in-chief of Encyclopædia Britannica , noted: [13]
This critical approach has been satirised as "Wikigroaning", a term coined by Jon Hendren [67] of the website Something Awful . [68] In the game, two articles (preferably with similar names) are compared: one about an acknowledged, serious, or classical subject and the other about a popular or current one. [69] Defenders of a broad inclusion criteria have held that the encyclopedia's coverage of pop culture does not impose space constraints on the coverage of more serious subjects (see " Wiki is not paper "). As Ivor Tossell noted:
In 2014, supporters of holistic healing and energy psychology began a change.org petition asking for "true scientific discourse" on Wikipedia, complaining that "much of the information [on Wikipedia] related to holistic approaches to healing is biased, misleading, out-of-date, or just plain wrong". In response, Jimmy Wales said that Wikipedia only covers works that are published in respectable scientific journals. [71] [72]

Notability of article topics
Wikipedia's notability guidelines , which are used by editors to determine if a subject merits its own article, and the application thereof, are the subject of much criticism. [73] Nicholson Baker considers the notability standards arbitrary and essentially unsolvable: [74]
Criticizing the " deletionists ", Baker then writes: [73]
Another criticism about the deletionists is: "The increasing difficulty of making a successful edit; the exclusion of casual users; slower growth—all are hallmarks of the deletionists approach." [75]
Complaining that his own biography was on the verge of deletion for lack of notability, Timothy Noah argued that:
In the same article, Noah mentions that the Pulitzer Prize-winning writer Stacy Schiff was not considered notable enough for a Wikipedia entry before she wrote an extensive New Yorker article on Wikipedia itself.
A 2014 study found no correlation between characteristics of a given Wikipedia page about an academic and the academic's notability as determined by citation counts. The metrics of each Wikipedia page examined included length, number of links to the page from other articles, and number of edits made to the page. This study also found that Wikipedia did not cover notable ISI highly cited researchers properly. [77]

Partisanship
There have been suggestions that a politically liberal viewpoint is predominant . According to Jimmy Wales: "The Wikipedia community is very diverse, from liberal to conservative to libertarian and beyond. If averages mattered, and due to the nature of the wiki software (no voting) they almost certainly don't, I would say that the Wikipedia community is slightly more liberal than the U.S. population on average, because we are global and the international community of English speakers is slightly more liberal than the U.S. population. There are no data or surveys to back that." [78] Andrew Schlafly created Conservapedia because of his perception that Wikipedia contained a liberal bias. [79] Conservapedia's editors have compiled a list of alleged examples of liberal bias in Wikipedia. [80] In 2007, an article in The Christian Post criticised Wikipedia's coverage of intelligent design , saying that it was biased and hypocritical. [81] Lawrence Solomon of the National Review considered the Wikipedia articles on subjects like global warming , intelligent design , and Roe v. Wade all to be slanted in favor of liberal views. [82]
In a September 2010 issue of the conservative weekly Human Events , Rowan Scarborough presented a critique of Wikipedia's coverage of American politicians prominent in the approaching midterm elections as evidence of systemic liberal bias. [83] Scarborough compares the biographical articles of liberal and conservative opponents in Senate races in the Alaska Republican primary and the Delaware and Nevada general election, emphasizing the quantity of negative coverage of Tea Party -endorsed candidates. He also cites some criticism by Lawrence Solomon and quotes in full the lead section of Wikipedia's article on its rival Conservapedia as evidence of an underlying bias.
Shane Greenstein and Feng Zhu analyzed 2012 era Wikipedia articles on U.S. politics , going back a decade, and wrote a study [84] arguing the more contributors there were to an article, the less biased the article would be, and that — based on a study of frequent collocations — fewer articles "leaned Democrat" than was the case in Wikipedia's early years. [85] [86]

American and corporate bias
In 2008, Tim Anderson, a senior lecturer in political economy at the University of Sydney , said that Wikipedia administrators display an American-focused bias in their interactions with editors and their determinations of which sources are appropriate for use on the site. Anderson was outraged after several of the sources he used in his edits to the Hugo Chávez article, including Venezuela Analysis and Z Magazine , were disallowed as "unusable". Anderson also described Wikipedia's neutral point of view policy to ZDNet Australia as "a facade" and that Wikipedia "hides behind a reliance on corporate media editorials". [87]

Racial bias
Wikipedia has been criticized for having a systemic racial bias in its coverage, due to an under-representation of people of colour within its editor base. [88] The President of Wikimedia D.C. , James Hare, noted that "a lot of black history is left out" of Wikipedia, due to articles predominately being written by white editors. [89] Articles that do exist on African topics are, according to some critics, largely edited by editors from Europe and North America and thus reflect their knowledge and consumption of media, which "tend to perpetuate a negative image" of Africa. [90] Maira Liriano of the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture , has argued that the lack of information regarding black history on Wikipedia "makes it seem like it's not important." [91] San Francisco Poet Laureate Alejandro Murguía has stressed how it is important for Latinos to be part of Wikipedia "because it is a major source of where people get their information." [92]

Gender bias and sexism
Wikipedia has a longstanding controversy concerning gender bias and sexism. [94] [95] [96] [97] [98] [99] Gender bias on Wikipedia refers to the finding that between 84 and 91 percent of Wikipedia editors are male, [100] [101] which allegedly leads to systemic bias . [102] Wikipedia has been criticized [94] by some journalists and academics for lacking not only women contributors but also extensive and in-depth encyclopedic attention to many topics regarding gender. Sue Gardner , the former executive director of the foundation, said that increasing diversity was about making the encyclopedia "as good as it could be". Factors the article cited as possibly discouraging women from editing included the "obsessive fact-loving realm", associations with the "hard-driving hacker crowd", and the necessity to be "open to very difficult, high-conflict people, even misogynists." [95] In 2011, the Wikimedia Foundation set a goal of increasing the proportion of female contributors to 25 percent by 2015. [95] In August 2013, Gardner conceded defeat: "I didn't solve it. We didn't solve it. The Wikimedia Foundation didn't solve it. The solution won't come from the Wikimedia Foundation." [103] In August 2014, Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales acknowledged in a BBC interview the failure of Wikipedia to fix the gender gap and announced the Wikimedia Foundation 's plans for "doubling down" on the issue. Wales said the Foundation would be open to more outreach and more software changes. [104]

Sexual content
Wikipedia has been criticized for allowing graphic sexual content such as images and videos of masturbation and ejaculation as well as photos from hardcore pornographic films found on its articles. Child protection campaigners say graphic sexual content appears on many Wikipedia entries, displayed without any warning or age verification. [105]
The Wikipedia article Virgin Killer —a 1976 album from German heavy metal band Scorpions —features a picture of the album's original cover, which depicts a naked prepubescent girl. In December 2008, the Internet Watch Foundation , a nonprofit, nongovernment-affiliated organization, added the article to its blacklist, criticizing the inclusion of the picture as "distasteful". As a result, access to the article was blocked for four days by most Internet service providers in the United Kingdom. [106]
In April 2010, Larry Sanger , a co-founder of Wikipedia who had left the organization eight years previously, wrote a letter to the Federal Bureau of Investigation , outlining his concerns that two categories of images on Wikimedia Commons contained child pornography, and were in violation of United States federal obscenity law. Sanger also expressed concerns about access to the images on Wikipedia in schools. [107] Sanger later said that it was probably not correct to call it "child pornography", which most people associate with images of real children, and that he should have said "depictions of child sexual abuse". [108] Wikimedia Foundation spokesman Jay Walsh said that Wikipedia doesn't have "material we would deem to be illegal. If we did, we would remove it." [107] Following the complaint by Larry Sanger, Jimmy Wales deleted many sexual images without consulting the community; some were reinstated following discussion. [109] Critics, including Wikipediocracy , noticed that many of the sexual images deleted from Wikipedia since 2010 have reappeared. [110]

Exposure to vandals
As an online encyclopedia which almost anyone can edit, Wikipedia has long had problems with vandalism of articles, which range from "blanking" articles to inserting profanities, hoaxes or nonsense. Wikipedia has a range of tools available to users and administrators in order to fight against vandalism, including blocking and banning of vandals and automated bots that detect and repair vandalism. Supporters of the project argue that the vast majority of vandalism on Wikipedia is reverted within a short time, and a study by Fernanda Viégas of the MIT Media Lab and Martin Wattenberg and Kushal Dave of IBM Research found that most vandal edits were reverted within around five minutes; however they state that "it is essentially impossible to find a crisp definition of vandalism". [111] While most instances of page blanking or the addition of offensive material are soon reverted, less obvious vandalism, or vandalism to a little viewed article, has remained for longer periods.
A 2007 peer-reviewed study [112] that measured the actual number of page views with "damaged" content, concluded:

Privacy concerns
Most privacy concerns refer to cases of government or employer data gathering; or to computer or electronic monitoring; or to trading data between organizations. "The Internet has created conflicts between personal privacy, commercial interests and the interests of society at large" warn James Donnelly and Jenifer Haeckl. [113] Balancing the rights of all concerned as technology alters the social landscape will not be easy. It "is not yet possible to anticipate the path of the common law or governmental regulation" regarding this problem. [113]
The concern in the case of Wikipedia is the right of a private citizen to remain private; to remain a "private citizen" rather than a " public figure " in the eyes of the law. [114] It is somewhat of a battle between the right to be anonymous in cyberspace and the right to be anonymous in real life (" meatspace "). [ citation needed ] Wikipedia Watch argues that "Wikipedia is a potential menace to anyone who values privacy" and that "a greater degree of accountability in the Wikipedia structure" would be "the very first step toward resolving the privacy problem." [115] A particular problem occurs in the case of an individual who is relatively unimportant and for whom there exists a Wikipedia page against their wishes.
In 2005 Agence France-Presse quoted Daniel Brandt, the Wikipedia Watch owner, as saying that "the basic problem is that no one, neither the trustees of Wikimedia Foundation, nor the volunteers who are connected with Wikipedia, consider themselves responsible for the content." [116]
In January 2006, a German court ordered the German Wikipedia shut down within Germany because it stated the full name of Boris Floricic , aka "Tron", a deceased hacker who was formerly with the Chaos Computer Club . More specifically, the court ordered that the URL within the German .de domain ( http://www.wikipedia.de/ ) may no longer redirect to the encyclopedia's servers in Florida at http://de.wikipedia.org although German readers were still able to use the US-based URL directly, and there was virtually no loss of access on their part. The court order arose out of a lawsuit filed by Floricic's parents, demanding that their son's surname be removed from Wikipedia. [ citation needed ] On February 9, 2006, the injunction against Wikimedia Deutschland was overturned, with the court rejecting the notion that Tron's right to privacy or that of his parents were being violated. [117]

Criticism of the community

Role of Jimmy Wales
The community of Wikipedia editors has been criticized for placing an irrational emphasis on Jimmy Wales as a person. Wales's role in personally determining the content of some articles has also been criticized as contrary to the independent spirit that Wikipedia supposedly has gained. [118] [119] In early 2007, Wales dismissed the criticism of the Wikipedia model: "I am unaware of any problems with the quality of discourse on the site. I don't know of any higher-quality discourse anywhere." [120] [121] [122] [123] [124]

Conflict of interest cases
A Business Insider article wrote about a controversy in September 2012 where two Wikimedia Foundation employees were found to have been "running a PR business on the side and editing Wikipedia on behalf of their clients." [125]

Unfair treatment of female contributors
Some female editors have stated that they have been harassed by male editors. [126]
The English Wikipedia Arbitration Committee has been criticized as unfairly targeting female and feminist editors. [126]
In an article for Slate , David Auerbach criticized the decisions made by the Arbitration Committee, in a December 2014 case centered around the site's Gender Gap Task Force . Auerbach was critical of the committee's decision to permanently ban a female editor involved in the case, while not banning her male "chief antagonists", stating "With the Arbitration Committee opting only to ban the one woman in the dispute despite her behavior being no worse than that of the men, it's hard not to see this as a setback to Wikipedia's efforts to rectify its massive gender gap." [127]
In January 2015, The Guardian reported that the Arbitration Committee had banned five feminist editors from gender-related articles on a case related to the Gamergate controversy , while including quotes from a Wikipedia editor alleging unfair treatment. [128] [129] Other commentators, including from Gawker and ThinkProgress , provided additional analysis while sourcing from The Guardian ' s story. [129] [130] [131] [132] [133] Reports in The Washington Post , Slate and Social Text described these articles as "flawed" or factually inaccurate, pointing out that the Arbitration case had not concluded as at the time of publishing; no editor had been banned. [129] [134] [135] After the result was published, Gawker wrote that "ArbCom ruled to punish six editors who could be broadly classified as 'anti-Gamergate' and five who are 'pro-Gamergate'." All of the supposed "Five Horsemen" were among the editors punished, with one of them being the sole editor banned due to this case. [136] An article called "ArbitrationGate" regarding this situation was created (and quickly deleted) on Wikipedia, while The Guardian later issued a correction to their article. [129] The Committee and the Wikimedia Foundation issued press statements that the Gamergate case was in response to the atmosphere of the Gamergate article resembling a "battlefield" due to "various sides of the discussion [having] violated community policies and guidelines on conduct", and that the Committee was fulfilling its role to "uphold a civil, constructive atmosphere" on Wikipedia. The Committee also wrote that it "does not rule on the content of articles, or make judgements on the personal views of parties to the case". [134] [137] Michael Mandiberg , writing in Social Text , remained unconvinced. [135]

Lack of verifiable identities

Scandals involving administrators and arbitrators
David Boothroyd, a Wikipedia editor and a Labour Party ( United Kingdom ) member, created controversy in 2009, when Wikipedia Review contributor "Tarantino" discovered that he committed sockpuppeting , editing under the accounts "Dbiv", "Fys", and "Sam Blacketer", none of which acknowledged his real identity. After earning Administrator status with one account, then losing it for inappropriate use of the administrative tools, Boothroyd regained Administrator status with the Sam Blacketer sockpuppet account in April 2007. [ citation needed ] Later in 2007, Boothroyd's Sam Blacketer account became part of the English Wikipedia's Arbitration Committee. [ citation needed ] Under the Sam Blacketer account, Boothroyd edited many articles related to United Kingdom politics, including that of rival Conservative Party leader David Cameron . [138] [139] Boothroyd then resigned as an administrator and as an arbitrator. [140] [141]

Essjay controversy
In July 2006 The New Yorker ran a feature about Wikipedia by Stacy Schiff about a highly credentialed Wikipedia editor. [142] The initial version of the article included an interview with a Wikipedia administrator known by the pseudonym Essjay, who was described as a tenured professor of theology. [143] Essjay's Wikipedia user page, now removed, said the following:
Essjay also stated that he held four academic degrees: Bachelor of Arts in Religious Studies (B.A.), Master of Arts in Religion (M.A.R.), Doctorate of Philosophy in Theology (Ph.D.), and Doctorate in Canon Law (JCD). Essjay specialized in editing articles about religion on Wikipedia, including subjects such as "the penitential rite, transubstantiation, the papal tiara"; [142] on one occasion he was called in to give some "expert testimony" on the status of Mary in the Roman Catholic Church . [144] In January 2007, Essjay was hired as a manager with Wikia , a wiki-hosting service founded by Wales and Angela Beesley. In February, Wales appointed Essjay as a member of the Wikipedia Arbitration Committee , a group with powers to issue binding rulings in disputes relating to Wikipedia. [145]
In late February 2007 The New Yorker added an editorial note to its article on Wikipedia stating that it had learned that Essjay was Ryan Jordan, a 24-year-old college dropout from Kentucky with no advanced degrees and no teaching experience. [146] Initially Jimmy Wales commented on the issue of Essjay's identity: "I regard it as a pseudonym and I don't really have a problem with it." Larry Sanger , co-founder [147] [148] [149] of Wikipedia, responded to Wales on his Citizendium blog by calling Wales' initial reaction "utterly breathtaking, and ultimately tragic." Sanger said the controversy "reflects directly on the judgment and values of the management of Wikipedia." [150]
Wales later issued a new statement saying he had not previously understood that "EssJay used his false credentials in content disputes." He added: "I have asked EssJay to resign his positions of trust within the [Wikipedia] community." [151] Sanger responded the next day: "It seems Jimmy finds nothing wrong, nothing trust-violating, with the act itself of openly and falsely touting many advanced degrees on Wikipedia. But there most obviously is something wrong with it, and it's just as disturbing for Wikipedia's head to fail to see anything wrong with it." [152]
On March 4, Essjay wrote on his user page that he was leaving Wikipedia, and he also resigned his position with Wikia. [153] A subsequent article in The Courier-Journal ( Louisville ) suggested that the new résumé he had posted at his Wikia page was exaggerated. [154] The March 19, 2007 issue of The New Yorker published a formal apology by Wales to the magazine and Stacy Schiff for Essjay's false statements. [155]
Discussing the incident, the New York Times noted that the Wikipedia community had responded to the affair with "the fury of the crowd", and observed:
The Essjay incident received extensive media coverage, including a national United States television broadcast on ABC's World News with Charles Gibson [157] and the March 7, 2007, Associated Press story. [158] The controversy has led to a proposal that users who say that they possess academic qualifications should have to provide evidence before citing them in Wikipedia content disputes. [159] The proposal was not accepted. [160]

Anonymity
Wikipedia has been criticised for allowing editors to contribute anonymously (without a registered account and using an auto-generated IP -labeled account) or pseudonymously (using a registered account), with critics saying that this leads to a lack of accountability. [124] [161] This also sometimes leads to uncivil conduct in debates between Wikipedians. [124] [161] For privacy reasons, Wikipedia even forbids editors to reveal information about an anonymous editor on Wikipedia. [ citation needed ]

Editorial process

Level of debate, edit wars and harassment
The standard of debate on Wikipedia has been called into question by persons who have noted that contributors can make a long list of salient points and pull in a wide range of empirical observations to back up their arguments, only to have them ignored completely on the site. [162] An academic study of Wikipedia articles found that the level of debate among Wikipedia editors on controversial topics often degenerated into counterproductive squabbling:
In 2008, a team from the Palo Alto Research Center found that for editors that make between two and nine edits a month, the percentage of their edits being reverted had gone from 5% in 2004 to about 15%, and people who only make one edit a month were being reverted at a 25% rate. [164] According to The Economist magazine (2008), "The behaviour of Wikipedia's self-appointed deletionist guardians, who excise anything that does not meet their standards, justifying their actions with a blizzard of acronyms, is now known as "wiki-lawyering". [165] In regards to the decline in the number of Wikipedia editors since the 2007 policy changes, another study stated this was partly down to the way "in which newcomers are rudely greeted by automated quality control systems and are overwhelmed by the complexity of the rule system." [166]
Another complaint about Wikipedia focuses on the efforts of contributors with idiosyncratic beliefs , who push their point of view in an effort to dominate articles, especially controversial ones. [167] [168] This sometimes results in revert wars and pages being locked down. In response, an Arbitration Committee has been formed on the English Wikipedia that deals with the worst alleged offenders—though a conflict resolution strategy is actively encouraged before going to this extent. Also, to stop the continuous reverting of pages, Jimmy Wales introduced a "three-revert rule", whereby those users who reverse the effect of others' contributions to one article more than three times in a 24-hour period may be blocked. [ citation needed ]
In a 2008 article in The Brooklyn Rail , Wikipedia contributor David Shankbone contended that he had been harassed and stalked because of his work on Wikipedia, had received no support from the authorities or the Wikimedia Foundation, and only mixed support from the Wikipedia community. Shankbone wrote, "If you become a target on Wikipedia, do not expect a supportive community." [169]
David Auerbach , writing in Slate magazine, said:

Consensus and the "hive mind"
Oliver Kamm , in an article for The Times , said that Wikipedia's reliance on consensus in forming its content was dubious: [2]
Wikimedia advisor Benjamin Mako Hill also talked about Wikipedia's disproportional representation of viewpoints, saying:
Wikimedia steward Dariusz Jemielniak says:
In his article, " Digital Maoism: The Hazards of the New Online Collectivism " (first published online by Edge: The Third Culture , May 30, 2006), computer scientist and digital theorist Jaron Lanier describes Wikipedia as a "hive mind" that is "for the most part stupid and boring", and asks, rhetorically, "why pay attention to it?" His thesis says:
Lanier also says the economic trend to reward entities that aggregate information, rather than those that actually generate content. [ incomprehensible ] In the absence of "new business models", the popular demand for content will be sated by mediocrity, thus reducing or even eliminating any monetary incentives for the production of new knowledge. [173]
Lanier's opinions produced some strong disagreement. Internet consultant Clay Shirky noted that Wikipedia has many internal controls in place and is not a mere mass of unintelligent collective effort:

Excessive rule-making
Various figures involved with the Wikimedia Foundation have argued that Wikipedia's increasingly complex policies and guidelines are driving away new contributors to the site . Former chair Kat Walsh has criticized the project in recent years, saying, "It was easier when I joined in 2004... Everything was a little less complicated.... It's harder and harder for new people to adjust." [175] Top Wikipedia administrator Oliver Moran also views "policy creep" as the major barrier, writing that "the loose collective running the site today, estimated to be 90 percent male, operates a crushing bureaucracy with an often abrasive atmosphere that deters newcomers who might increase participation in Wikipedia and broaden its coverage". [176]
In his 2014 book, Common Knowledge?: An Ethnography of Wikipedia , Jemielniak, the Wikimedia steward, states similarly that the sheer complexity of the rules and laws governing content and editor behavior has become excessive and creates a learning burden for new editors. [6] [7] In a 2013 study, Aaron Halfaker of the University of Minnesota concluded the same thing. [8] Jemielniak suggests actively abridging and rewriting the rules and laws to fall within a fixed and reasonable limit of size and complexity to remedy their excessive complexity and size. [6] [7]

Social stratification
Despite the perception that the Wikipedia process is democratic, "a small number of people are running the show", [177] including administrators, bureaucrats, stewards, checkusers, mediators, arbitrators, and oversighters. [10] In an article on Wikipedia conflicts in 2007, The Guardian discussed "a backlash among some editors, who say that blocking users compromises the supposedly open nature of the project and the imbalance of power between users and administrators may even be a reason some users choose to vandalize in the first place" based on the experiences of one editor who became a vandal after his edits were reverted and he was blocked for edit warring. [178]

See also
WebPage index: 00026
Web portal
A Web portal is most often a specially designed web site that brings information together from diverse sources in a uniform way. Usually, each information source gets its dedicated area on the page for displaying information (a portlet ); often, the user can configure which ones to display. Variants of portals include mashups and intranet "dashboards" for executives and managers. The extent to which content is displayed in a "uniform way" may depend on the intended user and the intended purpose, as well as the diversity of the content. Very often design emphasis is on a certain "metaphor" for configuring and customizing the presentation of the content and the chosen implementation framework and/or code libraries. In addition, the role of the user in an organization may determine which content can be added to the portal or deleted from the portal configuration.
A portal may use a search engine API to permit users to search intranet as opposed to extranet content by restricting which domains may be searched. Apart from this common search engines feature, web portals may offer other services such as e-mail , news, stock quotes, information from databases and even entertainment content. Portals provide a way for enterprises and organizations to provide a consistent look and feel with access control and procedures for multiple applications and databases, which otherwise would have been different web entities at various URLs . The features available may be restricted by whether access is by an authorized and authenticated user (employee,member) or an anonymous site visitor.
Examples of early public web portals were AOL , Excite , Netvibes , iGoogle , MSN , Naver , Lycos , Prodigy , Indiatimes , Rediff , and Yahoo! . See for example, the "My Yahoo!" feature of Yahoo! that may have inspired such features as the later Google "iGoogle" (discontinued as of November 1, 2013.) The configurable side-panels of, for example, the modern Opera browser and the option of "Speed Dial" pages by most browsers continue to reflect the earlier "portal" metaphor.

History
In the late 1990s the Web portal was a Web IT buzzword. After the proliferation of Web browsers in the late-1990s many companies tried to build or acquire a portal to attempt to obtain a share of an Internet market. The Web portal gained special attention because it was, for many users, the starting point of their Web browsing if it was set as their home page. The content and branding of a portal could change as Internet companies merged or were acquired. Netscape became a part of America Online , the Walt Disney Company launched Go.com , IBM and others launched Prodigy (-only users.) Portal metaphors are widely used by public library sites for borrowers using a login as users and by university intranets for students and for faculty. Vertical markets remain for ISV's offering management and executive intranet "dashboards" for corporations and government agencies in areas such as GRC and risk management.

Classification
Web portals are sometimes classified as horizontal or vertical . A horizontal portal is used as a platform to several companies in the same economic sector or to the same type of manufacturers or distributors. [1] A vertical portal (also known as a "vortal") is a specialized entry point to a specific market or industry niche, subject area, or interest. [2] Some vertical portals are known as "vertical information portals" (VIPs). VIPs provide news, editorial content, digital publications, and e-commerce capabilities. In contrast to traditional vertical portals, VIPs also provide dynamic multimedia applications including social networking, video posting, and blogging.

Types of Web portals

Personal Web portals
A personal portal is a Web page at a Web site on the World Wide Web or a local HTML home page including JavaScript and perhaps running in a modified Web browser. A personal portal typically provides personalized capabilities to its visitors or its local user, providing a pathway to other content. It may be designed to use distributed applications , different numbers and types of middleware and hardware to provide services from a number of different sources and may run on a non-standard local Web server. In addition, business portals can be designed for sharing and collaboration in workplaces. A further business-driven requirement of portals is that the content be presented on multiple platforms such as personal computers , personal digital assistants (PDAs), and cell phones/mobile phone/mobile phones . Information, news, and updates are examples of content that would be delivered through such a portal. Personal portals can be related to any specific topic such as providing friend information on a social network or providing links to outside content that may help others beyond your reach of services. Portals are not limited to simply providing links. Outside of business intracet user, very often simpler portals become replaced with richer mashup designs. Within enterprises, early portals were often replaced by much more powerful "dashboard" designs. Some also have relied on newer protocols such as some version of RSS aggregation and may or may not involve some degree of Web harvesting. Examples of personal portals include:

Government Web portals
At the end of the dot-com boom in the 1990s, many governments had already committed to creating portal sites for their citizens. These included primary portals to the governments as well as portals developed for specific audiences. Examples of government Web portals include:

Cultural portals
Cultural portal aggregate digitised cultural collections of galleries, libraries (see: library portal ), archives and museums. This type of portal provides a point of access to invisible Web cultural content that may not be indexed by standard search engines. Digitised collections can include books, artworks, photography, journals, newspapers, music, sound recordings, film, maps, diaries and letters, and archived websites as well as the descriptive metadata associated with each type of cultural work. These portals are usually based around a specific national or regional groupings of institutions. Examples of cultural portals include:

Corporate Web portals
Corporate intranets became common during the 1990s. As intranets grew in size and complexity, webmasters were faced with increasing content and user management challenges. A consolidated view of company information was judged insufficient; users wanted personalization and customization. Webmasters, if skilled enough, were able to offer some capabilities, but for the most part ended up driving users away from using the intranet.
Many companies began to offer tools to help webmasters manage their data, applications and information more easily, and through personalized views. Portal solutions can also include workflow management, collaboration between work groups, and policy-managed content publication. Most can allow internal and external access to specific corporate information using secure authentication or single sign-on .
JSR168 Standards emerged around 2001. Java Specification Request (JSR) 168 standards allow the interoperability of portlets across different portal platforms. These standards allow portal developers, administrators and consumers to integrate standards-based portals and portlets across a variety of vendor solutions.
The concept of content aggregation seems to still gain momentum and portal solution will likely continue to evolve significantly over the next few years. The Gartner Group predicts generation 8 portals to expand on the Business Mashups concept of delivering a variety of information, tools, applications and access points through a single mechanism. [ citation needed ]
With the increase in user generated content, disparate data silos, and file formats, information architects and taxonomist will be required to allow users the ability to tag (classify) the data. This will ultimately cause a ripple effect where users will also be generating ad hoc navigation and information flows.
Corporate Portals also offer customers & employees self-service opportunities.

Stock portals
Also known as stock-share portals, stock market portals or stock exchange portals are Web-based applications that facilitates the process of informing the share-holders with substantial online data such as the latest price, ask/bids, the latest News, reports and announcements. Some stock portals use online gateways through a central depository system (CDS) for the visitors (ram) to buy or sell their shares or manage their portfolio .

Search portals
Search portals aggregate results from several search engines into one page. You can find search portals specialized in a product, for example property search portals. Library search portals are also known as discovery interfaces.

Property search portals
Property search portals aggregate data about properties for sale by real estate agents. Examples in the UK include Zoopla , Rightmove , Nestoria and Nuroa . Examples in the US include Propertini .

Tender portals
A tender portal is a gateway for government suppliers to bid on providing goods and services. Tender portals allow users to search, modify, submit, review and archive data in order to provide a complete online tendering process.
Using online tendering, bidders can do any of the following:

Hosted Web portals
Hosted Web portals gained popularity and a number of companies began offering them as a hosted service. The hosted portal market fundamentally changed the composition of portals. In many ways they served simply as a tool for publishing information instead of the loftier goals of integrating legacy applications or presenting correlated data from distributed databases. The early hosted portal companies such as Hyperoffice.com or the now defunct InternetPortal.com focused on collaboration and scheduling in addition to the distribution of corporate data. As hosted Web portals have risen in popularity their feature set has grown to include hosted databases, document management, email, discussion forums and more. Hosted portals automatically personalize the content generated from their modules to provide a personalized experience to their users. In this regard they have remained true to the original goals of the earlier corporate Web portals. Emerging new classes of Internet portals called Cloud Portals are showcasing the power of API (Application Programming Interface) rich software systems leveraging SOA (service-oriented architecture, Web services, and custom data exchange) to accommodate machine to machine interaction creating a more fluid user experience for connecting users spanning multiple domains during a given "session". Leading cloud portals like Nubifer Cloud Portal showcase what is possible using Enterprise Mashup and Web Service integration approaches to building cloud portals.

Domain-specific portals
A number of portals have come about which are specific to a particular domain, offering access to related companies and services; a prime example of this trend would be the growth in property portals that give access to services such as estate agents , removal firm , and solicitors that offer conveyancing . Along the same lines, industry-specific news and information portals have appeared, such as the clinical trials-specific portal .

Engineering aspects

Overview
The main concept is to present the user with a single Web page that brings together or aggregates content from a number of other systems or servers.
The application server or architecture performs most of the crucial functions of the application. This application server is in turn connected to database servers, and may be part of a clustered server environment. High-capacity portal configurations may include load balancing strategies.
For portals that present application functionality to the user, the portal server is in reality the front piece of a server configuration that includes some connectivity to the application server. For early Web browsers permitting HTML frameset and iframe elements, diverse information could be presented without violating the browser same-source security policy (relied upon to prevent a variety of cross-site security breaches.) More recent client-side technologies rely on JavaScript frameworks and libraries that rely on more recent Web functionality such as WebSockets and async callbacks using XMLHttpRequests.
The server hosting the portal may only be a "pass through" for the user. By use of portlets , application functionality can be presented in any number of portal pages. For the most part, this architecture is transparent to the user.
In such a design, security and concurrent user capacity can be important issues, and security designers need to ensure that only authenticated and authorized users can generate requests to the application server. If the security design and administration does not ensure adequate authentication and authorization, then the portal may inadvertently present vulnerabilities to various types of attacks.

Standards

See also
WebPage index: 00027
Electronic mailing list
An electronic mailing list or email list is a special use of email that allows for widespread distribution of information to many Internet users. It is similar to a traditional mailing list – a list of names and addresses – as might be kept by an organization for sending publications to its members or customers, but typically refers to four things:

How automated electronic mailing lists work
Electronic mailing lists usually are fully or partially automated through the use of special mailing list software and a reflector address set up on a server capable of receiving email. Incoming messages sent to the reflector address are processed by the software, and, depending on their content, are acted upon internally (in the case of messages containing commands directed at the software itself) or are distributed to all email addresses subscribed to the mailing list.
A web-based interface is often available to allow people to subscribe, unsubscribe, and change their preferences. However, mailing list servers existed long before the World Wide Web , [1] so most also accept commands over email to a special email address. This allows subscribers (or those who want to be subscribers) to perform such tasks as subscribing and unsubscribing, temporarily halting the sending of messages to them, or changing available preferences - all via email. The common format for sending these commands is to send an email that contains simply, the command followed by the name of the electronic mailing list the command pertains to. Examples: subscribe anylist or subscribe anylist John Doe .
Electronic mailing list servers may be set to forward messages to subscribers of a particular mailing list either individually as they are received by the list server, or in digest form in which all messages received on a particular day by the list server are combined into one email that is sent once per day to subscribers. Some mailing lists allow individual subscribers to decide how they prefer to receive messages from the list server (individual or digest ). [2]

Types

Announcement list
One type of electronic mailing list is an announcement list , which is used primarily as a one-way conduit of information and may only be "posted to" by selected people. This may also be referred to by the term newsletter . Newsletter and promotional emailing lists are employed in various sectors as parts of direct marketing campaigns.

Discussion list
Another type of electronic mailing list is a discussion list , in which any subscriber may post. On a discussion list, a subscriber uses the mailing list to send messages to all the other subscribers, who may answer in similar fashion. Thus, actual discussion and information exchanges can happen. Mailing lists of this type are usually topic-oriented (for example, politics, scientific discussion, health problems, joke contests), and the topic may range from extremely narrow to "whatever you think could interest us". In this they are similar to Usenet newsgroups , another form of discussion group that may have an aversion to off-topic messages.

List security
On both discussion lists and newsletter lists precautions are taken to avoid spamming .
Discussion lists often require every message to be approved by a moderator before being sent to the rest of the subscribers (moderated lists), although higher-traffic lists typically only moderate messages from new subscribers. Companies sending out promotional newsletters have the option of working with whitelist mail distributors, which agree to standards and high fines from ISPs should any of the opt-in subscribers complain. In exchange for their compliance and agreement to prohibitive fines, the emails sent by whitelisted companies are not blocked by spam filters , which often can reroute these legitimate, non-spam emails. [3]

Subscription
Some mailing lists are open to anyone who wants to join them, while others require an approval from the list owner before one may join. Joining a mailing list is called "subscribing" and leaving a list is called "unsubscribing".

Archives
A mailing list archive is a collection of past messages from one or more electronic mailing lists. Such archives often include searching and indexing functionality. Many archives are directly associated with the mailing list, but some organizations, such as Gmane , collect archives from multiple mailing lists hosted at different organizations; thus, one message sent to one popular mailing list may end up in many different archives. Gmane had over 9,000 mailing list archives as of 16 January 2007. Some popular free software programs for collecting mailing list archives are Hypermail , MHonArc , and FUDforum .

See also
WebPage index: 00028
Web search engine
A web search engine is a software system that is designed to search for information on the World Wide Web. The search results are generally presented in a line of results often referred to as search engine results pages (SERPs). The information may be a mix of web pages , images, and other types of files. Some search engines also mine data available in databases or open directories . Unlike web directories , which are maintained only by human editors, search engines also maintain real-time information by running an algorithm on a web crawler .

History
Internet search engines themselves predate the debut of the Web in December 1990. The Who is user search dates back to 1982 [1] and the Knowbot Information Service multi-network user search was first implemented in 1989. [2] The first well documented search engine that searched content files, namely FTP files was Archie, which debuted on 10 September 1990. [ citation needed ]
Prior to September 1993 the World Wide Web was entirely indexed by hand. There was a list of webservers edited by Tim Berners-Lee and hosted on the CERN webserver. One historical snapshot of the list in 1992 remains, [3] but as more and more web servers went online the central list could no longer keep up. On the NCSA site, new servers were announced under the title "What's New!" [4]
The first tool used for searching content (as opposed to users) on the Internet was Archie . [5] The name stands for "archive" without the "v". It was created by Alan Emtage , Bill Heelan and J. Peter Deutsch, computer science students at McGill University in Montreal . The program downloaded the directory listings of all the files located on public anonymous FTP ( File Transfer Protocol ) sites, creating a searchable database of file names; however, Archie Search Engine did not index the contents of these sites since the amount of data was so limited it could be readily searched manually.
The rise of Gopher (created in 1991 by Mark McCahill at the University of Minnesota ) led to two new search programs, Veronica and Jughead . Like Archie, they searched the file names and titles stored in Gopher index systems. Veronica ( V ery E asy R odent- O riented N et-wide I ndex to C omputerized A rchives) provided a keyword search of most Gopher menu titles in the entire Gopher listings. Jughead ( J onzy's U niversal G opher H ierarchy E xcavation A nd D isplay) was a tool for obtaining menu information from specific Gopher servers. While the name of the search engine " Archie Search Engine " was not a reference to the Archie comic book series, " Veronica " and " Jughead " are characters in the series, thus referencing their predecessor.
In the summer of 1993, no search engine existed for the web, though numerous specialized catalogues were maintained by hand. Oscar Nierstrasz at the University of Geneva wrote a series of Perl scripts that periodically mirrored these pages and rewrote them into a standard format. This formed the basis for W3Catalog , the web's first primitive search engine, released on September 2, 1993. [6]
In June 1993, Matthew Gray, then at MIT , produced what was probably the first web robot , the Perl -based World Wide Web Wanderer , and used it to generate an index called 'Wandex'. The purpose of the Wanderer was to measure the size of the World Wide Web, which it did until late 1995. The web's second search engine Aliweb appeared in November 1993. Aliweb did not use a web robot , but instead depended on being notified by website administrators of the existence at each site of an index file in a particular format.
NCSA's Mosaic™ - Mosaic (web browser) wasn't the first Web browser. But it was the first to make a major splash. In November 1993, Mosaic v 1.0 broke away from the small pack of existing browsers by including features—like icons, bookmarks, a more attractive interface, and pictures—that made the software easy to use and appealing to "non-geeks."
JumpStation (created in December 1993 [7] by Jonathon Fletcher ) used a web robot to find web pages and to build its index, and used a web form as the interface to its query program. It was thus the first WWW resource-discovery tool to combine the three essential features of a web search engine (crawling, indexing, and searching) as described below. Because of the limited resources available on the platform it ran on, its indexing and hence searching were limited to the titles and headings found in the web pages the crawler encountered.
One of the first "all text" crawler-based search engines was WebCrawler , which came out in 1994. Unlike its predecessors, it allowed users to search for any word in any webpage, which has become the standard for all major search engines since. It was also the first one widely known by the public. Also in 1994, Lycos (which started at Carnegie Mellon University ) was launched and became a major commercial endeavor.
Soon after, many search engines appeared and vied for popularity. These included Magellan , Excite , Infoseek , Inktomi , Northern Light , and AltaVista . Yahoo! was among the most popular ways for people to find web pages of interest, but its search function operated on its web directory , rather than its full-text copies of web pages. Information seekers could also browse the directory instead of doing a keyword-based search.
In 1996, Netscape was looking to give a single search engine an exclusive deal as the featured search engine on Netscape's web browser. There was so much interest that instead Netscape struck deals with five of the major search engines: for $5 million a year, each search engine would be in rotation on the Netscape search engine page. The five engines were Yahoo!, Magellan, Lycos, Infoseek, and Excite. [8] [9]
Google adopted the idea of selling search terms in 1998, from a small search engine company named goto.com . This move had a significant effect on the SE business, which went from struggling to one of the most profitable businesses in the internet. [ citation needed ]
Search engines were also known as some of the brightest stars in the Internet investing frenzy that occurred in the late 1990s. [10] Several companies entered the market spectacularly, receiving record gains during their initial public offerings . Some have taken down their public search engine, and are marketing enterprise-only editions, such as Northern Light. Many search engine companies were caught up in the dot-com bubble , a speculation-driven market boom that peaked in 1999 and ended in 2001.
Around 2000, Google's search engine rose to prominence. [11] The company achieved better results for many searches with an innovation called PageRank , as was explained in the paper Anatomy of a Search Engine written by Sergey Brin and Larry Page , the later founders of Google. [12] This iterative algorithm ranks web pages based on the number and PageRank of other web sites and pages that link there, on the premise that good or desirable pages are linked to more than others. Google also maintained a minimalist interface to its search engine. In contrast, many of its competitors embedded a search engine in a web portal . In fact, Google search engine became so popular that spoof engines emerged such as Mystery Seeker .
By 2000, Yahoo! was providing search services based on Inktomi's search engine. Yahoo! acquired Inktomi in 2002, and Overture (which owned AlltheWeb and AltaVista) in 2003. Yahoo! switched to Google's search engine until 2004, when it launched its own search engine based on the combined technologies of its acquisitions.
Microsoft first launched MSN Search in the fall of 1998 using search results from Inktomi. In early 1999 the site began to display listings from Looksmart , blended with results from Inktomi. For a short time in 1999, MSN Search used results from AltaVista instead. In 2004, Microsoft began a transition to its own search technology, powered by its own web crawler (called msnbot ).
Microsoft's rebranded search engine, Bing , was launched on June 1, 2009. On July 29, 2009, Yahoo! and Microsoft finalized a deal in which Yahoo! Search would be powered by Microsoft Bing technology.

How web search engines work
A search engine maintains the following processes in near real time:
Web search engines get their information by web crawling from site to site. The "spider" checks for the standard filename robots.txt , addressed to it, before sending certain information back to be indexed depending on many factors, such as the titles, page content, JavaScript , Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), headings, as evidenced by the standard HTML markup of the informational content, or its metadata in HTML meta tags .
Indexing means associating words and other definable tokens found on web pages to their domain names and HTML-based fields. The associations are made in a public database, made available for web search queries. A query from a user can be a single word. The index helps find information relating to the query as quickly as possible. [13]
Some of the techniques for indexing, and caching are trade secrets, whereas web crawling is a straightforward process of visiting all sites on a systematic basis.
Between visits by the spider , the cached version of page (some or all the content needed to render it) stored in the search engine working memory is quickly sent to an inquirer. If a visit is overdue, the search engine can just act as a web proxy instead. In this case the page may differ from the search terms indexed. [13] The cached page holds the appearance of the version whose words were indexed, so a cached version of a page can be useful to the web site when the actual page has been lost, but this problem is also considered a mild form of linkrot .
Typically when a user enters a query into a search engine it is a few keywords . [14] The index already has the names of the sites containing the keywords, and these are instantly obtained from the index. The real processing load is in generating the web pages that are the search results list: Every page in the entire list must be weighted according to information in the indexes. [13] Then the top search result item requires the lookup, reconstruction, and markup of the snippets showing the context of the keywords matched. These are only part of the processing each search results web page requires, and further pages (next to the top) require more of this post processing.
Beyond simple keyword lookups, search engines offer their own GUI- or command-driven operators and search parameters to refine the search results. These provide the necessary controls for the user engaged in the feedback loop users create by filtering and weighting while refining the search results, given the initial pages of the first search results. For example, from 2007 the Google.com search engine has allowed one to filter by date by clicking "Show search tools" in the leftmost column of the initial search results page, and then selecting the desired date range. [15] It's also possible to weight by date because each page has a modification time. Most search engines support the use of the boolean operators AND, OR and NOT to help end users refine the search query . Boolean operators are for literal searches that allow the user to refine and extend the terms of the search. The engine looks for the words or phrases exactly as entered. Some search engines provide an advanced feature called proximity search , which allows users to define the distance between keywords. [13] There is also concept-based searching where the research involves using statistical analysis on pages containing the words or phrases you search for. As well, natural language queries allow the user to type a question in the same form one would ask it to a human. [16] A site like this would be ask.com. [17]
The usefulness of a search engine depends on the relevance of the result set it gives back. While there may be millions of web pages that include a particular word or phrase, some pages may be more relevant, popular, or authoritative than others. Most search engines employ methods to rank the results to provide the "best" results first. How a search engine decides which pages are the best matches, and what order the results should be shown in, varies widely from one engine to another. [13] The methods also change over time as Internet usage changes and new techniques evolve. There are two main types of search engine that have evolved: one is a system of predefined and hierarchically ordered keywords that humans have programmed extensively. The other is a system that generates an " inverted index " by analyzing texts it locates. This first form relies much more heavily on the computer itself to do the bulk of the work.
Most Web search engines are commercial ventures supported by advertising revenue and thus some of them allow advertisers to have their listings ranked higher in search results for a fee. Search engines that do not accept money for their search results make money by running search related ads alongside the regular search engine results. The search engines make money every time someone clicks on one of these ads. [18]

Market share
Google is the world's most popular search engine, with a marketshare of 80.52 percent as of March, 2017. [19]
The world's most popular search engines (with >1% market share) are:

East Asia and Russia
In some East Asian countries and Russia, Google is not the most popular search engine since its algorithm searching has regional filtering, and hides most results. [ citation needed ]
Yandex commands a marketshare of 61.9 percent in Russia, compared to Google's 28.3 percent. [20] In China, Baidu is the most popular search engine. [21] South Korea's homegrown search portal, Naver , is used for 70 percent of online searches in the country. [22] Yahoo! Japan and Yahoo! Taiwan are the most popular avenues for internet search in Japan and Taiwan, respectively. [23]

Search engine bias
Although search engines are programmed to rank websites based on some combination of their popularity and relevancy, empirical studies indicate various political, economic, and social biases in the information they provide [24] [25] and the underlying assumptions about the technology. [26] These biases can be a direct result of economic and commercial processes (e.g., companies that advertise with a search engine can become also more popular in its organic search results), and political processes (e.g., the removal of search results to comply with local laws). [27] For example, Google will not surface certain neo-Nazi websites in France and Germany, where Holocaust denial is illegal.
Biases can also be a result of social processes, as search engine algorithms are frequently designed to exclude non-normative viewpoints in favor of more "popular" results. [28] Indexing algorithms of major search engines skew towards coverage of U.S.-based sites, rather than websites from non-U.S. countries. [25]
Google Bombing is one example of an attempt to manipulate search results for political, social or commercial reasons.
Several scholars have studied the cultural changes triggered by search engines, [29] and the representation of certain controversial topics in their results, such as terrorism in Ireland [30] and conspiracy theories . [31]

Customized results and filter bubbles
Many search engines such as Google and Bing provide customized results based on the user's activity history. This leads to an effect that has been called a filter bubble . The term describes a phenomenon in which websites use algorithms to selectively guess what information a user would like to see, based on information about the user (such as location, past click behaviour and search history). As a result, websites tend to show only information that agrees with the user's past viewpoint, effectively isolating the user in a bubble that tends to exclude contrary information. Prime examples are Google's personalized search results and Facebook 's personalized news stream. According to Eli Pariser , who coined the term, users get less exposure to conflicting viewpoints and are isolated intellectually in their own informational bubble. Pariser related an example in which one user searched Google for "BP" and got investment news about British Petroleum while another searcher got information about the Deepwater Horizon oil spill and that the two search results pages were "strikingly different". [32] [33] [34] The bubble effect may have negative implications for civic discourse, according to Pariser. [35] Since this problem has been identified, competing search engines have emerged that seek to avoid this problem by not tracking or "bubbling" users, such as DuckDuckGo . Other scholars do not share Pariser's view, finding the evidence in support of his thesis unconvincing. [36]

Christian, Islamic and Jewish search engines
The global growth of the Internet and electronic media in the Arab and Muslim World during the last decade has encouraged Islamic adherents in the Middle East and Asian sub-continent , to attempt their own search engines, their own filtered search portals that would enable users to perform safe searches .
More than usual safe search filters, these Islamic web portals categorizing websites into being either " halal " or " haram ", based on modern, expert, interpretation of the "Law of Islam" .
ImHalal came online in September 2011. Halalgoogling came online in July 2013. These use haram filters on the collections from Google and Bing (and other). [37]
While lack of investment and slow pace in technologies in the Muslim World has hindered progress and thwarted success of an Islamic search engine, targeting as the main consumers Islamic adherents, projects like Muxlim , a Muslim lifestyle site, did receive millions of dollars from investors like Rite Internet Ventures, and it also faltered.
Other religion-oriented search engines are Jewgle, the Jewish version of Google, and SeekFind.org, which is Christian. SeekFind filters sites that attack or degrade their faith. [38]

Search engine submission
Search engine submission is a process in which a webmaster submits a website directly to a search engine. While search engine submission is sometimes presented as a way to promote a website, it generally is not necessary because the major search engines use web crawlers, that will eventually find most web sites on the Internet without assistance. They can either submit one web page at a time, or they can submit the entire site using a sitemap , but it is normally only necessary to submit the home page of a web site as search engines are able to crawl a well designed website. There are two remaining reasons to submit a web site or web page to a search engine: to add an entirely new web site without waiting for a search engine to discover it, and to have a web site's record updated after a substantial redesign.
Some search engine submission software not only submits websites to multiple search engines, but also add links to websites from their own pages. This could appear helpful in increasing a website's ranking, because external links are one of the most important factors determining a website's ranking. However John Mueller of Google has stated that this "can lead to a tremendous number of unnatural links for your site" with a negative impact on site ranking. [39]

See also
WebPage index: 00029
PARC (company)
PARC ( Palo Alto Research Center Incorporated ), formerly Xerox PARC , is a research and development company in Palo Alto, California , [1] [2] [3] with a distinguished reputation for its contributions to information technology and hardware systems. [ citation needed ]
Founded in 1970 as a division of Xerox Corporation , PARC has been in large part responsible for such developments as laser printing , Ethernet , the modern personal computer , graphical user interface (GUI) and desktop paradigm , object-oriented programming , ubiquitous computing , amorphous silicon (a-Si) applications, and advancing very-large-scale integration (VLSI) for semiconductors .
Xerox formed Palo Alto Research Center Incorporated as a wholly owned subsidiary in 2002.

History
In 1969, Chief Scientist at Xerox Jack Goldman approached George Pake , a physicist specializing in nuclear magnetic resonance and provost of Washington University in St. Louis , about starting a second research center for the company.
Pake selected Palo Alto, California, as the site of what was to become known as PARC. While the 3,000 mile buffer between it and Xerox headquarters in Rochester, New York afforded scientists at the new lab great freedom to undertake their work, the distance also served as an impediment in persuading management of the promise of some of their greatest achievements.
PARC's West Coast location proved to be advantageous in the mid-1970s, when the lab was able to hire many employees of the nearby SRI Augmentation Research Center (ARC) as that facility's funding began falling, from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency ( DARPA ), National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ), and U.S. Air Force (USAF). Being situated on Stanford Research Park land leased from Stanford University [4] allowed Stanford graduate students to be involved in PARC research projects, and PARC scientists to collaborate with academic seminars and projects.
Much of PARC's early success in the computer field was under the leadership of its Computer Science Laboratory manager Bob Taylor , who guided the lab as associate manager from 1970 to 1977 and as manager from 1977 to 1983.

PARC today
After three decades as a division of Xerox, PARC was transformed in 2002 into an independent, wholly owned subsidiary company dedicated to developing and maturing advances in science and business concepts with the support of commercial partners and clients.
Xerox remains the company's largest customer (50%), but PARC has many other corporate and venture clients in different fields of use than Xerox including: VMware , Fujitsu , Dai Nippon Printing (DNP), Samsung , NEC , SolFocus, Powerset , Thin Film Electronics ASA and many more.
PARC currently conducts research into clean technology , metamaterials , user interface design, sensemaking , ubiquitous computing and context-aware systems, large-area electronics, digital manufacturing, and model-based control and optimization in embedded, intelligent systems.

Accomplishments
Xerox PARC has been the inventor and incubator of many elements of modern computing in the contemporary office work place:

The Alto
Most of these developments were included in the Alto, which added the now familiar Stanford Research Institute (SRI) developed mouse , [5] unifying into a single model most aspects of now-standard personal computer use. The integration of Ethernet prompted the development of the PARC Universal Packet architecture, much like today's Internet.

The GUI
Xerox has been heavily criticized (particularly by business historians) for failing to properly commercialize and profitably exploit PARC's innovations. [6] A favorite example is the graphical user interface (GUI), initially developed at PARC for the Alto and then commercialized as the Xerox Star by the Xerox Systems Development Department. Although very significant in terms of its influence on future system design, it is deemed a failure because it only sold approximately 25,000 units. A small group from PARC led by David Liddle and Charles Irby formed Metaphor Computer Systems . They extended the Star desktop concept into an animated graphic and communicating office-automation model and sold the company to IBM .

Distinguished researchers
Among PARC's distinguished researchers were three Turing Award winners: Butler W. Lampson (1992), Alan Kay (2003), and Charles P. Thacker (2009). The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Software System Award recognized the Alto system in 1984, Smalltalk in 1987, InterLisp in 1992, and the remote procedure call in 1994. Lampson, Kay, Bob Taylor, and Charles P. Thacker received the National Academy of Engineering 's prestigious Charles Stark Draper Prize in 2004 for their work on the Alto.

Legacy
PARC's developments in information technology served for a long time as standards for much of the computing industry. Many advances were not equalled or surpassed for two decades, [ citation needed ] enormous timespans in the fast-paced high-tech world.
While there is some truth that Xerox management failed to see the potential of many of PARC's inventions, this was mostly a problem with its computing research, a relatively small part of PARC's operations. A number of GUI engineers left to join Apple Computer . Technologies pioneered by its materials scientists such as liquid-crystal display (LCD), optical disc innovations, and laser printing were actively and successfully introduced by Xerox to the business and consumer markets. [7]
Work at PARC since the early 1980s includes advances in ubiquitous computing , aspect-oriented programming , and IPv6 .

See also
WebPage index: 00030
The Atlantic
The Atlantic is an American magazine and multi-platform publisher, founded in 1857 as The Atlantic Monthly in Boston, Massachusetts . Since 2006 [update] , The Atlantic has been based in Washington, D.C . [2] Created as a literary and cultural commentary magazine, it has grown to achieve a reputation for having a moderate mindset in its reporting. [3] The magazine has notably recognized and published new writers and poets, as well as encouraged major careers. It has published leading writers' commentary on abolition , education, and other major issues in contemporary political affairs. The periodical was named Magazine of the Year by the American Society of Magazine Editors (ASME) in 2016. [4]
The first issue of the magazine was published on November 1, 1857. [5] [6] The magazine's initiator and founder was Francis H. Underwood , an assistant to the publisher, [7] [8] [9] who received less recognition than his partners because he was "neither a 'humbug' nor a Harvard man". [10] The other founding sponsors were prominent writers, including Ralph Waldo Emerson ; Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr. ; Henry Wadsworth Longfellow ; Harriet Beecher Stowe ; John Greenleaf Whittier ; and James Russell Lowell , who served as its first editor.
After experiencing financial hardship and a series of ownership changes, the magazine was reformatted as a general editorial magazine. Focusing on " foreign affairs , politics, and the economy [as well as] cultural trends", it is now primarily aimed at a target audience of serious national readers and " thought leaders ". [11] [12] In 2010, The Atlantic posted its first profit in a decade. In profiling the publication at the time, The New York Times noted the accomplishment was the result of "a cultural transfusion, a dose of counterintuition and a lot of digital advertising revenue." [13]
TheAtlantic.com, The Atlantic 's flagship website, provides daily coverage and analysis of breaking news, politics and international affairs, education, technology, heath, science, and culture. In addition to the print magazine and website, The Atlantic houses an editorial events arm, AtlanticLIVE; Atlantic Re:think, its creative marketing team; and Atlantic Media Strategies, a creative agency and consulting firm.
The Atlantic's current editor in chief is Jeffrey Goldberg and its president is Bob Cohn. Hayley Romer is publisher and Scott Stossel is editor of the magazine. The Atlantic is part of the portfolio of Washington, D.C.-based media company, Atlantic Media, which is owned by David Bradley. [14]

Format, publication frequency, and name
The magazine, subscribed to by over 425,000 readers, now publishes ten times a year. [15] As the former name suggests, it was a monthly magazine for 144 years until 2001, when it published eleven issues; it published ten issues yearly from 2003 on, dropped "Monthly" from the cover starting with the January/February 2004 issue, and officially changed the name in 2007. The Atlantic features articles in the fields of politics, foreign affairs, business and the economy, culture and the arts, technology, and science. [16]
On January 22, 2008, TheAtlantic.com dropped its subscriber wall and allowed users to freely browse its site, including all past archives. [17] At the time, The Atlantic ' s web properties included TheAtlanticWire.com, a news- and opinion-tracking site launched in 2009, [18] and in 2011, TheAtlanticCities.com, a stand-alone website devoted to global cities and trends. [19] According to a Mashable profile in December 2011, "traffic to the three web properties recently surpassed 11 million uniques per month, up a staggering 2500% since The Atlantic brought down its paywall in early 2008." [20]
In December 2011, a new Health Channel launched on TheAtlantic.com, incorporating coverage of food, as well as topics related to the mind, body, sex, family, and public health. [21] TheAtlantic.com has also expanded to visual storytelling with the addition of the In Focus photo blog, curated by Alan Taylor. [22] and in 2011 it created its Video Channel. [23] Initially created as an aggregator, The Atlantic 's Video component, Atlantic Studios, has since evolved in an in-house production studio that create custom video series and original documentaries. [24]
In 2015, TheAtlantic.com launched a dedicated Science section; [25] and in January 2016 it redesigned and expanded its politics section in conjunction with the 2016 U.S. presidential race. [26]
TheAtlantic.com was redesigned and relaunched as CityLab.com in 2014. [27]

Literary history
A leading literary magazine, The Atlantic has published many significant works and authors. It was the first to publish pieces by the abolitionists Julia Ward Howe (" Battle Hymn of the Republic " on February 1, 1862), and William Parker's slave narrative , "The Freedman's Story" (in February and March 1866). It also published Charles W. Eliot 's "The New Education", a call for practical reform that led to his appointment to presidency of Harvard University in 1869; works by Charles Chesnutt before he collected them in The Conjure Woman (1899); and poetry and short stories, helping launch many national literary careers. [ citation needed ] For example, Emily Dickinson , after reading an article in The Atlantic by Thomas Wentworth Higginson , asked him to become her mentor. [ citation needed ] In 2005, the magazine won a National Magazine Award for fiction. [ citation needed ]
The magazine also published many of the works of Mark Twain , including one that was lost until 2001. [ citation needed ] Editors have recognized major cultural changes and movements; for example, the magazine published Martin Luther King, Jr. 's defense of civil disobedience in " Letter from Birmingham Jail " in August 1963. [29]
The magazine has also published speculative articles that inspired the development of new technologies. The classic example is Vannevar Bush 's essay " As We May Think " (July 1945), which inspired Douglas Engelbart and later Ted Nelson to develop the modern workstation and hypertext technology. [ citation needed ]
In addition to its fiction and poetry, The Atlantic has emerged as an influential platform for longform storytelling and newsmaker interviews. Influential cover stories have included Anne Marie Slaughter's 2012 cover story, "Why Women Still Can't Have It All" and Ta-Nehisi Coates's 2014 "Case for Reparations". [30] In 2015, Jeffrey Goldberg's "Obama Doctrine" was a widely discussed by American media and prompted response by many world leaders. [31]
As of 2017, writers and frequent contributors to the print magazine include James Fallows , Jeffrey Goldberg , Ta-Nehisi Coates , Molly Ball, Caitlin Flanagan , James Hamblin , Julia Ioffe , Jonathan Rauch , Rosie Gray, Gillian White, Adrienne LaFrance, Vann Newkirk, Derek Thompson, David Frum , Peter Beinart , and James Parker.

Ownership
For all but recent decades, The Atlantic was known as a distinctively New England literary magazine (as opposed to Harper's and later The New Yorker , both from New York City). It achieved a national reputation and was important to the careers of many American writers and poets. [ citation needed ] By its third year, it was published by the famous Boston publishing house Ticknor and Fields (later to become part of Houghton Mifflin [ citation needed ] ). The magazine was purchased in 1908 by its then editor, Ellery Sedgwick , but remained in Boston.
In 1980, the magazine was acquired by Mortimer Zuckerman , property magnate and founder of Boston Properties , who became its Chairman. On September 27, 1999, Zuckerman transferred ownership of the magazine to David G. Bradley , owner of the Beltway news-focused National Journal Group . Bradley had promised that the magazine would stay in Boston for the foreseeable future, as it did for the next five and a half years.
In April 2005, however, the publishers announced that the editorial offices would be moved from its long-time home at 77 North Washington Street in Boston to join the company's advertising and circulation divisions in Washington, D.C. [32] Later in August, Bradley told the New York Observer , cost cutting from the move would amount to a minor $200,000–$300,000 and those savings would be swallowed by severance-related spending. The reason was to create a hub in Washington where the top minds from all of Bradley's publications could collaborate under the Atlantic Media Company umbrella. Few of the Boston staff agreed to relocate, and Bradley embarked on an open search for a new editorial staff. [33]
In 2006, Bradley hired James Bennet as editor-in-chief, who had been the Jerusalem bureau chief for The New York Times . He also hired writers including Jeffrey Goldberg and Andrew Sullivan . [34] Jay Lauf joined the organization as publisher and vice-president in 2008; he is currently publisher and president of Quartz . [35]

Politics
Throughout its 159-year history, The Atlantic has been reluctant to issue electoral stances. In 1860, three years into publication, The Atlantic' s then-editor James Russell Lowell endorsed Abraham Lincoln for his first run for president and also endorsed the abolition of slavery . [36] In 1964, 104 years later, Edward Weeks wrote on behalf of the editorial board in endorsing Lyndon B. Johnson and rebuking Barry Goldwater 's candidacy. [37] In 2016, the editorial board endorsed, the third time since the magazine's founding, Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton in a rebuke of Donald Trump 's candidacy. [38]

The Wire
The Wire (previously known as The Atlantic Wire ) was a sister site of TheAtlantic.com that aggregated news and opinions from online, print, radio, and television outlets. [39] [40] [41] When The Atlantic Wire first launched in 2009, it curated op-eds from across the media spectrum and summarized significant positions in each debate. [41] Expanded to encompass news and original reporting, regular features include "What I Read", showcasing the media diets of individuals from the worlds of entertainment, journalism, and politics, and "Trimming the Times", [42] a summary of the feature editor's choices of the best content in The New York Times . The Atlantic Wire rebranded itself as The Wire in November 2013. [43] [44]
The Wire was folded back into The Atlantic in September 2014. [45]

CityLab
CityLab (formerly The Atlantic Cities ) is the latest expansion of The Atlantic ' s digital properties, launched in September 2011. The stand-alone site has been described as exploring and explaining "the most innovative ideas and pressing issues facing today's global cities and neighborhoods." [46]
The site was co-founded as The Atlantic Cities by Richard Florida, urban theorist, professor. In 2014, it was rebranded as CityLab.com. Today, CityLab.com's coverage areas include design, politics, crime, and housing. Among its offerings are Navigator, "a guide to urban life," and CityFixer, which curates solutions-based stories around a dozen topics. [47]
In 2015, CityLab partnered with Univision to launch CityLab Latino, which features original journalism in Spanish as well as translated reporting from CityLab.com. [48]

Critical reception
In June 2006, the Chicago Tribune named The Atlantic one of the top ten English-language magazines, describing it as "a gracefully aging ... 150-year-old granddaddy of periodicals" because "it keeps us smart and in the know" with cover stories on the then-forthcoming fight over Roe v. Wade . It also lauded regular features such as "Word Fugitives" and "Primary Sources" as "cultural barometers." [49]
On January 14, 2013, The Atlantic ' s website published " sponsor content " about David Miscavige , the leader of the Church of Scientology . While the magazine had previously published advertising looking like articles, this one was met with wide criticism. The page comments were moderated by the marketing team, not by editorial staff; comments critical of the church were being removed while comments praising the church were being downvoted by readers. Later that day, The Atlantic removed the piece from its website and issued an apology. [50] [51] [52]

List of editors

List of issues

See also
WebPage index: 00031
comScore
comScore is an American global media measurement and analytics company providing marketing data and analytics to many of the world's largest enterprises, media and advertising agencies, and publishers.

History
ComScore Networks was founded in July 1999 in Reston, Virginia . [3] The company was co-founded by Gian Fulgoni , who was for many years the CEO of market research company Information Resources, Inc. (IRI) and Magid Abraham , who was also an ex-IRI employee and had served as President of IRI in the mid-1990s. Please visit [1]
Magid and Gian came up with the idea while working with one of the original investors in the company, Mike Santer, who thought up the concept of creating a very large consumer panel online to track online commerce. The problem was that the traditional methods in which companies were tracking online behavior would not work in tracking commerce, because of the lower incidence of buying online. Normal panels in tracking visitation would be around 20-30K and, with less than 2-3% of the population buying online, the panel size needed to be at least 1-2MM. They decided to build a very large panel using more aggressive recruiting methodology and managing for the error by using advanced statistical methods and controls. Years and tens of millions of dollars went into finding the best ways to measure online buying and other behaviors, plus the level of accuracy required for Fortune 1000 companies to buy. [ citation needed ]
In 2000, comScore bought certain assets and the customer agreements of PC Data of Reston, Virginia, which was founded by Ann Stephens in 1991. PC Data was among the earliest Web measurement firms, but increasing competitive challenges (including a threat of a patent infringement lawsuit by industry pioneer Media Metrix ) put PC Data's future in doubt. The acquisition of PC Data's large customer base helped accelerate the growth of comScore's syndicated measurement service.
By 2001, Media Metrix had built a market share lead but had been unable to create a sustainable financial structure. NetRatings, its closest competitor, was armed with strong capital reserves and announced its intention to acquire and integrate Media Metrix. However, after several months, the FTC announced its intention to block the acquisition and accordingly, NetRatings canceled the transaction. comScore was subsequently able to acquire Media Metrix in a deal announced in June 2002.
Media Metrix originated as PC Meter, a business unit of market research company NPD Group and began publishing statistics in January 1996. [4] In July 1997, it changed its name to Media Metrix, citing the desire to track a wider variety of interactive traffic. [5] In October 1998, Media Metrix merged with its nearest rival, Relevant Knowledge. [6] The company went public as NASDAQ:MMXI in May 1999, reaching a market cap of $135 million on its first day of trading. [7] In June 2000, the company acquired Jupiter Communications for $414 million in stock and changed its name to Jupiter Media Metrix. [8] In the aftermath of the dot-com bubble collapse and associated downturn in internet marketing spending, Jupiter sold the Media Metrix service to rival comScore for $1.5 million in June 2002. [9]
On March 30, 2007, comScore announced its intent to sell shares in an initial public offering and be traded on the Nasdaq using the symbol "SCOR". [10] [11]
In May 2008, comScore announced its acquisition of M:Metrics, a company measuring mobile content consumption. The transaction involved a cash payment of $44.3 million and the issue of approximately 50,000 options to purchase shares of comScore common stock to certain M:Metrics unvested option holders. [12]
comScore announced in October 2009 the acquisition of Certifica, a provider of real-time web measurement and digital marketing technology solutions in Latin America. Based in Santiago , Chile , Certifica has offices throughout Latin America, including Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, Colombia and Peru. The acquisition enhanced comScore’s presence in the rapidly developing Latin American market. [13]
In February 2010, comScore announced it had signed a definitive agreement to acquire the ARSgroup in an all-cash acquisition. Headquartered in Evansville , Indiana, ARSgroup’s areas of expertise included brand strategy, all stages of creative development, campaign evaluation across all marketing and media channels, media planning, return on investment, and forecasting. [14]
On July 1, 2010, comScore announced that it has acquired the products division of Nexius, Inc. [15]
comScore then acquired web analytics and video measurement solutions provider Nedstat ( nl ) for approximately $36.7 million. Announced on September 1, 2010, the acquisition helps comScore accelerate its global expansion strategy, particularly in European markets. [16]
On February 11, 2014, comScore announced the appointment of Serge Matta as chief executive officer, effective March 1. [17] In February 2015 comScore US entered into a partnership with Kantar owned by WPP with an equity stake purchase. [18]
In September 2015, comScore and Rentrak announced a merger of the two companies. The move was meant to combine comScore's digital media measurement capabilities with the TV measurement capabilities of Rentrak to create a cross-platform media measurement firm, perhaps capable of challenging Nielsen N.V. in the media measurement space. [19] Under terms of the agreement, comScore agreed to acquire Rentrak in an all-stock deal valued at about $732 million, with Rentrak shareholders receiving 1.15 shares of comScore per owned share of Rentrak. [20]
The comScore-Rentrak deal closed on February 1, 2016, with the final transaction being valued at $767.7 million. [21]
Co-founder Gian Fulgoni, who had been serving as chairman emeritus since 2014, abruptly replaced Serge Matta as chief executive officer on August 10, 2016. [22] On September 2, 2016, comScore received a letter from NASDAQ that it was in danger of being delisted from the exchange on September 12 unless comScore filed its 2015 annual report (form 10-K) and reports for the first two quarters of 2016. [23] On Feb 6, 2017, comScore announced they would not meet the NASDAQ-imposed deadline to "complete its financial restatement and regain compliance with Nasdaq's listing requirements." [24] Because of this missed deadline being missed, "comScore's common stock may be suspended from trading and delisted from Nasdaq." [24] If comScore is delisted from NASDAQ and their trading is suspended, they advise they intend to "be quoted on the OTC Markets." [24]

Data collection and reporting
comScore maintains a group of users who have monitoring software (with brands including PermissionResearch, OpinionSquare and VoiceFive Networks) [25] installed on their computers. [ citation needed ] In exchange for joining the comScore research panels, users are presented with various benefits, including computer security software, Internet data storage, virus scanning and chances to win cash or prizes. [ citation needed ]
comScore estimates that two million users are part of the monitoring program. [11] However, self-selected populations, no matter how large, may not be representative of the population as a whole. To obtain the most accurate data, comScore adjusts the statistics using weights to make sure that each population segment is adequately represented. To calculate these weights, comScore regularly recruits panelists using random digit dialing and other offline recruiting methods to accurately determine how many users are online, aggregated by geography, income, and age. [26] [27] [28] Correcting the comScore data requires having accurate demographics about the larger pool of users. However, some comScore users are recruited without being asked to give demographic information and, in other cases, users may not be truthful about their demographics. To ensure the accuracy of the data, comScore verifies its users' demographics during the course of measuring statistical data. [29]
The corrected data is used to generate reports on topics ranging from web traffic [30] to video streaming activity [31] and consumer buying power. [32]

Unified Digital Measurement
With the introduction of Unified Digital Measurement (UDM) in May 2009, comScore implemented a solution to digital audience measurement that organically blended both panel and census-based measurement approaches into a single unified methodology. comScore has developed this proprietary methodology to calculate audience reach in a manner not affected by variables such as cookie deletion and cookie blocking/rejection to help reconcile longstanding differences between the two measurement approaches. [33]

Campaign measurement
comScore debuted Campaign Essentials in 2010 to measure how digital campaigns are reaching their audiences. In March 2012, comScore launched validated Campaign Essentials (vCE), which introduced the notion of “validated” impressions. [34] In January 2013, comScore announced that it had evaluated 4,000 campaigns for clients covering more than 75 advertising agencies. [35]

Criticism
In 2006, Ben Edelman , a Harvard researcher, alleged that there were cases where comScore software had been installed on users' computers without their knowledge. [36] comScore admitted that it was in discussion with a spyware firm called DollarRevenue but said that no contract was ever signed, and that once it realized DollarRevenue was distributing comScore's software, months later, it took steps to prevent the DollarRevenue-distributed software from sending data to comScore. [37] Stanford IT notes that the monitoring software has been bundled with file sharing program iMesh without users being aware of it, [38] although comScore's relationship with iMesh was short-lived and occurred several years ago. [37]
In the past, the software forwarded users' internet traffic through comScore proxy servers , provoking criticism about speed performance. [38] [39] As a result, several universities and banks took steps to block the proxy servers. [40] [41] In response to these concerns, comScore no longer uses this technology. [ citation needed ]
In June 2010, a warning about Mac Spyware being launched from free applications like screensavers, from security company Intego [42] was reported in the media and implicated VoiceFive, Inc. as the source of certain alleged spyware software. [43]
Additionally, noted blogger and angel investor Jason Calacanis claimed that ComScore was running an 'extorting ring' by vastly undercounting publisher traffic numbers and forcing them to pay fees for direct measurement via a tracking pixel. [44] ComScore responded to these allegations by offering their direct measurement tracking pixel to long-tail web publishers for free. [45]

Awards

Competitors and alliances
Competitors in internet market research include Alexa , Nielsen Online , Quantcast , SimilarWeb , SRDS by Kantar Media , Thalamus, and Compete , a TNS Media company.
In February 2011, The Coalition for Innovative Media Measurement (CIMM) and comScore announced they were working together to measure three-screen users and their behavior with content and advertising across television, Internet, and mobile.

See also
WebPage index: 00032
PROTECT IP Act
The PROTECT IP Act ( Preventing Real Online Threats to Economic Creativity and Theft of Intellectual Property Act , or PIPA ) was a proposed law with the stated goal of giving the US government and copyright holders additional tools to curb access to "rogue websites dedicated to the sale of infringing or counterfeit goods", especially those registered outside the U.S. [1] The bill was introduced on May 12, 2011, by Senator Patrick Leahy (D-VT) and 11 bipartisan co-sponsors. [2] The Congressional Budget Office estimated that implementation of the bill would cost the federal government $47 million through 2016, to cover enforcement costs and the hiring and training of 22 new special agents and 26 support staff. [3] The Senate Judiciary Committee passed the bill, but Senator Ron Wyden (D-OR) placed a hold on it. [4]
The PROTECT IP Act is a re-write of the Combating Online Infringement and Counterfeits Act (COICA), [5] which failed to pass in 2010. A similar House version of the bill, the Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA), was introduced on October 26, 2011. [6]
In the wake of online protests held on January 18, 2012, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid announced that a vote on the bill would be postponed until issues raised about the bill were resolved. [7] [8] [9]

Content
The bill defines infringement as distribution of illegal copies, counterfeit goods, or anti- digital rights management technology. Infringement exists if "facts or circumstances suggest [the site] is used, primarily as a means for engaging in, enabling, or facilitating the activities described." [10] The bill says that it does not alter existing substantive trademark or copyright law. [11]
The bill provides for "enhancing enforcement against rogue websites operated and registered overseas" and authorizes the United States Department of Justice to seek a court order in rem against websites dedicated to infringing activities, if through due diligence , an individual owner or operator cannot be located. [12] The bill requires the Attorney General to serve notice to the defendant. [13] Once the court issues an order, it could be served on financial transaction providers, Internet advertising services, Internet service providers, and information location tools to require them to stop financial transactions with the rogue site and remove links to it. [14] The term "information location tool" is borrowed from the Digital Millennium Copyright Act and is understood to refer to search engines but could cover other sites that link to content. [15]
Nonauthoritative domain name servers would be ordered to take technically feasible and reasonable steps to prevent the domain name from resolving to the IP address of a website that had been found by the court to be "dedicated to infringing activities." [17] The website could still be reached by its IP address, but links or users that used the website’s domain name would not reach it. Search engines—such as Google—would be ordered to "(i) remove or disable access to the Internet site associated with the domain name set forth in the [court] order; or (ii) not serve a hypertext link to such Internet site." [18]
Trademark and copyright holders who have been harmed by the activities of a website dedicated to infringing activities would be able to apply for a court injunction against the domain name to compel financial transaction providers and Internet advertising services to stop processing transactions to and placing ads on the website but would not be able to obtain the domain name remedies available to the Attorney General. [19]

Supporters

Legislators
The PROTECT IP Act has received bipartisan support in the Senate, with introduction sponsorship by Senator Patrick Leahy (D-VT) , and, as of December 17, 2011, co-sponsorship by 40 Senators. [20]

Companies and trade organizations
The bill is supported by copyright and trademark owners in business, industry, and labor groups, spanning all sectors of the economy. Supporters include the National Cable & Telecommunications Association, the Independent Film & Television Alliance, the National Association of Theatre Owners, the Motion Picture Association of America , the Directors Guild of America, the American Federation of Musicians, the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists, the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees, the Screen Actors Guild, International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Nashville Songwriters Association International, Songwriters Guild of America, Viacom, Institute for Policy Innovation, Macmillan Publishers, Acushnet Company , Recording Industry Association of America , Copyright Alliance and NBCUniversal. [21] [22]
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce and AFL-CIO have come together in support of the bill. In May and September 2011, two letters signed by 170 and 359 businesses and organizations, respectively—including the National Association of Manufacturers (NAM), the Small Business & Entrepreneurship Council, Nike, 1–800 Pet Meds, L’Oreal, Rosetta Stone, Pfizer, Ford Motor Company, Revlon, NBA, and Sony—were sent to Congress which endorsed the Act and encouraged the passage of legislation to protect intellectual property and shut down rogue websites. [23] [24] [25] David Hirschmann of the Chamber of Commerce complained about the state of the political debate in January 2012, saying that talk of loss of freedoms and censorship "has nothing to do with the substance of the bills." Hirschmann promised "to use every tool in our toolbox to make sure members of Congress know what’s in these bills." [26]

Others
Constitutional expert Floyd Abrams , representing the MPAA and related trade groups, wrote a Letter to Congress stating that the proposed PROTECT IP Act is constitutionally sound. [27]
Daniel Castro of the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation (ITIF), a think tank funded in part by the Information Technology Industry Council and the publisher of a 2009 report titled "Steal These Policies" [28] that formed the basis for both SOPA and PIPA, defended PIPA's predecessor bill ( COICA ) in March 2011, saying "nobody's talking about taking down someone's personal website because they happen to use a copyrighted photo." [29] In January 2012 ITIF Senior Research Fellow Richard Bennett said that criticism of the legislation was misinformed and overblown: "[t]he critics either don't understand what the bills do or are misrepresenting what the bills do. There's sort of a hysterical climate of criticism where people are objecting to something the bills don't do and are promoting noble causes like free speech and democracy but there is not much connection between what they are complaining about and what's in the legislation." [30]

Opponents

Legislators
Oregon Senator Ron Wyden (D) has publicly voiced opposition to the legislation, and placed a Senate hold on it in May 2011, citing concerns over possible damage to freedom of speech, innovation, and Internet integrity. [31] Massachusetts Senator Scott Brown (R) has also publicly voiced his opposition to the legislation as well as its sister bill in the House, SOPA. [32] Congressional opponents of PROTECT IP have introduced an alternative bill called the Online Protection and Enforcement of Digital Trade Act (OPEN Act). [33] [34]

Companies and organizations
Among those who oppose the legislation are the Mozilla Corporation , [35] Facebook , [35] Electronic Frontier Foundation , [36] Yahoo! , eBay , American Express , reddit , Google , [37] Reporters Without Borders , Human Rights Watch , [38] English Wikipedia , [39] Entertainment Consumers Association [40] and Uncyclopedia . [ citation needed ] Internet entrepreneurs including Reid Hoffman of LinkedIn , Twitter co-founder Evan Williams, and Foursquare co-founder Dennis Crowley signed a letter to Congress expressing their opposition to the legislation. [41] The Tea Party Patriots have argued that the bill "is bad for consumers". [42] A letter of opposition was signed by 130 technology entrepreneurs and executives and sent to Congress to express their concern that the law in its present form would "hurt economic growth and chill innovation in legitimate services that help people create, communicate, and make money online". [43] English-language Wikipedia sites joined other Internet sites in protesting the PIPA and SOPA legislation by staging a "blackout" of service for 24 hours on January 18, 2012. Many websites protested, including: Wikipedia, CNet and Cheezburger network sites. Some websites denied access to their websites altogether. [44] Campaigner Peter Bradwell of the Open Rights Group argues how this act could have a negative influence among other countries who are also considering this bill. "These two bills are too broad and so badly worded that perfectly lawful sites could be censored. One reason we're joining these protests is that we face very similar issues in UK copyright-enforcement policies. Highlighting these flaws should help UK policymakers avoid making the same mistakes." [45]

Others
Law professors Mark Lemley (Stanford University) , David S. Levine (Elon University) , and David G. Post (Temple University) have criticized the PROTECT IP Act and SOPA . [46]

Reception
On January 14, 2012, White House officials posted a statement saying, "Any effort to combat online piracy must guard against the risk of online censorship of lawful activity and must not inhibit innovation by our dynamic businesses large and small", and "We must avoid creating new cybersecurity risks or disrupting the underlying architecture of the Internet." [47] [48] [49] [50]

Technical objections to DNS blocking and redirection
The bill originally contained measures which would allow the stripping of rogue websites out of the Domain Name System (DNS), the Internet’s virtual "phone book." If a user entered the web address of a rogue site, it would appear the site did not exist. The bill's sponsors have said they are removing this provision. [51]
According to Sherwin Siy of Public Knowledge , past attempts to limit copyright infringement online by way of blocking domains have always generated criticism that doing so would fracture the Domain Name System and threaten the global functionality of the Internet, with the original draft of this bill being no different. By design, all domain name servers world-wide should contain identical lists; with the changes initially proposed, servers inside the United States would have records different from their global counterparts, making URLs less universal. [52] [53]
Five Internet engineers ( Steve Crocker , David Dagon, Dan Kaminsky , Danny McPherson, and Paul Vixie ) prepared a whitepaper [54] which states that the DNS filtering provisions in the original bill "raise serious technical and security concerns" and would "break the Internet", while other engineers and proponents of the act have called those concerns groundless and without merit. [55] [56] [57] [58] [59] [60] [61] One concern expressed by network experts is that hackers would offer workarounds to private users to allow access to government-seized sites, but these workarounds might also jeopardize security by redirecting unsuspecting users to scam websites. Supporters of the bill, such as the MPAA and RIAA, have argued that widespread circumvention of the filtering would be unlikely. The CEO of the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation compared the DNS provisions to car door locks, noting that while they aren't foolproof against thieves, we should still use them. [57] [61] [62]
A group of Law professors, quoting Crocker's whitepaper, say that the PROTECT IP and Stop Online Piracy Acts could have the opposite of the intended impact, driving users to unregulated alternative DNS systems, and hindering the government from conducting legitimate Internet regulation. [46] They question the constitutionality of both bills, believing they could have potentially disastrous technical consequences and would make US Internet law more like those of repressive regimes. [46] They go on to state that both bills provide "nothing more than ex parte proceedings—proceedings at which only one side (the prosecutor or even a private plaintiff) need present evidence and the operator of the allegedly infringing site need not be present nor even made aware that the action was pending against his or her 'property.' This not only violates basic principles of due process by depriving persons of property without a fair hearing and a reasonable opportunity to be heard, it also constitutes an unconstitutional abridgement of the freedom of speech protected by the First Amendment." [46]
A browser plugin called MAFIAAFire Redirector was created in March 2011 that redirects visitors to an alternative domain when a site's primary domain has been seized. The Mozilla Foundation says that United States Department of Homeland Security (DHS) requested by phone that Mozilla remove the plugin, a request with which they have not yet complied. Instead, Mozilla's legal counsel has asked for further information from the DHS, including legal justification for the request. [63]
The Information Technology and Innovation Foundation (ITIF) argued that concerns about the domain name remedy in the legislation were undercut by the already ongoing use of these approaches to counter spam and malware. [64] According to Daniel Castro, an ITIF analyst, DNS blocking is practiced in several democracies without "breaking the internet", including the Netherlands, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland and South Korea. [29] ITIF's CEO compared the DNS provisions to car door locks, writing that even though they aren't foolproof they can still be useful. [61] [62]
On January 12, 2012, Sen. Patrick Leahy (D-VT) , Chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee , said he would be willing to remove a controversial DNS-filtering provision from the bill. "I’ve authorized my staff to tell ... the other senators that I’m willing to hold that back in the final piece of legislation," Senator Leahy said. "That in itself will remove a lot of the opposition that we now have." [65] [66] Rep. Lamar Smith (R-TX) , primary sponsor of the related House bill also expressed an intent to remove the DNS blocking provisions from SOPA. [67]

Civil liberties issues
First Amendment scholars Laurence Tribe and Marvin Ammori raised concerns over how the PROTECT IP act would impact free speech, arguing that the act doesn't target just foreign rogue sites, and would extend to "domestic websites that merely 'facilitate' or 'enable' infringement. Thus, in their language, the bills target considerable protected speech on legitimate sites such as YouTube, Twitter, and Facebook." [68] Ammori says that the PROTECT IP Act and the Stop Online Piracy Act "would miss their mark and silence a lot of non-infringing speech." [69]
The bill has been criticized by Abigail Phillips of the Electronic Frontier Foundation for not being specific about what constitutes an infringing web site. For example, if WikiLeaks were accused of distributing copyrighted content, U.S. search engines could be served a court order to block search results pointing to Wikileaks. Requiring search engines to remove links to an entire website altogether due to an infringing page would raise free speech concerns regarding lawful content hosted elsewhere on the site. [36]
Google chairman Eric Schmidt stated that the measures called for in PIPA are overly simple solutions to a complex problem, and that the precedent set by pruning DNS entries is bad from the viewpoint of free speech and would be a step toward less permissive Internet environments, such as China's. As the chairman of the company that owns the world's largest search engine, Schmidt said "If there is a law that requires DNSs to do X and it's passed by both Houses of Congress and signed by the President of the United States and we disagree with it then we would still fight it." [70]
Constitutional law expert Floyd Abrams said, "The Protect IP Act neither compels nor prohibits free speech or communication... the bill sets a high bar in defining when a website or domain is eligible for potential actions by the Attorney General...". [27]

Concern for user-generated sites
Opponents of the legislation warn that the PROTECT IP Act would have a negative impact on online communities. Journalist Rebecca MacKinnon argued in an op-ed that making companies liable for users' actions could have a chilling effect on user-generated sites like YouTube. "The intention is not the same as China’s Great Firewall , a nationwide system of Web censorship, but the practical effect could be similar", she says. [71] Policy analysts for New America Foundation say this legislation would enable law enforcement to take down an entire domain due to something posted on a single blog: "Yes, an entire, largely innocent online community could be punished for the actions of a tiny minority." [72]

Business and innovation issues
A legal analysis by the Congressional Research Service (CRS) notes concerns by opponents such as American Express and Google that the inclusion of a private cause of action would result in stifled Internet innovation, protect outdated business models and at the cost of an overwhelming number of suits from content producers. [73] "Legislation should not include a private right of action that would invite suits by 'trolls' to extort settlements from intermediaries or sites who are making good faith efforts to comply with the law," Google Senior Vice-president and General Counsel Kent Walker has said in Congressional testimony. [74]
"Rogue sites jeopardize jobs for film and TV workers," according to the Motion Picture Association of America, which cites several government and independent industry studies on the effects of online piracy, including a report [75] by Envisional Ltd. which concluded that one quarter of the content on the internet infringes copyright. [76] [77] [78] The Recording Industry Association of America points to a 2007 study [79] by the Institute for Policy Innovation which found that online piracy caused $12.5 billion in losses to the U.S. economy and more than 70,000 lost jobs. [80] [81]
"If we need to amend the DMCA, let's do it with a negotiation between the interested parties, not with a bill written by the content industry's lobbyists and jammed through Congress on a fast track," wrote venture capitalist and Business Insider columnist Fred Wilson in an October 29 editorial on the changes that the House and Senate versions of the proposed legislation would make to the safe harbor provisions of the DMCA . "Companies like Apple, Google, Facebook, and startups like Dropbox, Kickstarter, and Twilio are the leading exporters and job creators of this time. They are the golden goose of the economy and we cannot kill the golden goose to protect industries in decline," he said. [82] The impact of the law on small businesses and entrepreneurs may also be disproportionate due to the high costs of complying with its legal, technical and administrative requirements. [83]

Online protests against the bill and announcement of delay
On January 18, 2012, widespread online protests against SOPA and PIPA were held that included an English Wikipedia blackout. Several senators who sponsored PIPA, including Roy Blunt and John Boozman announced that they would withdraw support for the bill; [84] on January 20 Senate Majority Leader Reid announced that a vote on PIPA would be postponed. [7] Senator Leahy issued a press release stating that he understood Reid's decision "but the day will come when the Senators who forced this move will look back and realize they made a knee-jerk reaction to a monumental problem. Somewhere in China today, in Russia today, and in many other countries that do not respect American intellectual property, criminals who do nothing but peddle in counterfeit products and stolen American content are smugly watching how the United States Senate decided it was not even worth debating how to stop the overseas criminals from draining our economy." [85]

See also
WebPage index: 00033
Wikipedia administrators
On Wikipedia , trusted users may be appointed as administrators (also known as admins, sysops , and janitors), [1] :327 following a successful request for adminship. There are 1,259 administrators on the English Wikipedia [2] (as of May 2017). Administrators have additional technical privileges compared to other editors.
On Wikipedia, becoming an admin is often referred to as being "given [or taking up] the mop", [2] a term which has also been used elsewhere. [3] In 2006, The New York Times reported that administrators on Wikipedia, of whom there were then about 1,000, were "geographically diverse". [4] In July 2012, it was widely reported that Wikipedia was "running out of administrators", because in 2005 and 2006, 40 to 50 people were often appointed administrators each month, but in the first half of 2012, only nine in total were appointed. [5] [6] However, Jimmy Wales , Wikipedia's co-founder, denied that this was a crisis or that Wikipedia was running out of admins, saying, "The number of admins has been stable for about two years, there's really nothing going on." [7] Wales had previously (in a message sent to the English Wikipedia mailing list on February 11, 2003) stated that being an admin is "not a big deal", and that "It's merely a technical matter that the powers given to sysops are not given out to everyone." [8]
In his book Wikipedia – The Missing Manual , John Broughton states that while many people think of administrators on Wikipedia as judges, that is not the purpose of the role. Instead, he says, admins usually "delete pages" and "protect pages involved in edit wars". [9]

Requests for adminship
While the first Wikipedia administrators were appointed by Jimmy Wales himself in October 2001, [10] administrator privileges on Wikipedia are now granted through a process known as requests for adminship (RfA). [1] Any registered editor may nominate themselves, or may request another editor to do so. The process has been said to be "akin to putting someone through the Supreme Court" by Andrew Lih , a scientist and professor who is himself an administrator on the English Wikipedia . Lih also said, "It's pretty much a hazing ritual at this point", in contrast to how the process worked early in Wikipedia's history, when all one had to do to become an admin was "prove you weren't a bozo". [5] Candidacy for the role is normally considered only after "extensive work on the wiki". [1] While any editor may vote in an RfA, the outcome is not determined by a majority vote, but rather by whether or not consensus has been reached that the candidate would make a good administrator, a decision which can only be made by a bureaucrat, a Wikipedia editor who is also appointed by the community through a "request" process, though the process is much stricter for them than for administrators. [11] This may have been implemented as a result of RfAs attracting increasing levels of attention: Stvilia et al. quoted that "Prior to mid-2005, RfAs typically did not attract much attention. Since then, it has become quite common for RfAs to attract huge numbers of RfA groupies who all support one another". [12]

Role
Once granted administrator privileges, a user has access to additional functions in order to perform certain duties. [5] These include "messy cleanup work", [1] deletion of articles deemed unsuitable, protecting pages (restricting editing privileges to that page), [13] :66 and blocking the accounts of disruptive users. [1] [5] Blocking a user must be done according to Wikipedia's policies and a reason must be stated for the block, which will be permanently logged by the software. [1] :401 [13] :120 Use of this privilege to "gain editing advantages" is considered inappropriate. [1]

Scientific studies
A scientific paper by researchers from Virginia Tech and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute found that after editors are promoted to administrator status, they often focus more on articles about controversial topics than they did before. The researchers also proposed an alternative method for choosing administrators, in which more weight is given to the votes of experienced editors. [14] Another paper, presented at the 2008 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , analyzed data from all 1,551 requests for adminship from January 2006 to October 2007, with the goal of determining which (if any) of the criteria recommended in Wikipedia's Guide to requests for adminship [15] page were the best predictors of whether the user in question would actually become an admin. [3] In December 2013, a similar study was published by researchers from the Polish-Japanese Institute of Information Technology in Warsaw which aimed to model the results of requests for adminship on the Polish Wikipedia using a model derived from Wikipedia's edit history. They found that they could "classify the votes in the RfA procedures using this model with an accuracy level that should be sufficient to recommend candidates." [16]
WebPage index: 00034
John Seigenthaler
John Lawrence Seigenthaler ( / ˈ s iː ɡ ən θ ɔː l ər / ; July 27, 1927 – July 11, 2014) was an American journalist , writer, and political figure . He was known as a prominent defender of First Amendment rights. [1] [2]
Seigenthaler joined the Nashville newspaper The Tennessean in 1949, resigning in 1960 to act as Robert F. Kennedy 's administrative assistant. He rejoined The Tennessean as editor in 1962, publisher in 1973, and chairman in 1982 before retiring as chairman emeritus in 1991. Seigenthaler was also founding editorial director of USA Today from 1982 to 1991. During this period, he served on the board of directors for the American Society of Newspaper Editors , and from 1988 to 1989 was its president.

Early life
Born in Nashville, Tennessee , Seigenthaler was the eldest of eight siblings. He attended Father Ryan High School and served in the U.S. Air Force from 1946–49, achieving the rank of sergeant. [3] After leaving the service, Seigenthaler was hired at The Tennessean . While working at The Tennessean , Seigenthaler took courses in sociology and literature at Peabody College , now part of Vanderbilt University . He also attended the American Press Institute for Reporters at Columbia University . [4]

Career

Journalism
Seigenthaler began his career in journalism as a police beat reporter in The Tennessean city room [5] after his uncle encouraged an editor about his talent. [4] Seigenthaler gradually established himself on the staff among heavy competition that included future standout journalists David Halberstam and Tom Wicker .
He first gained prominence in November 1953 when he tracked down the former Thomas C. Buntin and his wife. The bizarre case involved the son of a wealthy Nashville business owner who had disappeared in September 1931, followed six weeks later by the disappearance of his secretary. Seigenthaler was sent to Texas by The Tennessean after reports surfaced that Buntin (now known as Thomas D. Palmer) was living somewhere in the Lone Star state. After a series of dead-ends, Seigenthaler struck pay dirt in Orange, Texas, where he saw an elderly man step off a bus. Noting the man's distinctive left ear, Seigenthaler followed him home. After three further days of investigation, he went back to the home, where he confirmed the identities of Buntin/Palmer, his wife, the former Betty McCuddy, and their six children. [6] Seigenthaler won a National Headliner Award for the story. [5]
Less than a year later, on October 5, 1954, Seigenthaler once again made national news for his efforts in saving a suicidal man from jumping off the Shelby Street Bridge in Nashville. Gene Bradford Williams had called The Tennessean saying he would jump and for the newspaper to "send a reporter and photographer if you want a story." After talking to Williams at the bridge for 40 minutes, Seigenthaler watched the man begin to attempt his 100-foot plunge off the bridge railing. Grabbing hold of his collar, Seigenthaler and police saved the man from falling into the Cumberland River . Williams muttered "I'll never forgive you" to Seigenthaler. [7] On April 29, 2014, the bridge was renamed the John Seigenthaler Pedestrian Bridge . [8]
In July 1957, Seigenthaler began a battle to eliminate corruption within the local branch of the Teamsters , noting the criminal backgrounds of key employees, along with the use of intimidation in keeping news of certain union activities quiet. During this period, he contacted Dave Beck and Jimmy Hoffa , both top Teamsters officials, but the two men ignored Seigenthaler's queries. His series of articles resulted in the impeachment trial of Chattanooga Criminal Court Judge Ralston Schoolfield. [9]
Seigenthaler took a one-year sabbatical from The Tennessean in 1958 to participate in Harvard University 's prestigious Nieman Fellowship program. [4] Upon returning to The Tennessean , Seigenthaler became an assistant city editor and special assignment reporter. [5]

Politics
Frustrated by the leadership of Tennessean publisher Silliman Evans, Jr., Seigenthaler resigned in 1960 to serve as an administrative assistant to incoming Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy . On April 21, 1961, Seigenthaler was the only other Justice Department figure to witness a meeting between Kennedy and Martin Luther King, Jr .
During the Freedom Rides of 1961, Seigenthaler was sent in his capacity as assistant to Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights John Doar [10] to be chief negotiator for the government, in its attempts to work with Alabama Governor John Malcolm Patterson . After several days of refusing to return calls, Patterson finally agreed to protect the Riders, but their state trooper escort disappeared as soon as they arrived in Montgomery on May 20, 1961, leaving them unprotected before the waiting white mob. [11]
Seigenthaler was a block away when he rushed to help Susan Wilbur, [12] a Freedom Rider who was being chased by the angry mob . Seigenthaler shoved her into his car and shouted "Get back! I'm with the Federal government" [13] but was hit behind the left ear with a pipe. Knocked unconscious, he was not picked up until police arrived 10 minutes later, with Montgomery Police Commissioner Lester B. Sullivan noting, "We have no intention of standing police guard for a bunch of troublemakers coming into our city." [14] [15]
Seigenthaler's brief career in government would conclude as a result of Evans' death from a heart attack on July 29, 1961. A brief transition period followed, during which long-time Tennessean reporter John Nye served as publisher. On March 20, 1962, the newspaper made the announcement that Evans' brother, Amon Carter Evans, would be the new publisher.
One of the new Evans' first acts would be to bring back Seigenthaler as editor. The two had worked together before at the paper, when Seigenthaler served as assistant city editor and Evans was an aspiring journalist. On one occasion during that era, the two nearly came to blows over Seigenthaler's assignment of Evans to a story.
Evans named Seigenthaler editor of The Tennessean on March 21, 1962. [16] With this new team in place, The Tennessean quickly regained its hard-hitting reputation. One example of the paper's resurgence came following a Democratic primary in August 1962, when The Tennessean found documented evidence of voter fraud based on absentee ballots in the city's second ward. [9]
Seigenthaler's friendship with Kennedy became one of the focal points of Jimmy Hoffa 's bid to shift his jury tampering trial from Nashville. Citing "one-sided, defamatory" coverage from the newspaper, Hoffa's lawyers were able to get Seigenthaler to admit he personally wanted Hoffa convicted. However, the journalist noted that he hadn't conveyed those sentiments to his reporters. Hoffa's lawyers gained a minor victory when the trial was moved to Chattanooga in a change of venue , but Hoffa was nonetheless convicted in 1964 after a 45-day trial.
The following year, Seigenthaler led a fight for access to the Tennessee state senate chamber in Nashville after a resolution was passed revoking the floor privileges of Tennessean reporter Bill Kovach . The action came after Kovach had refused to leave a committee hearing following a call for executive session .
In December 1966, Seigenthaler and Richard Goodwin represented the Kennedy family when controversy developed about historian William Manchester 's book about the John F. Kennedy assassination , The Death of a President . Seigenthaler had read an early version of the book, which led to Jacqueline Kennedy threatening a lawsuit over inaccurate and private statements in the publication.
Seigenthaler then took a temporary leave from his duties at the newspaper to work on Robert Kennedy's 1968 presidential campaign . During this period, the journalist was described by the New York Times as, "one of a handful of advisers in whom [Kennedy] has absolute confidence." [17] Moments after a victory in the California primary, Kennedy was shot by an assassin and died on June 6, 1968. Seigenthaler would serve as one of the pallbearers at his funeral, and later co-edited the book An Honorable Profession: A Tribute to Robert F. Kennedy .
Remaining focused on the cause of civil rights, Seigenthaler then supported Tennessee Bishop Joseph Aloysius Durick in 1969 during the latter's contentious fight to end segregation , a stance that outraged many in the community who still believed in the concept.
The New Yorker described Seigenthaler as being "well connected in the Democratic Party." [18] He was called a "close family friend" of the Kennedys, [19] a "longtime family friend" of the Gores, [20] and a friend of former Democratic Senator James Sasser . [21] In 1976, after having encouraged Al Gore to consider entering public life, [22] he tipped off Gore that a nearby U. S. House representative was retiring. [23] In 1981, Seigenthaler urged Sen. Sasser to return to the Democratic party's "liberal tradition": "I keep telling him that Reagan's going to make it respectable to be a liberal." [21] In 1984, Reagan's reelection team vetoed Seigenthaler as a debate panelist for being too liberal. [24]

In publishing
On February 8, 1973, Seigenthaler was promoted to publisher of the Tennessean , after Amon Carter Evans was named president of Tennessean Newspaper, Inc.
As the publisher, Seigenthaler worked with Al Gore , then a reporter, on investigative stories about Nashville city council corruption in the early 1970s. [25] In February 1976, Seigenthaler contacted Gore at home to tip him off that he had heard that U.S. Representative Joe L. Evins was retiring, [23] telling Gore "You know what I think." [18] Seiganthaler previously had been encouraging Gore to consider entering public life. [22] Gore decided to resign from the paper and drop out of Vanderbilt University Law School , beginning his political career by entering the race for Tennessee's 4th congressional district , a seat previously held by Albert Gore, Sr. , his father.
On May 5, 1976, Seigenthaler dismissed Jacque Srouji, a copy editor at The Tennessean , after finding that she had served as an informant for the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) for much of the previous decade. The controversy came to light after Srouji testified before the Energy and Environment Subcommittee of the Senate Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship , which was investigating nuclear safety . Srouji, who was writing a book critical of Karen Silkwood , had perused more than 1000 pages of FBI documents pertaining to the nuclear power critic. In follow-up testimony, FBI agent Lawrence J. Olson, Sr. acknowledged that the bureau had a "special relationship" with Srouji. Tennessean reporters had been suspicious of Srouji's reporting coups, coming just months after she had joined the paper. These included such things as a late-night FBI raid on illegal gambling establishments, as well as one on a local business suspected of fraud. [26]
Afterwards the FBI appears to have collected rumors about Seigenthaler. FBI Deputy Assistant Director Homer Boynton told an editor of the New York Times to "look into Seigenthaler," whom he called "not entirely pure." After hearing this, Seigenthaler tried for a year to get his own FBI dossier, and finally received some highly expurgated material including these words: "Allegations of Seigenthaler having illicit relations with young girls, which information source obtained from an unnamed source." He had previously promised to publish whatever the FBI gave him, and did so. He flatly stated that the charges were false. The attorney general issued an apology, the allegations were removed from Seigenthaler's file, and he received the 1976 Sidney Hillman Prize for "courage in publishing". [27] [28]
In May 1982, Seigenthaler was named the first editorial director of USA Today . In announcing the appointment, Gannett president Allen Neuharth said Seigenthaler was "one of the most thoughtful and respected editors in America." [29] During Seigenthaler's tenure at USA Today , he frequently commuted between Nashville and Washington to fulfill his duties at both newspapers. [30]
The publication of author Peter Maas' 1983 book, Marie: A True Story , again put Seigenthaler under scrutiny over the investigation of a pardon scandal involving former Tennessee governor Ray Blanton . Marie Ragghianti was the head of the state's Board of Pardons and Paroles before being fired after refusing to release prisoners who had bribed Blanton's aides. Since the Tennessean had supported Blanton, the newspaper's initial reluctance in investigating the charges was called into question. However, editors and reporters had believed that Ragghianti's alleged broken affair with Blanton's chief counsel, T. Edward Sisk, was the motivation for her claims. [31]

Later life
In 1986, Middle Tennessee State University established the John Seigenthaler Chair of Excellence in First Amendment Studies, honoring Seigenthaler's "lifelong commitment to free expression values". [32]
Three years later, Seigenthaler again became embroiled in controversy with the FBI when he was tipped off by Circuit Court Judge Gilbert S. Merritt that Nashville-Davidson County Sheriff Lafayette "Fate" Thomas, his friend since childhood, was the target of a FBI government corruption sting. Although Seigenthaler was never charged with any crime, Thomas later pleaded guilty to mail fraud, theft of government property, and tax conspiracy and was sentenced to five years in prison. Despite the conviction, the FBI claimed that Thomas' knowledge of the plan ruined countless hours of investigative work. [33]
Seigenthaler announced his retirement in December 1991 from The Tennessean , just months after he made a similar announcement concerning his tenure at USA Today . [ citation needed ]
On December 15, 1991, Seigenthaler founded the First Amendment Center at Vanderbilt University , [34] saying, "It is my hope that this center at Vanderbilt University... will help promote appreciation and understanding for those values so vital in a democratic society." The center serves as a forum for dialog about First Amendment issues, including freedom of speech, freedom of the press, and freedom of religion.
In 1996, Seigenthaler received the Elijah Parish Lovejoy Award as well as an honorary Doctor of Laws degree from Colby College . [ citation needed ]
In 2001, Seigenthaler was appointed to the National Commission on Federal Election Reform that followed the 2000 presidential election . He was also a member of the Constitution Project on Liberty and Security. [ citation needed ]
In 2002, when it was discovered that USA Today reporter Jack Kelley had fabricated some of his stories, USA Today turned to Seigenthaler, along with veteran editors Bill Hilliard and Bill Kovach , to monitor the investigation. [35]
In 2002, Vanderbilt renamed the 57,000-square-foot (5,300 m²) building that houses the Freedom Forum , First Amendment Center, and Diversity Institute the John Seigenthaler Center. At one point, USA Today and Freedom Forum founder Allen Neuharth called Seigenthaler "the best champion of the First Amendment." [2]
In April 2014, the Shelby Street Bridge was renamed the John Seigenthaler Pedestrian Bridge in his honor. [36]
Seigenthaler hosted a book review program on Nashville public television station WNPT , called A Word on Words , and chaired the selection committees for the John F. Kennedy Library Foundation's Profiles in Courage Award and the Robert F. Kennedy Memorial 's Robert F. Kennedy Book Award . [ citation needed ]

Wikipedia controversy
In May 2005, a Wikipedia user created a five-sentence article about Seigenthaler that contained false and defamatory content. [37] The false statement in Seigenthaler's Wikipedia article read:
Seigenthaler directly contacted Wikipedia founder, Jimmy Wales . At first, the only thing Wikipedia did was correct the misspelling of the word "early". As Seigenthaler later wrote, "For four months, Wikipedia depicted me as a suspected assassin before Wales erased it from his website's history Oct. 5". The erroneous information was on Wikipedia from May 26 through October 5, 2005. [38] [39]
Seigenthaler noted that the falsehoods that were written about him on Wikipedia were later posted on Answers.com and Reference.com. He later wrote an op-ed on the experience for USA Today in which he wrote, "And so we live in a universe of new media with phenomenal opportunities for worldwide communications and research – but populated by volunteer vandals with poison-pen intellects. Congress has enabled them and protects them", [40] a reference to the protection from liability that internet service providers are given under federal law versus editorially controlled media like newspapers and television.

Death
Seigenthaler died of complications from colon cancer on July 11, 2014, at the age of 86, surrounded by his family in his home. [3] [41]

Publications
WebPage index: 00035
First Amendment Center
The First Amendment Center supports the First Amendment and builds understanding of its core freedoms through education, information and entertainment.
The center serves as a forum for the study and exploration of free-expression issues, including freedom of speech, of the press and of religion, and the rights to assemble and to petition the government.
Founded by John Seigenthaler , the First Amendment Center is an operating program of the Freedom Forum and is associated with the Newseum and the Diversity Institute. The center has offices in the John Seigenthaler Center at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee , and at the Newseum in Washington, D.C .
The center’s programs, including the Religious Freedom Education Project at the Newseum, provide education and information to the public and groups including First Amendment scholars and experts, educators, government policy makers, legal experts and students. The center is nonpartisan and does not lobby, litigate or provide legal advice.
The center’s website is a source of news, information, and commentary in the nation on First Amendment issues. It features daily updates on news about First Amendment-related developments, as well as detailed reports about U.S. Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment, and commentary, analysis and special reports on free expression, press freedom and religious-liberty issues.

See also

External links
WebPage index: 00036
Virginia
Virginia ( i / v ər ˈ dʒ ɪ n j ə / , UK / v ər ˈ dʒ ɪ n i . ə / , officially the Commonwealth of Virginia ) is a state located on the Atlantic Coast of the United States . The state is part of both the Southern United States, [6] [7] as well as the Mid-Atlantic . [8] [9] Virginia is nicknamed the "Old Dominion" due to its status as the first colonial possession established in mainland British America , [10] and "Mother of Presidents" because eight U.S. presidents were born there, more than any other state. The geography and climate of the Commonwealth are shaped by the Blue Ridge Mountains and the Chesapeake Bay , which provide habitat for much of its flora and fauna. The capital of the Commonwealth is Richmond ; Virginia Beach is the most populous city, and Fairfax County is the most populous political subdivision. The Commonwealth's estimated population as of 2014 [update] is over 8.3 million. [2]
The area's history begins with several indigenous groups , including the Powhatan . In 1607 the London Company established the Colony of Virginia as the first permanent New World English colony. Slave labor and the land acquired from displaced Native American tribes each played a significant role in the colony's early politics and plantation economy. Virginia was one of the 13 Colonies in the American Revolution and joined the Confederacy in the American Civil War , during which Richmond was made the Confederate capital and Virginia's northwestern counties seceded to form the state of West Virginia . Although the Commonwealth was under one-party rule for nearly a century following Reconstruction , both major national parties are competitive in modern Virginia. [11]
The Virginia General Assembly is the oldest continuous law-making body in the New World. [12] The state government was ranked most effective by the Pew Center on the States in both 2005 and 2008. [13] It is unique in how it treats cities and counties equally, manages local roads, and prohibits its governors from serving consecutive terms. Virginia's economy has many sectors: agriculture in the Shenandoah Valley ; federal agencies in Northern Virginia , including the headquarters of the U.S. Department of Defense and Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) ; and military facilities in Hampton Roads , the site of the region's main seaport . Virginia's economy changed from primarily agricultural to industrial during the 1960s and 1970s, and in 2002 computer chips became the state's leading export by monetary value. [14] [15]

Geography
Virginia has a total area of 42,774.2 square miles (110,784.7 km 2 ), including 3,180.13 square miles (8,236.5 km 2 ) of water, making it the 35th- largest state by area. [17] Virginia is bordered by Maryland and Washington, D.C. to the north and east; by the Atlantic Ocean to the east; by North Carolina to the south; by Tennessee to the southwest; by Kentucky to the west; and by West Virginia to the north and west. Virginia's boundary with Maryland and Washington, D.C. extends to the low-water mark of the south shore of the Potomac River . [18] The southern border is defined as the 36° 30′ parallel north , though surveyor error led to deviations of as much as three arcminutes . [19] The border with Tennessee was not settled until 1893, when their dispute was brought to the U.S. Supreme Court . [20]

Geology and terrain
The Chesapeake Bay separates the contiguous portion of the Commonwealth from the two-county peninsula of Virginia's Eastern Shore . The bay was formed from the drowned river valleys of the Susquehanna River and the James River . [21] Many of Virginia's rivers flow into the Chesapeake Bay, including the Potomac , Rappahannock , York , and James, which create three peninsulas in the bay. [22] [23]
The Tidewater is a coastal plain between the Atlantic coast and the fall line . It includes the Eastern Shore and major estuaries of Chesapeake Bay. The Piedmont is a series of sedimentary and igneous rock -based foothills east of the mountains which were formed in the Mesozoic era. [25] The region, known for its heavy clay soil, includes the Southwest Mountains around Charlottesville . [26] The Blue Ridge Mountains are a physiographic province of the Appalachian Mountains with the highest points in the state, the tallest being Mount Rogers at 5,729 feet (1,746 m). [27] The Ridge and Valley region is west of the mountains and includes the Great Appalachian Valley . The region is carbonate rock based and includes Massanutten Mountain . [28] The Cumberland Plateau and the Cumberland Mountains are in the southwest corner of Virginia, south of the Allegheny Plateau . In this region, rivers flow northwest, with a dendritic drainage system , into the Ohio River basin. [29]
The Virginia Seismic Zone has not had a history of regular earthquake activity. Earthquakes are rarely above 4.5 in magnitude , because Virginia is located away from the edges of the North American Plate . The largest earthquake, at an estimated 5.9 magnitude, was in 1897 near Blacksburg . [30] A 5.8 magnitude earthquake struck central Virginia on August 23, 2011, near Mineral . The earthquake was reportedly felt as far away as Toronto , Atlanta and Florida . [31]
Coal mining takes place in the three mountainous regions at 45 distinct coal beds near Mesozoic basins. [32] Over 62 million tons of other non-fuel resources, such as slate , kyanite , sand, or gravel, were also mined in Virginia in 2012. [33] The state's carbonate rock is filled with more than 4,000 caves, ten of which are open for tourism. [34] 35 million years ago, a bolide impacted what is now eastern Virginia. The resulting crater may explain sinking and earthquakes in the region. [35]

Climate
The climate of Virginia is temperate and becomes increasingly warmer and more humid farther south and east. [36] Seasonal extremes vary from average lows of 26 °F (−3 °C) in January to average highs of 86 °F (30 °C) in July. The Atlantic Ocean has a strong effect on eastern and southeastern coastal areas of the state. Influenced by the Gulf Stream , coastal weather is subject to hurricanes , most pronouncedly near the mouth of Chesapeake Bay. [37] In spite of its position adjacent to the Atlantic Ocean, even the coastal areas have a significant continental influence with quite large temperature differences between summer and winter, particularly given the state climate's subtropical classification, which is typical of states in the Upper South .
Virginia has an annual average of 35–45 days of thunderstorm activity, particularly in the western part of the state, [38] and an average annual precipitation of 42.7 inches (108 cm). [37] Cold air masses arriving over the mountains in winter can lead to significant snowfalls, such as the Blizzard of 1996 and winter storms of 2009–2010 . The interaction of these elements with the state's topography creates distinct microclimates in the Shenandoah Valley, the mountainous southwest, and the coastal plains. [39] Virginia averages seven tornadoes annually, most F2 or lower on the Fujita scale . [40]
In recent years, the expansion of the southern suburbs of Washington, D.C. into Northern Virginia has introduced an urban heat island primarily caused by increased absorption of solar radiation in more densely populated areas. [41] In the American Lung Association 's 2011 report, 11 counties received failing grades for air quality, with Fairfax County having the worst in the state, due to automobile pollution. [42] [43] Haze in the mountains is caused in part by coal power plants. [44]

Ecosystem
Forests cover 65% of the state, primarily with deciduous, broad leaf trees in the western part of the state and evergreens and conifers dominant the central and eastern part of Virginia. [45] Lower altitudes are more likely to have small but dense stands of moisture-loving hemlocks and mosses in abundance, with hickory and oak in the Blue Ridge. [36] However, since the early 1990s, Gypsy moth infestations have eroded the dominance of oak forests. [46] In the lowland tidewater and piedmont, yellow pines tend to dominate, with bald cypress wetland forests in the Great Dismal and Nottoway swamps. Other common trees and plants include red bay, wax myrtle, dwarf palmetto, tulip poplar , mountain laurel , milkweed , daisies, and many species of ferns. The largest areas of wilderness are along the Atlantic coast and in the western mountains, where the largest populations of trillium wildflowers in North America are found. [36] [47] The Atlantic coast regions are host to flora commonly associated with the South Atlantic pine forests and lower Southeast Coastal Plain maritime flora, the latter found primarily in eastern and central Virginia.
Mammals include white-tailed deer , black bear , beaver , bobcat , coyote , raccoon , skunk , groundhog , Virginia opossum , gray fox , red fox , and eastern cottontail rabbit . [48] Other mammals include: nutria, fox squirrel, gray squirrel, flying squirrel, chipmunk, brown bat, and weasel. Birds include cardinals (the state bird), barred owls, Carolina chickadees, red-tailed hawks, ospreys, brown pelicans, quail, seagulls, bald eagles, and wild turkeys. Virginia is also home to the pileated woodpecker as well as the red-bellied woodpecker. The peregrine falcon was reintroduced into Shenandoah National Park in the mid-1990s. [49] Walleye, brook trout, Roanoke bass, and blue catfish are among the 210 known species of freshwater fish. [50] Running brooks with rocky bottoms are often inhabited by plentiful amounts of crayfish and salamanders. [36] The Chesapeake Bay is host to many species, including blue crabs , clams, oysters, and rockfish (also known as striped bass). [51]
Virginia has 30 National Park Service units, such as Great Falls Park and the Appalachian Trail , and one national park, the Shenandoah National Park . [52] Shenandoah was established in 1935 and encompasses the scenic Skyline Drive . Almost 40% of the park's area (79,579 acres/322 km 2 ) has been designated as wilderness under the National Wilderness Preservation System . [53] Additionally, there are 34 Virginia state parks and 17 state forests , run by the Department of Conservation and Recreation and the Department of Forestry. [45] [54] The Chesapeake Bay, while not a national park, is protected by both state and federal legislation, and the jointly run Chesapeake Bay Program which conducts restoration on the bay and its watershed. The Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge extends into North Carolina, as does the Back Bay National Wildlife Refuge , which marks the beginning of the Outer Banks . [55]

History
"Jamestown 2007" marked Virginia's quadricentennial year, celebrating 400 years since the establishment of the Jamestown Colony. The celebrations highlighted contributions from Native Americans , Africans, and Europeans, each of which had a significant part in shaping Virginia's history. [57] [58] Warfare, including among these groups, has also had an important role. Virginia was a focal point in conflicts from the French and Indian War , the American Revolution and the Civil War , to the Cold War and the War on Terrorism . [59] Stories about historic figures, such as those surrounding Pocahontas and John Smith , George Washington 's childhood, or the plantation elite in the slave society of the antebellum period , have also created potent myths of state history, and have served as rationales for Virginia's ideology. [60]

Colony
The first people are estimated to have arrived in Virginia over 12,000 years ago. [61] By 5,000 years ago more permanent settlements emerged, and farming began by 900 AD. By 1500, the Algonquian peoples had founded towns such as Werowocomoco in the Tidewater region , which they referred to as Tsenacommacah . The other major language groups in the area were the Siouan to the west, and the Iroquoians , who included the Nottoway and Meherrin , to the north and south. After 1570, the Algonquians consolidated under Chief Powhatan in response to threats from these other groups on their trade network. [62] Powhatan controlled more than 30 smaller tribes and over 150 settlements, who shared a common Virginia Algonquian language. In 1607, the native Tidewater population was between 13,000 and 14,000. [63]
Several European expeditions, including a group of Spanish Jesuits , explored the Chesapeake Bay during the 16th century. [64] In 1583, Queen Elizabeth I of England granted Walter Raleigh a charter to plant a colony north of Spanish Florida . [65] In 1584, Raleigh sent an expedition to the Atlantic coast of North America . [66] The name "Virginia" may have been suggested then by Raleigh or Elizabeth, perhaps noting her status as the "Virgin Queen," and may also be related to a native phrase, "Wingandacoa," or name, "Wingina." [67] Initially the name applied to the entire coastal region from South Carolina to Maine, plus the island of Bermuda . [68] Later, subsequent royal charters modified the Colony's boundaries. The London Company was incorporated as a joint stock company by the proprietary Charter of 1606 , which granted land rights to this area. The company financed the first permanent English settlement in the " New World ", Jamestown . Named for King James I , it was founded in May 1607 by Christopher Newport . [69] In 1619, colonists took greater control with an elected legislature called the House of Burgesses . With the bankruptcy of the London Company in 1624, the settlement was taken into royal authority as an English crown colony . [70]
Life in the colony was perilous, and many died during the Starving Time in 1609 and the Anglo-Powhatan Wars , including the Indian massacre of 1622 , which fostered the colonists' negative view of all tribes. [71] By 1624, only 3,400 of the 6,000 early settlers had survived. [72] However, European demand for tobacco fueled the arrival of more settlers and servants. [73] The headright system tried to solve the labor shortage by providing colonists with land for each indentured servant they transported to Virginia. [74] African workers were first imported to Jamestown in 1619 initially under the rules of indentured servitude. The shift to a system of African slavery in Virginia was propelled by the legal cases of John Punch , who was sentenced to lifetime slavery in 1640 for attempting to run away, [75] and of John Casor , who was claimed by Anthony Johnson as his servant for life in 1655. [76] Slavery first appears in Virginia statutes in 1661 and 1662, when a law made it hereditary based on the mother's status. [77]
Tensions and the geographic differences between the working and ruling classes led to Bacon's Rebellion in 1676, by which time current and former indentured servants made up as much as 80% of the population. [78] Rebels, largely from the colony's frontier, were also opposed to the conciliatory policy towards native tribes , and one result of the rebellion was the signing at Middle Plantation of the Treaty of 1677 , which made the signatory tribes tributary states and was part of a pattern of appropriating tribal land by force and treaty. Middle Plantation saw the founding of The College of William & Mary in 1693 and was renamed Williamsburg as it became the colonial capital in 1699. [79] In 1747, a group of Virginian speculators formed the Ohio Company , with the backing of the British crown, to start English settlement and trade in the Ohio Country west of the Appalachian Mountains . [80] France , which claimed this area as part of their colony of New France , viewed this as a threat, and the ensuing French and Indian War became part of the Seven Years' War (1756–1763). A militia from several British colonies, called the Virginia Regiment , was led by then-Lieutenant Colonel George Washington . [81]

Statehood
The British Parliament's efforts to levy new taxes following the French and Indian War were deeply unpopular in the colonies. In the House of Burgesses , opposition to taxation without representation was led by Patrick Henry and Richard Henry Lee , among others. [82] Virginians began to coordinate their actions with other colonies in 1773, and sent delegates to the Continental Congress the following year. [83] After the House of Burgesses was dissolved by the royal governor in 1774, Virginia's revolutionary leaders continued to govern via the Virginia Conventions . On May 15, 1776, the Convention declared Virginia's independence from the British Empire and adopted George Mason 's Virginia Declaration of Rights , which was then included in a new constitution. [84] Another Virginian, Thomas Jefferson , drew upon Mason's work in drafting the national Declaration of Independence . [85]
When the American Revolutionary War began, George Washington was selected to head the colonial army . During the war, the capital was moved to Richmond at the urging of Governor Thomas Jefferson, who feared that Williamsburg's coastal location would make it vulnerable to British attack. [86] In 1781, the combined action of Continental and French land and naval forces trapped the British army on the Virginia Peninsula , where troops under George Washington and Comte de Rochambeau defeated British General Cornwallis in the Siege of Yorktown . His surrender on October 19, 1781 led to peace negotiations in Paris and secured the independence of the colonies. [87]
Virginians were instrumental in writing the United States Constitution . James Madison drafted the Virginia Plan in 1787 and the Bill of Rights in 1789. [85] Virginia ratified the Constitution on June 25, 1788. The three-fifths compromise ensured that Virginia, with its large number of slaves, initially had the largest bloc in the House of Representatives . Together with the Virginia dynasty of presidents, this gave the Commonwealth national importance. In 1790, both Virginia and Maryland ceded territory to form the new District of Columbia , though the Virginian area was retroceded in 1846. [88] Virginia is called "Mother of States" because of its role in being carved into states like Kentucky , which became the 15th state in 1792, and for the numbers of American pioneers born in Virginia. [89]

Civil War and aftermath
In addition to agriculture, slave labor was increasingly used in mining, shipbuilding and other industries. [90] The execution of Gabriel Prosser in 1800, Nat Turner's slave rebellion in 1831 and John Brown's Raid on Harpers Ferry in 1859 marked the growing social discontent over slavery and its role in the plantation economy . By 1860, almost half a million people, roughly 31% of the total population of Virginia, were enslaved. [91] [92] This division contributed to the start of the American Civil War .
Virginia voted to secede from the United States on April 17, 1861, after the Battle of Fort Sumter and Abraham Lincoln 's call for volunteers. On April 24, Virginia joined the Confederate States of America , which chose Richmond as its capital. [89] After the 1861 Wheeling Convention , 48 counties in the northwest separated to form a new state of West Virginia , which chose to remain loyal to the Union . Virginian general Robert E. Lee took command of the Army of Northern Virginia in 1862, and led invasions into Union territory, ultimately becoming commander of all Confederate forces. During the war, more battles were fought in Virginia than anywhere else, including Bull Run , the Seven Days Battles , Chancellorsville , and the concluding Battle of Appomattox Court House . [93] After the capture of Richmond in April 1865, the state capital was briefly moved to Lynchburg , [94] while the Confederate leadership fled to Danville . [95] Virginia was formally restored to the United States in 1870, due to the work of the Committee of Nine . [96]
During the post-war Reconstruction era , Virginia adopted a constitution which provided for free public schools, and guaranteed political, civil, and voting rights . [97] The populist Readjuster Party ran an inclusive coalition until the conservative white Democratic Party gained power after 1883. [98] It passed segregationist Jim Crow laws and in 1902 rewrote the Constitution of Virginia to include a poll tax and other voter registration measures that effectively disfranchised most African Americans and many poor European Americans. [99] Though their schools and public services were segregated and underfunded due to a lack of political representation, African Americans were able to unite in communities and take a greater role in Virginia society. [100]

Post-Reconstruction
New economic forces also changed the Commonwealth. Virginian James Albert Bonsack invented the tobacco cigarette rolling machine in 1880 leading to new industrial scale production centered on Richmond. In 1886, railroad magnate Collis Potter Huntington founded Newport News Shipbuilding , which was responsible for building six major World War I -era battleships for the U.S. Navy from 1907 to 1923. [101] During the war, German submarines like U-151 attacked ships outside the port. [102] In 1926, Dr. W.A.R. Goodwin , rector of Williamsburg's Bruton Parish Church , began restoration of colonial-era buildings in the historic district with financial backing of John D. Rockefeller, Jr. [103] Though their project, like others in the state, had to contend with the Great Depression and World War II , work continued as Colonial Williamsburg became a major tourist attraction. [104]
Protests started by Barbara Rose Johns in 1951 in Farmville against segregated schools led to the lawsuit Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County . This case, filed by Richmond natives Spottswood Robinson and Oliver Hill , was decided in 1954 with Brown v. Board of Education , which rejected the segregationist doctrine of " separate but equal ". But, in 1958, under the policy of " massive resistance " led by the influential segregationist Senator Harry F. Byrd and his Byrd Organization , the Commonwealth prohibited desegregated local schools from receiving state funding. [105]
The Civil Rights Movement gained many participants in the 1960s. It achieved the moral force and support to gain passage of national legislation with the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965. In 1964 the United States Supreme Court ordered Prince Edward County and others to integrate schools. [106] In 1967, the Court also struck down the state's ban on interracial marriage with Loving v. Virginia . From 1969 to 1971, state legislators under Governor Mills Godwin rewrote the constitution, after goals such as the repeal of Jim Crow laws had been achieved. In 1989, Douglas Wilder became the first African American elected as governor in the United States. [107]
The Cold War led to the expansion of national defense government programs housed in offices in Northern Virginia near Washington, D.C., and correlative population growth. [108] The Central Intelligence Agency in Langley was involved in various Cold War events , including as the target of Soviet espionage activities . Also among the federal developments was the Pentagon , built during World War II as the headquarters for the Department of Defense. It was one of the targets of the September 11 attacks ; 189 people died at the site when a jet passenger plane was crashed into the building. [109]

Cities and towns
Virginia is divided into 95 counties and 38 independent cities , the latter acting in many ways as county-equivalents . [111] This general method of treating cities and counties on par with each other is unique to Virginia, with only three other independent cities in the United States outside Virginia, in three different states. [112] Virginia limits the authority of cities and counties to countermand laws expressly allowed by the Virginia General Assembly under what is known as Dillon's Rule . [113] In addition to independent cities, there are also incorporated towns which operate under their own governments, but are part of a county. Finally there are hundreds of unincorporated communities within the counties. Virginia does not have any further political subdivisions, such as villages or townships.
Virginia has 11 Metropolitan Statistical Areas ; Northern Virginia , Hampton Roads , and Richmond-Petersburg are the three most populous. Richmond is the capital of Virginia, and its metropolitan area has a population of over 1.2 million. [114] As of 2010 [update] , Virginia Beach is the most populous city in the Commonwealth, with Norfolk and Chesapeake second and third, respectively. [115] Norfolk forms the urban core of the Hampton Roads metropolitan area, which has a population over 1.6 million people and is the site of the world's largest naval base, Naval Station Norfolk . [114] [116] Suffolk , which includes a portion of the Great Dismal Swamp , is the largest city by area at 429.1 square miles (1,111 km 2 ). [117]
Fairfax County is the most populous locality in Virginia, with over one million residents, although that does not include its county seat Fairfax, which is one of the independent cities. [118] Fairfax County has a major urban business and shopping center in Tysons Corner , Virginia's largest office market. [119] Neighboring Prince William County is Virginia's second most populous county, with a population exceeding 450,000, and is home to Marine Corps Base Quantico , the FBI Academy and Manassas National Battlefield Park . Loudoun County , with the county seat at Leesburg , is both the fastest-growing county in Virginia and has the highest median household income ($114,204) in the country as of 2010 [update] . [120] Arlington County , the smallest self-governing county in the United States by land area, is an urban community organized as a county. [121] The Roanoke area, with an estimated population of 300,399, is the largest Metropolitan Statistical Area in western Virginia. [122]

Demographics
The United States Census Bureau estimates that the state population was 8,411,808 on July 1, 2016, a 5.1% increase since the 2010 United States Census . [2] This includes an increase from net migration of 381,969 people into the Commonwealth since the 2010 census . Immigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 159,627 people, and migration within the country produced a net increase of 155,205 people. [125] As of 2000, the center of population is located in Goochland County , near Richmond . [126]
Aside from Virginia, the top birth state for Virginians is New York , having overtaken North Carolina in the 1990s, with the Northeast accounting for the largest number of migrants into the state by region. [127] As of 2015, both the state's population density and median household income are nearly identical to that of Hawaii , while Virginia's total population is closest in size to New Jersey .

Ethnicity
The state's most populous ethnic group, Non-Hispanic White , has declined from 76% in 1990 to 62.7% in 2015. [128] [129] In 2011, non-Hispanic Whites were involved in 50.9% of all the births. [130] People of English heritage settled throughout the Commonwealth during the colonial period, and others of British and Irish heritage have since immigrated. [131] Those who self-identify as having " American ethnicity " are predominantly of English descent, but have ancestry that has been in North America for so long that they choose to identify simply as American. [132] [133] Of the English immigrants to Virginia in the 17th century, 75% came as indentured servants . [134] The western mountains have many settlements that were founded by Scots-Irish immigrants before the American Revolution . [135] [136] There are also sizable numbers of people of German descent in the northwestern mountains and Shenandoah Valley , [137] and German ancestry was the most popular response on the 2010 American Community Survey , with 11.7%. [138] 2.9% of Virginians also describe themselves as biracial . [139]
The largest minority group in Virginia is African American, at 19.7% as of 2015 [update] . [129] Most African American Virginians have been descendants of enslaved Africans who worked on tobacco, cotton, and hemp plantations. These men, women and children were brought from West and West-Central Africa, primarily from Angola and the Bight of Biafra . The Igbo ethnic group of what is now southern Nigeria were the single largest African group among slaves in Virginia. [140] Though the black population was reduced by the Great Migration , since 1965 there has been a reverse migration of blacks returning south . [141] According to the Pew Research Center , the state has the highest concentration of black and white interracial marriages. [142]
More recent immigration in the late 20th century and early 21st century has fueled new communities of Hispanics and Asians. As of 2015 [update] , 9.0% of Virginians are Hispanic or Latino (of any race), and 6.5% are Asian . [129] The state's Hispanic population rose by 92% from 2000 to 2010, with two-thirds of Hispanics living in Northern Virginia . [139] Hispanic citizens in Virginia have higher median household incomes and educational attainment than the general Virginia population. [143] As far as Hispanic groups, there is a large Salvadoran population in the DC suburbs of Northern Virginia, [144] and a large Puerto Rican population in the Hampton Roads region of Southeast Virginia. [145] Northern Virginia also has a significant population of Vietnamese Americans , whose major wave of immigration followed the Vietnam War , [146] and Korean Americans , whose migration has been more recent and was induced in part by the quality school system. [147] The Filipino American community has about 45,000 in the Hampton Roads area, many of whom have ties to the U.S. Navy and armed forces. [148]
Additionally, 0.5% of Virginians are American Indian or Alaska Native , and 0.1% are Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander . [129] Virginia has extended state recognition to eight Native American tribes resident in the state, though some lack federal recognition status. Most Native American groups are located in the Tidewater region . [149]
As of 2011, 49.1% of Virginia's population younger than age 1 were minorities (meaning that they had at least one parent who was not non-Hispanic white). [150]

Languages
The Piedmont region is known for its dialect's strong influence on Southern American English . While a more homogenized American English is found in urban areas, various accents are also used, including the Tidewater accent , the Old Virginia accent , and the anachronistic Elizabethan of Tangier Island . [151] [152]
As of 2010 [update] , 85.87% (6,299,127) of Virginia residents age 5 and older spoke English at home as a primary language , while 6.41% (470,058) spoke Spanish , 0.77% (56,518) Korean , 0.63% (45,881) Vietnamese , 0.57% (42,418) Chinese (which includes Mandarin ), and Tagalog was spoken as a main language by 0.56% (40,724) of the population over the age of five. In total, 14.13% (1,036,442) of Virginia's population age 5 and older spoke a mother language other than English. [153] English was passed as the Commonwealth's official language by statutes in 1981 and again in 1996, though the status is not mandated by the Constitution of Virginia . [154]

Religion
Virginia is predominantly Christian and Protestant ; Baptists are the largest single group with 27% of the population as of 2008 [update] . [155] Baptist congregations in Virginia have 763,655 members. [156] Baptist denominational groups in Virginia include the Baptist General Association of Virginia , with about 1,400 member churches, which supports both the Southern Baptist Convention and the moderate Cooperative Baptist Fellowship ; and the Southern Baptist Conservatives of Virginia with more than 500 affiliated churches, which supports the Southern Baptist Convention. [157] [158] Roman Catholics are the second-largest religious group with 673,853 members. [156] The Roman Catholic Diocese of Arlington includes most of Northern Virginia's Catholic churches, while the Diocese of Richmond covers the rest.
The Virginia Conference is the regional body of the United Methodist Church in most of the Commonwealth, while the Holston Conference represents much of extreme Southwest Virginia. The Virginia Synod is responsible for the congregations of the Lutheran Church . Presbyterian , Pentecostal , Congregationalist , and Episcopalian adherents each composed less than 2% of the population as of 2010 [update] . [156] The Episcopal Diocese of Virginia , Southern Virginia , and Southwestern Virginia support the various Episcopal churches .
In November 2006, 15 conservative Episcopal churches voted to split from the Diocese of Virginia over the ordination of openly gay bishops and clergy in other dioceses of the Episcopal Church; these churches continue to claim affiliation with the larger Anglican Communion through other bodies outside the United States . Though Virginia law allows parishioners to determine their church's affiliation, the diocese claimed the secessionist churches' buildings and properties. The resulting property law case, ultimately decided in favor of the mainline diocese, was a test for Episcopal churches nationwide. [159]
Among other religions, adherents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints constitute 1% of the population, with 197 congregations in Virginia as of March 2014 [update] . [160] Fairfax Station is the site of the Ekoji Buddhist Temple , of the Jodo Shinshu school, and the Hindu Durga Temple. While the state's Jewish population is small, organized Jewish sites date to 1789 with Congregation Beth Ahabah . [161] Muslims are a growing religious group throughout the Commonwealth through immigration. [162] Megachurches in the Commonwealth include Thomas Road Baptist Church , Immanuel Bible Church , and McLean Bible Church . [163] Several Christian universities are also based in the state, including Regent University , Liberty University , and Lynchburg College .

Economy
Virginia is an employment-at-will state; [164] its economy has diverse sources of income, including local and federal government, military, farming and business. Virginia has 4.1 million civilian workers, and one-third of the jobs are in the service sector . [165] [166] The unemployment rate in Virginia is among the lowest in the nation , at 4.8%, as of December 2014 [update] . [167] The second fastest job growth town in the nation is Leesburg , as of 2011 [update] . [168] The Gross Domestic Product of Virginia was $452 billion in 2013. [169] According to the Bureau of Economic Analysis , Virginia had the most counties in the top 100 wealthiest in the United States based upon median income in 2007. [170] Northern Virginia is the highest-income region in Virginia, having six of the twenty highest-income counties in the United States , including the three highest as of 2011 [update] . [171] According to CNN Money Magazine the highest-income town in the nation is Great Falls , as of 2011 [update] . [172] According to a 2013 study by Phoenix Marketing International, Virginia had the seventh-largest number of millionaires per capita in the United States, with a ratio of 6.64%. [173]

Government
Virginia has the highest defense spending of any state per capita, providing the Commonwealth with around 900,000 jobs. [175] [176] Approximately 12% of all U.S. federal procurement money is spent in Virginia, the second-highest amount after California. [176] [177] Many Virginians work for federal agencies in Northern Virginia , which include the Central Intelligence Agency and the Department of Defense , as well as the National Science Foundation , the United States Geological Survey and the United States Patent and Trademark Office . Many others work for government contractors , including defense and security firms, which hold more than 15,000 federal contracts. [178]
Virginia has one of the highest concentrations of veterans of any state, [179] and is second to California in total Department of Defense employees. [177] [180] The Hampton Roads area has the largest concentration of military personnel and assets of any metropolitan area in the world, [181] including the largest naval base in the world, Naval Station Norfolk . [116] In its state government, Virginia employs 106,143 public employees, who combined have a median income of $44,656 as of 2013 [update] . [182]

Business
Virginia has the highest concentration of technology workers of any state, [183] and the fourth-highest number of technology workers after California , Texas , and New York . [184] Computer chips became the state's highest-grossing export in 2006, surpassing its traditional top exports of coal and tobacco combined, [14] reaching a total export value of $717 million in 2015. [15] Northern Virginia , once considered the state's dairy capital, now hosts software, communication technology, defense contracting companies, particularly in the Dulles Technology Corridor .
The state has the highest average and peak Internet speeds in the United States, with the third-highest worldwide. [185] Northern Virginia's data centers can carry up to 70% of the nation's internet traffic, [186] with Loudoun County alone home to as much data center space as northern California . [187] [188]
Virginia companies received the fourth-highest amount of venture capital funding in the first half of 2011 after California, Massachusetts , and New York. [189] In 2009, Forbes magazine named Virginia the best state in the nation for business for the fourth year in a row, [190] while CNBC named it the top state for business in 2007, 2009, and 2011. [191] Additionally, in 2014 a survey of 12,000 small business owners found Virginia to be one of the most friendly states for small businesses. [192] Virginia has 20 Fortune 500 companies, ranking the state eighth nationwide. [193] Tysons Corner is one of the largest business districts in the nation.
Tourism in Virginia supported an estimated 210,000 jobs and generated $21.2 billion in 2012. [194] Arlington County is the top tourist destination in the state by domestic spending, followed by Fairfax County , Loudoun County , and Virginia Beach . [195]

Agriculture
Agriculture occupies 32% of the land in Virginia. As of 2012 [update] , about 357,000 Virginian jobs were in agriculture, with over 47,000 farms, averaging 171 acres (0.27 sq mi; 0.69 km 2 ), in a total farmland area of 8.1 million acres (12,656 sq mi; 32,780 km 2 ). Though agriculture has declined significantly since 1960 when there were twice as many farms, it remains the largest single industry in Virginia. [197] Tomatoes surpassed soy as the most profitable crop in Virginia in 2006, with peanuts and hay as other agricultural products. [198] Although it is no longer the primary crop, Virginia is still the fifth-largest producer of tobacco nationwide. [199]
Virginia is the largest producer of seafood on the East Coast , with scallops , oysters , blue crabs , and clams as the largest seafood harvests by value, and France , Canada , and Hong Kong as the top export destinations. [196] [200] Eastern oyster harvests have increased from 23,000 bushels in 2001 to over 500,000 in 2013. [196] Wineries and vineyards in the Northern Neck and along the Blue Ridge Mountains also have begun to generate income and attract tourists. [201] Virginia has the fifth-highest number of wineries in the nation. [202]

Taxes
Virginia collects personal income tax in five income brackets, ranging from 3.0% to 5.75%. The state sales and use tax rate is 4.3%, while the tax rate on food is 1.5%. There is an additional 1% local tax, for a total of a 5.3% combined sales tax on most Virginia purchases and 2.5% on most food. [203] Virginia's property tax is set and collected at the local government level and varies throughout the Commonwealth. Real estate is also taxed at the local level based on 100% of fair market value. Tangible personal property also is taxed at the local level and is based on a percentage or percentages of original cost. [204]

Culture
Virginia's culture was popularized and spread across America and the South by figures such as George Washington , Thomas Jefferson , and Robert E. Lee . Their homes in Virginia represent the birthplace of America and the South. [205] Modern Virginia culture has many sources, and is part of the culture of the Southern United States . [206] The Smithsonian Institution divides Virginia into nine cultural regions. [207]
Besides the general cuisine of the Southern United States , Virginia maintains its own particular traditions. Virginia wine is made in many parts of the state. [201] Smithfield ham , sometimes called "Virginia ham", is a type of country ham which is protected by state law , and can only be produced in the town of Smithfield . [208] Virginia furniture and architecture are typical of American colonial architecture . Thomas Jefferson and many of the state's early leaders favored the Neoclassical architecture style, leading to its use for important state buildings. The Pennsylvania Dutch and their style can also be found in parts of the state. [137]
Literature in Virginia often deals with the state's extensive and sometimes troubled past. The works of Pulitzer Prize winner Ellen Glasgow often dealt with social inequalities and the role of women in her culture. [209] Glasgow's peer and close friend James Branch Cabell wrote extensively about the changing position of gentry in the Reconstruction era , and challenged its moral code with Jurgen, A Comedy of Justice . [210] William Styron approached history in works such as The Confessions of Nat Turner and Sophie's Choice . [211] Tom Wolfe has occasionally dealt with his southern heritage in bestsellers like I Am Charlotte Simmons . [212] Mount Vernon native Matt Bondurant received critical acclaim for his historic novel The Wettest County in the World about moonshiners in Franklin County during prohibition . [213] Virginia also names a state Poet Laureate , currently Ron Smith of Richmond , who will serve until mid-2016. [214]

Fine and performing arts
Rich in cultural heritage, Virginia however ranks near the bottom of U.S. states in terms of public spending on the arts, at nearly half of the national average. [215] The state government does fund some institutions, including the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts and the Science Museum of Virginia . Other museums include the popular Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center of the National Air and Space Museum and the Chrysler Museum of Art . [216] Besides these sites, many open-air museums are located in the Commonwealth, such as Colonial Williamsburg , the Frontier Culture Museum , and various historic battlefields. [217] The Virginia Foundation for the Humanities works to improve the Commonwealth's civic, cultural, and intellectual life. [218]
Theaters and venues in the Commonwealth are found both in the cities and suburbs. The Harrison Opera House , in Norfolk , is home of the Virginia Opera . The Virginia Symphony Orchestra operates in and around Hampton Roads . [219] Resident and touring theater troupes operate from the American Shakespeare Center in Staunton . [220] The Barter Theatre , designated the State Theatre of Virginia, in Abingdon won the first ever Regional Theatre Tony Award in 1948, while the Signature Theatre in Arlington won it in 2009. There's also a Children's Theater of Virginia, Theatre IV , which is the second largest touring troupe nationwide. [221]
Virginia has launched many award-winning traditional musical artists and internationally successful popular music acts, as well as Hollywood actors. [1] Virginia is known for its tradition in the music genres of old-time string and bluegrass , with groups such as the Carter Family and Stanley Brothers , as well as gospel , blues , and shout bands . [222] Contemporary Virginia is also known for folk rock artists like Dave Matthews and Jason Mraz , hip hop stars like Pharrell Williams and Missy Elliott , as well as thrash metal groups like GWAR and Lamb of God . [223] Notable performance venues include The Birchmere , the Landmark Theater , and Jiffy Lube Live . [224] Wolf Trap National Park for the Performing Arts is located in Vienna and is the only national park intended for use as a performing arts center. [225]

Festivals
Many counties and localities host county fairs and festivals. The Virginia State Fair is held at the Meadow Event Park every September. Also in September is the Neptune Festival in Virginia Beach , which celebrates the city, the waterfront, and regional artists. Norfolk's Harborfest , in June, features boat racing and air shows . [226] Fairfax County also sponsors Celebrate Fairfax! with popular and traditional music performances. [227] The Virginia Lake Festival is held during the third weekend in July in Clarksville . [228] Wolf Trap hosts the Wolf Trap Opera Company , which produces an opera festival every summer. [225] Each September, Bay Days celebrates the Chesapeake Bay as well as Hampton's 400-year history since 1610, and Isle of Wight County holds a County Fair on the second week of September as well. Both feature live music performances, and other unique events.
On the Eastern Shore island of Chincoteague the annual Pony Swim & Auction of feral Chincoteague ponies at the end of July is a unique local tradition expanded into a week-long carnival. The Shenandoah Apple Blossom Festival is a six-day festival held annually in Winchester that includes parades and bluegrass concerts. The Old Time Fiddlers' Convention in Galax , begun in 1935, is one of the oldest and largest such events worldwide. Two important film festivals, the Virginia Film Festival and the VCU French Film Festival , are held annually in Charlottesville and Richmond, respectively. [229]

Media
The Hampton Roads area is the 45th-largest media market in the United States as ranked by Nielsen Media Research , while the Richmond-Petersburg area is 57th and Roanoke - Lynchburg is 66th as of 2013 [update] . [230] Northern Virginia is part of the much larger Washington, D.C. media market.
There are 36 television stations in Virginia , representing each major U.S. network , part of 42 stations which serve Virginia viewers. [231] More than 720 FCC -licensed FM radio stations broadcast in Virginia , with about 300 such AM stations. [232] [233] The nationally available Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) is headquartered in Arlington . Independent PBS affiliates exist throughout Virginia, and the Arlington PBS member station WETA-TV produces programs such as the PBS NewsHour and Washington Week .
The most circulated native newspapers in the Commonwealth are Norfolk's The Virginian-Pilot (142,476 daily subscribers), the Richmond Times-Dispatch (108,559), and The Roanoke Times (78,663), as of 2014 [update] . [234] Several Washington, D.C. papers are based in Northern Virginia , such as The Washington Examiner and Politico . The paper with the nation's widest circulation, USA Today , with 1.83 million daily subscriptions, is headquartered in McLean . [235] Besides traditional forms of media, Virginia is the home base for telecommunication companies such as Voxant and XO Communications . In Northern Virginia, The Washington Post is the dominant newspaper, since Northern VA is located in the Washington, DC metropolitan area.

Education
Virginia's educational system consistently ranks in the top ten states on the U.S. Department of Education's National Assessment of Educational Progress , with Virginia students outperforming the average in all subject areas and grade levels tested. [237] The 2011 Quality Counts report ranked Virginia's K–12 education fourth best in the country. [238] All school divisions must adhere to educational standards set forth by the Virginia Department of Education , which maintains an assessment and accreditation regime known as the Standards of Learning to ensure accountability. [239] In 2010, 85% of high school students graduated on-time after four years. [240] Between 2000 and 2008, school enrollment increased 5%, the number of teachers 21%. [241]
Public K–12 schools in Virginia are generally operated by the counties and cities, and not by the state. As of 2011 [update] , a total of 1,267,063 students were enrolled in 1,873 local and regional schools in the Commonwealth, including three charter schools , and an additional 109 alternative and special education centers across 132 school divisions . [242] [243] Besides the general public schools in Virginia, there are Governor's Schools and selective magnet schools . The Governor's Schools are a collection of more than 40 regional high schools and summer programs intended for gifted students. [244] The Virginia Council for Private Education oversees the regulation of 320 state accredited and 130 non-accredited private schools. [245] [246] An additional 24,682 students receive homeschooling. [247]
As of 2011 [update] , there are 176 colleges and universities in Virginia . [248] In the 2017 U.S. News & World Report ranking of national public universities, the University of Virginia is ranked No. 2, the College of William and Mary is No. 6, Virginia Tech is No. 27, George Mason University is No. 71, and Virginia Commonwealth University is No. 87. [249] [250] Virginia Commonwealth is also ranked the No. 1 public graduate school in fine arts, while James Madison University is ranked the No. 8 regional university in The South . [251] [252] The Virginia Military Institute is the oldest state military college . [253] [254] George Mason is the largest university in Virginia with approximately 35,000 students. [255] Virginia State University and Virginia Tech are the state's land-grant universities . Virginia also operates 23 community colleges on 40 campuses serving over 260,000 students. [256] There are 129 private institutions in the state, including nationally ranked liberal arts colleges Washington and Lee University at No. 11, the University of Richmond at No. 27, and the Virginia Military Institute at No. 72. [248] [257]

Health
Virginia has a mixed health record, and is ranked as the 26th overall healthiest state according to the 2013 United Health Foundation's Health Rankings. [260] Virginia also ranks 21st among the states in the rate of premature deaths, 6,816 per 100,000. In 2008, Virginia reached its lowest ever rate of infant mortality , at 6.7 deaths per 1,000. [261] There are however racial and social health disparities, in 2010 African Americans experienced 28% more premature deaths than whites, while 13% of Virginians lack any health insurance . According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 's 2009 survey, 26% of Virginians are obese and another 35% are overweight. 78% of residents claim to have exercised at least once in the past three months. [262] [263] About 30% of Virginia's 10- to 17-year-olds are overweight or obese. [264] Virginia banned smoking in bars and restaurants in January 2010. [265] 19% of Virginians smoke tobacco. [260] Residents of Virginia's 8th congressional district share the longest average life expectancy rate in the nation, over 83 years. [266]
There are 89 hospitals in Virginia listed with the United States Department of Health and Human Services . [267] Notable examples include Inova Fairfax Hospital , the largest hospital in the Washington Metropolitan Area , and the VCU Medical Center , located on the medical campus of Virginia Commonwealth University . The University of Virginia Medical Center, part of the University of Virginia Health System , is highly ranked in endocrinology according to U.S.News & World Report . [268] Virginia has a ratio of 127 primary care physicians per 10,000 residents, which is the 16th highest nationally. [260] Virginia was one of five states to receive a perfect score in disaster preparedness according to a 2008 report by the Trust for America's Health , based on criteria such as detecting pathogens and distributing vaccines and medical supplies. [269]

Transportation
Because of the 1932 Byrd Road Act , the state government controls most of Virginia's roads, instead of a local county authority as is usual in other states. [272] As of 2011 [update] , the Virginia Department of Transportation owns and operates 57,867 miles (93,128 km) of the total 70,105 miles (112,823 km) of roads in the state, making it the third largest state highway system in the United States. [273] Although the Washington Metropolitan Area, which includes Northern Virginia , has the second worst traffic in the nation, Virginia as a whole has the 21st-lowest congestion and the average commute time is 26.9 minutes. [274] [275] Virginia hit peak car usage before the year 2000, making it one of the first such states. [276]
Virginia has Amtrak passenger rail service along several corridors, and Virginia Railway Express (VRE) maintains two commuter lines into Washington, D.C. from Fredericksburg and Manassas . VRE is one of the nation's fastest growing commuter rail services, handling nearly 20,000 passengers a day. [277] The Washington Metro rapid transit system serves Northern Virginia as far west as communities along I-66 in Fairfax County, with expansion plans to reach Loudoun County by 2017. [278] Major freight railroads in Virginia include Norfolk Southern and CSX Transportation . Commuter buses include the Fairfax Connector and the Shenandoah Valley Commuter Bus . The Virginia Department of Transportation operates several free ferries throughout Virginia, the most notable being the Jamestown-Scotland ferry which crosses the James River in Surry County . [279]
Virginia has five major airports: Washington Dulles International and Reagan Washington National in Northern Virginia, both of which handle over 20 million passengers a year; Richmond International ; and Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport and Norfolk International serving the Hampton Roads area. Several other airports offer limited commercial passenger service, and sixty-six public airports serve the state's aviation needs. [280] The Virginia Port Authority 's main seaports are those in Hampton Roads , which carried 17,726,251 short tons (16,080,984 t ) of bulk cargo in 2007, the sixth most of United States ports. [281] The Eastern Shore of Virginia is the site of Wallops Flight Facility , a rocket testing center owned by NASA , and the Mid-Atlantic Regional Spaceport , a commercial spaceport. [282] [283] Space tourism is also offered through Vienna -based Space Adventures . [284]

Law and government
In colonial Virginia, free men elected the lower house of the legislature, called the House of Burgesses , which together with the Governor's Council, made the "General Assembly". Founded in 1619, the Virginia General Assembly is still in existence as the oldest legislature in the Western Hemisphere. [285] In 2008, the government was ranked by the Pew Center on the States with an A− in terms of its efficiency, effectiveness, and infrastructure, tied with Utah and Washington . This was the second consecutive time that Virginia received the highest grade in the nation. [13]
Since 1971, the government has functioned under the seventh Constitution of Virginia , which provides for a strong legislature and a unified judicial system. Similar to the federal structure , the government is divided in three branches : legislative, executive, and judicial. The legislature is the General Assembly , a bicameral body whose 100-member House of Delegates and 40-member Senate write the laws for the Commonwealth. The Assembly is stronger than the executive, as it selects judges and justices. The Governor and Lieutenant Governor are elected every four years in separate elections. Incumbent governors cannot run for re-election, however the Lieutenant Governor and Attorney General can, and governors may serve non-consecutive terms. [286] The judicial system, the oldest in America, consists of a hierarchy from the Supreme Court of Virginia and the Court of Appeals of Virginia to the Circuit Courts , the trial courts of general jurisdiction, and the lower General District Courts and Juvenile and Domestic Relations District Courts . [287]
The Code of Virginia is the statutory law, and consists of the codified legislation of the General Assembly. The Virginia State Police is the largest law enforcement agency in Virginia . The Virginia Capitol Police is the oldest police department in the United States. [288] The Virginia National Guard consists of 7,500 soldiers in the Virginia Army National Guard and 1,200 airmen in the Virginia Air National Guard . [289] Since the resumption of capital punishment in Virginia in 1982, 107 people have been executed , the second highest number in the nation. [290] The "total crime risk" is 28% lower than the national average. [291] Since Virginia ended prisoner parole in 1995, the rate of recidivism has fallen to 28.3%, among the lowest nationwide. [292] Virginia is an open-carry state .

Politics
Over the 20th century, Virginia shifted from a largely rural, politically Southern and conservative state to a more urbanized, pluralistic, and politically moderate environment. Up until the 1970s, Virginia was a racially divided one-party state dominated by the Byrd Organization . [294] The legacy of slavery in the state effectively disfranchised African Americans until after passage of civil rights legislation in the mid-1960s. [295] Enfranchisement and immigration of other groups, especially Hispanics, have placed growing importance on minority voting, [296] while voters that identify as "white working-class" declined by three percent between 2008 and 2012. [297] Regional differences play a large part in Virginia politics. [298] Rural southern and western areas moved to support the Republican Party in response to its " southern strategy ", while urban and growing suburban areas, including much of Northern Virginia , form the Democratic Party base . [299] [300] Democratic support also persists in union-influenced Roanoke in Southwest Virginia , college towns such as Charlottesville and Blacksburg , and the southeastern Black Belt Region . [301]
Political party strength in Virginia has likewise been in flux. In the 2007 state elections , Democrats regained control of the State Senate , and narrowed the Republican majority in the House of Delegates to eight seats. [302] Yet elections in 2009 resulted in the election of Republican Bob McDonnell as Governor by a seventeen-point margin, the election of a Republican Lieutenant Governor and Attorney General , as well as Republican gains of six seats in the House of Delegates. [303] In 2011, the Republican caucus took over two-thirds (68–32) of the seats in the House of Delegates, and a majority of the Senate based on the Lieutenant Governor Bill Bolling as the tie-breaker. [304] Following the 2013 elections , Democrat Terry McAuliffe was elected Governor by two percentage points, [305] [306] and Democrat Ralph Northam was elected Lieutenant Governor by double digits. [307] [308] Republicans, however, maintained their super-majority (68–32) in the House of Delegates. [307] [309] State election seasons traditionally start with the annual Shad Planking event in Wakefield . [310]
In federal elections since 2006, both parties have seen successes. Republican Senator George Allen lost close races in 2006 , to Democratic newcomer Jim Webb , and again in 2012 , to Webb's replacement, former Governor Tim Kaine . [311] In 2008 , Democrats won both United States Senate seats; former Governor Mark Warner was elected to replace retiring Republican John Warner . [312] The state went Republican in 13 out of 14 presidential elections from 1952 to 2004, including 10 in a row from 1968 to 2004. However, Democrat Barack Obama carried Virginia's 13 electoral votes in both the 2008 and 2012 presidential elections. [297] In the 2010 elections , Republicans won three United States House of Representatives seats from the Democrats. Of the state's eleven seats in the House of Representatives, Republicans hold seven and Democrats hold four. Virginia is considered a " swing state " in future presidential elections. [11]
In the 2016 Presidential election, Democrat Hillary Clinton carried Virginia, marking the third consecutive win for the Democratic Party at the presidential level and the first time the state gave its electoral votes to a Democrat, who did not win the national Electoral Vote, since 1924 . In contrast, the state gave Donald J. Trump the smallest percentage of Virginian votes for any Republican Party presidential nominee since Thomas E. Dewey in 1948 .

Sports
Virginia is the most populous U.S. state without a major professional sports league franchise. [314] The reasons for this include the lack of any dominant city or market within the state, the proximity of teams in Washington, D.C. and North Carolina , and a reluctance to publicly finance stadiums. [315] [316] However, in recent years, the city of Virginia Beach has proposed a new arena designed to lure a major league franchise. Norfolk is host to two minor league teams: The AAA Norfolk Tides and the ECHL 's Norfolk Admirals . The San Francisco Giants ' AA team , the Richmond Flying Squirrels , began play at The Diamond in 2010, replacing the AAA Richmond Braves , who relocated after 2008. [317] Additionally, the Washington Nationals , Boston Red Sox , Cleveland Indians , Atlanta Braves , Pittsburgh Pirates , New York Yankees , and Toronto Blue Jays also have Single-A and Rookie-level farm teams in Virginia. [318]
The Washington Redskins have Redskins Park, their headquarters, in Ashburn and their training facility is in Richmond, [319] and the Washington Capitals train at Kettler Capitals Iceplex in Ballston . Virginia has many professional caliber golf courses including the Greg Norman course at Lansdowne Resort and Kingsmill Resort, home of the Kingsmill Championship , an LPGA Tour tournament. NASCAR currently schedules Sprint Cup races on two tracks in Virginia: Martinsville Speedway and Richmond International Raceway . Virginia natives currently competing in the series include Denny Hamlin and Elliott Sadler . [320]
Virginia does not allow state appropriated funds to be used for either operational or capital expenses for intercollegiate athletics. [321] Despite this, both the Virginia Cavaliers and Virginia Tech Hokies have been able to field competitive teams in the Atlantic Coast Conference and maintain modern facilities. Their rivalry is followed statewide. Twelve other universities compete in NCAA Division I , particularly in the Atlantic 10 Conference , Big South Conference , and Colonial Athletic Association . Three historically black schools compete in the Division II Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association , and two others compete in the Division I Mid-Eastern Athletic Conference . Several smaller schools compete in the Old Dominion Athletic Conference and the USA South Athletic Conference of NCAA Division III. The NCAA currently holds its Division III championships in football , men's basketball, volleyball and softball in Salem . [322]

State symbols
The state nickname is its oldest symbol, though it has never been made official by law. Virginia was given the title " Dominion " by King Charles II of England at the time of The Restoration , because it had remained loyal to the crown during the English Civil War , and the present moniker, "Old Dominion" is a reference to that title. Charles' supporters were called Cavaliers , and "The Cavalier State" nickname was popularized after the American Civil War to romanticize the antebellum period. Sports teams from the University of Virginia are called the Cavaliers . [323] The other nickname, "Mother of Presidents", is also historic, as eight Virginians have served as President of the United States , including four of the first five. [1]
The state's motto, Sic Semper Tyrannis , translates from Latin as "Thus Always to Tyrants", and is used on the state seal, which is then used on the flag. While the seal was designed in 1776, and the flag was first used in the 1830s, both were made official in 1930. [1] The majority of the other symbols were made official in the late 20th century. [324] The Virginia reel is among the square dances classified as the state dance . [16] In March 2015, after 20 years without a state song , Virginia received two: " Our Great Virginia " (official traditional state song) and " Sweet Virginia Breeze " (official popular state song). [325] In 1940, Virginia made " Carry Me Back to Old Virginny " the state song, but it was retired in 1997 and reclassified as the state song emeritus. [326]

See also
WebPage index: 00037
Flow (psychology)
In positive psychology , flow , also known as the zone , is the mental state of operation in which a person performing an activity is fully immersed in a feeling of energized focus, full involvement, and enjoyment in the process of the activity. In essence, flow is characterized by complete absorption in what one does.
Named by Mihály Csíkszentmihályi , the concept has been widely referenced across a variety of fields (and has an especially big recognition in occupational therapy ), though the concept has existed for thousands of years under other guises, notably in some Eastern religions . [1] Achieving flow is often colloquially referred to as being in the zone .
Flow shares many characteristics with hyperfocus . However, hyperfocus is not always described in a positive light. Some examples include spending "too much" time playing video games or getting side-tracked and pleasurably absorbed by one aspect of an assignment or task to the detriment of the overall assignment. In some cases, hyperfocus can "capture" a person, perhaps causing them to appear unfocused or to start several projects, but complete few.

Components
Jeanne Nakamura and Csíkszentmihályi identify the following six factors as encompassing an experience of flow. [2]
Those aspects can appear independently of each other, but only in combination do they constitute a so-called flow experience . Additionally, psychology writer Kendra Cherry has mentioned three other components that Csíkszentmihályi lists as being a part of the flow experience: [3]
Just as with the conditions listed above, these conditions can be independent of one another.

Etymology
Flow is so named because during Csíkszentmihályi's 1975 interviews several people described their "flow" experiences using the metaphor of a water current carrying them along. [4]

History
Mihaly Csikszentmihályi and his fellow researchers began researching flow after Csikszentmihályi became fascinated by artists who would essentially get lost in their work. Artists, especially painters, got so immersed in their work that they would disregard their need for food, water and even sleep. Thus, the origin of research on the theory of flow came about when Csikszentmihályi tried to understand this phenomenon experienced by these artists. Flow research became prevalent in the 1980s and 1990s, with Csikszentmihályi and his colleagues in Italy still at the forefront. Researchers interested in optimal experiences and emphasizing positive experiences, especially in places such as schools and the business world, also began studying the theory of flow at this time. The theory of flow was greatly used in the theories of Abraham Maslow and Carl Rogers in their development of the humanistic tradition of psychology . [2]
Flow has been recognized throughout history and across cultures. The teachings of Buddhism and of Taoism speak of a state of mind known as the "action of inaction" or "doing without doing" ( wu wei in Taoism) that greatly resembles the idea of flow. Also, Hindu texts on Advaita philosophy such as Ashtavakra Gita and the Yoga of Knowledge such as Bhagavad-Gita refer to a similar state.

Mechanism
In every given moment, there is a great deal of information made available to each individual. Psychologists have found that one's mind can attend to only a certain amount of information at a time. According to Csikszentmihályi's 2004 TED talk, that number is about "110 bits of information per second". [5] That may seem like a lot of information, but simple daily tasks take quite a lot of information. Just decoding speech takes about 60 bits of information per second. [5] That is why when having a conversation one cannot focus as much attention on other things.
For the most part (except for basic bodily feelings like hunger and pain, which are innate), people are able to decide what they want to focus their attention on. However, when one is in the flow state, they are completely engrossed with the one task at hand and, without making the conscious decision to do so, lose awareness of all other things: time, people, distractions, and even basic bodily needs. This occurs because all of the attention of the person in the flow state is on the task at hand; there is no more attention to be allocated. [6]
The flow state has been described by Csikszentmihályi as the "optimal experience" in that one gets to a level of high gratification from the experience. [7] Achieving this experience is considered to be personal and "depends on the ability" of the individual. [7] However, the overall feeling of being in the state of flow is said to be congruent for everyone since they are all experiencing some form of the previously mentioned conditions of flow. One's capacity and desire to overcome challenges in order to achieve their ultimate goals not only leads to the optimal experience, but also to a sense of life satisfaction overall. [7]

Measurement
There are three common ways to measure flow experiences: the flow questionnaire (FQ), the experience sampling method (ESM), and the "standardized scales of the componential approach". [8]

Flow questionnaire
The FQ requires individuals to identify definitions of flow and situations in which they believe that they have experienced flow, followed by a section that asks them to evaluate their personal experiences in these flow-inducing situations. The FQ identifies flow as a single construct, therefore allowing the results to be used to estimate differences in the likelihood of experiencing flow across a variety of factors. Another strength of the FQ is that it does not assume that everyone's flow experiences are the same. Because of this, the FQ is the ideal measure for estimating the prevalence of flow. However, the FQ has some weaknesses that more recent methods have set out to address. The FQ does not allow for measurement of the intensity of flow during specific activities. This method also does not measure the influence of the ratio of challenge to skill on the flow state. [8]

Experience sampling method
The ESM requires individuals to fill out the experience sampling form (ESF) at eight randomly chosen time intervals throughout the day. The purpose of this is to understand subjective experiences by estimating the time intervals that individuals spend in specific states during everyday life. The ESF is made up of 13 categorical items and 29 scaled items. The purpose of the categorical items is to determine the context and motivational aspects of the current actions (these items include: time, location, companionship/desire for companionship, activity being performed, reason for performing activity). Because these questions are open-ended, the answers need to be coded by researchers. This needs to be done carefully so as to avoid any biases in the statistical analysis. The scaled items are intended to measure the levels of a variety of subjective feelings that the individual may be experiencing. The ESM is more complex than the FQ and contributes to the understanding of how flow plays out in a variety of situations, however the possible biases make it a risky choice. [8]

Standardized scales
Some researchers are not satisfied with the methods mentioned above and have set out to create their own scales. The scales developed by Jackson and Eklund are the most commonly used in research, mainly because they are still consistent with Csíkszentmihályi's definition of flow and consider flow as being both a state and a trait. Jackson and Eklund created two scales that have been proven to be psychometrically valid and reliable: the Flow State Scale-2 (which measures flow as a state) and the Dispositional Flow Scale-2 (designed to measure flow as either a general trait or domain-specific trait). The statistical analysis of the individual results from these scales gives a much more complete understanding of flow than the ESM and the FQ. [8]

Conditions
A flow state can be entered while performing any activity, although it is most likely to occur when one is wholeheartedly performing a task or activity for intrinsic purposes . [6] [10] Passive activities like taking a bath or even watching TV usually do not elicit flow experiences as individuals have to actively do something to enter a flow state. [11] [12] While the activities that induce flow may vary and be multifaceted, Csikszentmihályi asserts that the experience of flow is similar despite the activity. [13]
Flow theory postulates three conditions that have to be met to achieve a flow state:
However, it was argued that the antecedent factors of flow are interrelated, as a perceived balance between challenges and skills requires that one knows what he or she has to do (clear goals) and how successful he or she is in doing it (immediate feedback). Thus, a perceived fit of skills and task demands can be identified as the central precondition of flow experiences. [15]
In 1987, Massimini, Csíkszentmihályi and Carli published the 8-channel model of flow shown here. [16] Antonella Delle Fave, who worked with Fausto Massimini at the University of Milan, now calls this graph the Experience Fluctuation Model. [17] The Experience Fluctuation Model depicts the channels of experience that result from different levels of perceived challenges and perceived skills. This graph illustrates one further aspect of flow: it is more likely to occur when the activity at hand is a higher-than-average challenge (above the center point) and the individual has above-average skills (to the right of the center point). [6] The center of this graph (where the sectors meet) represents one's average levels of challenge and skill across all activities an individual performs during their daily life. The further from the center an experience is, the greater the intensity of that state of being (whether it is flow or anxiety or boredom or relaxation). [10]
Several problems of this model have been discussed in literature. [15] [18] One is, that it does not ensure a perceived balance between challenges and skills which is supposed to be the central precondition of flow experiences. Individuals with a low average level of skills and a high average level of challenges (or the other way round) do not necessarily experience a fit between skills and challenges when both are above their individual average. [19] In addition, one study found that low challenge situations which were surpassed by skill were associated with enjoyment, relaxation, and happiness, which, they claim, is contrary to flow theory. [20]
Schaffer (2013) proposed 7 flow conditions:
Schaffer also published a measure, the Flow Condition Questionnaire (FCQ), to measure each of these 7 flow conditions for any given task or activity. [21]

Challenges to staying
Some of the challenges to staying in flow include states of apathy, boredom, and anxiety. Being in a state of apathy is characterized when challenges are low and one's skill level is low producing a general lack of interest in the task at hand. Boredom is a slightly different state in that it occurs when challenges are low, but one's skill level exceeds those challenges causing one to seek higher challenges. Lastly, a state of anxiety occurs when challenges are so high that they exceed one's perceived skill level causing one great distress and uneasiness. These states in general differ from being in a state of flow, in that flow occurs when challenges match one's skill level. [22] Consequently, Csíkszentmihályi has said, "If challenges are too low, one gets back to flow by increasing them. If challenges are too great, one can return to the flow state by learning new skills." [3]

The autotelic personality
Csíkszentmihályi hypothesized that people with several very specific personality traits may be better able to achieve flow more often than the average person. These personality traits include curiosity, persistence, low self-centeredness, and a high rate of performing activities for intrinsic reasons only. People with most of these personality traits are said to have an autotelic personality . [10] The term “autotelic” is acquired from two Greek words, auto , meaning self, and telos meaning goal. Being Autotelic means having a self-contained activity, one that is done not with the expectation of some future benefit, but simply to experience it as the main goal. [23]
At this point, there is not much research on the autotelic personality , but results of the few studies that have been conducted suggest that indeed some people are more prone to experience flow than others. One researcher (Abuhamdeh, 2000) found that people with an autotelic personality have a greater preference for "high-action-opportunity, high-skills situations that stimulate them and encourage growth" compared to those without an autotelic personality. [10] It is in such high-challenge, high-skills situations that people are most likely to enter the flow state.
Experimental evidence shows that a balance between skills of the individual and demands of the task (compared to boredom and overload) only elicits flow experiences in individuals characterized by an internal locus of control [24] or a habitual action orientation. [25] Several correlational studies found need for achievement to be a personal characteristic that fosters flow experiences. [26] [27] [28]

Group
Group flow is notably different from independent flow as it is inherently mutual. Group flow is attainable when the performance unit is a group, such as a team or musical group. When groups cooperate to agree on goals and patterns, social flow, commonly known as group cohesion, is much more likely to occur. If a group still has not entered flow, a team-level challenge may stimulate the group to harmonize. [29]
Csíkszentmihályi suggests several ways a group can work together so that each individual member achieves flow. The characteristics of such a group include:

Applications

Applications suggested by Csíkszentmihályi versus other practitioners
Only Csíkszentmihályi seems to have published suggestions for extrinsic applications of the flow concept, such as design methods for playgrounds to elicit the flow experience. Other practitioners of Csíkszentmihályi's flow concept focus on intrinsic [ disambiguation needed ] applications, such as spirituality , performance improvement , or self-help . His work has also informed the measurement of donor momentum by The New Science of Philanthropy.

Education
In education , the concept of overlearning plays a role in a student's ability to achieve flow. Csíkszentmihályi [31] states that overlearning enables the mind to concentrate on visualizing the desired performance as a singular, integrated action instead of a set of actions. Challenging assignments that (slightly) stretch one's skills lead to flow. [32]
In the 1950s British cybernetician Gordon Pask designed an adaptive teaching machine called SAKI, an early example of "e-learning". The machine is discussed in some detail in Stafford Beer's book "Cybernetics and Management". [33] In the patent application for SAKI (1956), [34] Pask's comments (some of which are included below) indicate an awareness of the pedagogical importance of balancing student competence with didactic challenge, which is quite consistent with flow theory:
Around 2000, it came to the attention of Csíkszentmihályi that the principles and practices of the Montessori Method of education seemed to purposefully set up continuous flow opportunities and experiences for students. Csíkszentmihályi and psychologist Kevin Rathunde embarked on a multi-year study of student experiences in Montessori settings and traditional educational settings. The research supported observations that students achieved flow experiences more frequently in Montessori settings. [35] [36] [37]

Music
Musicians, especially improvisational soloists , may experience a state of flow while playing their instrument. [38] Research has shown that performers in a flow state have a heightened quality of performance as opposed to when they are not in a flow state. In a study performed with professional classical pianists who played piano pieces several times to induce a flow state, a significant relationship was found between the flow state of the pianist and the pianist's heart rate, blood pressure, and major facial muscles. As the pianist entered the flow state, heart rate and blood pressure decreased and the major facial muscles relaxed. This study further emphasized that flow is a state of effortless attention. In spite of the effortless attention and overall relaxation of the body, the performance of the pianist during the flow state improved. [39]
Groups of drummers experience a state of flow when they sense a collective energy that drives the beat, something they refer to as getting into the groove or entrainment . Likewise drummers and bass guitarists often describe a state of flow when they are feeling the downbeat together as being in the pocket. [40]

Sports
The concept of being in the zone during an athletic performance fits within Csíkszentmihályi's description of the flow experience, and theories and applications of being in the zone and its relationship with athletic competitive advantage are topics studied in the field of sport psychology . [41]
Timothy Gallwey 's influential works on the "inner game" of sports such as golf and tennis described the mental coaching and attitudes required to "get in the zone" and fully internalize mastery of the sport. [42]
Roy Palmer suggests that "being in the zone" may also influence movement patterns as better integration of the conscious and subconscious reflex functions improves coordination. Many athletes describe the effortless nature of their performance while achieving personal bests. [43] [44] [45]
Mixed martial arts champion and Karate master Lyoto Machida uses meditation techniques before fights to attain mushin , a concept that, by his description, is in all respects equal to flow.
The Formula One driver Ayrton Senna , during qualifying for the 1988 Monaco Grand Prix , explained: "I was already on pole, [...] and I just kept going. Suddenly I was nearly two seconds faster than anybody else, including my team mate with the same car. And suddenly I realised that I was no longer driving the car consciously. I was driving it by a kind of instinct, only I was in a different dimension. It was like I was in a tunnel." [46]
Former 500 GP rider Wayne Gardner talking about his victory at the 1990 Australian Grand Prix on The Unrideables 2 documentary said: ''During these last five laps I had this sort of above body experience where actually raised up above and I could see myself racing. It was kind of a remote control and it's the weirdest thing I've ever had in my life. [...] After the race Mick [Doohan] and in fact Wayne Rainey said: ''How the hell did you do that?'' and I said: ''I have no idea.'''' [47]

Religion and spirituality
Csíkszentmihályi may have been the first to describe this concept in Western psychology , he was most certainly not the first to quantify the concept of flow or develop applications based on the concept.
For millennia, practitioners of Eastern religions such as Hinduism , Buddhism , Taoism and later in Sufism have honed the discipline of overcoming the duality of self and object as a central feature of spiritual development. Eastern spiritual practitioners have developed a very thorough and holistic set of theories around overcoming duality of self and object, tested and refined through spiritual practice instead of the systematic rigor and controls of modern science.
Csíkszentmihályi's flow concept relates to the idea of being at one with things or as psychology expert, Kendra Cherry, describes it: "complete immersion in an activity". [3] Practitioners of the varied schools of Zen Buddhism apply concepts similar to flow to aid their mastery of art forms, including, in the case of Japanese Zen Buddhism, Aikido , Cheng Hsin , Judo , Honkyoku , Kendo and Ikebana . In yogic traditions such as Raja Yoga , reference is made to a state of flow [48] in the practice of Samyama , a psychological absorption in the object of meditation. [49] Theravada Buddhism refers to "access concentration", which is a state of flow achieved through meditation and used to further strengthen concentration into jhana , and/or to develop insight .
In Islam the first mental state that precedes human action is known as al-khatir. In this state an image or thought is born in the mind. [ citation needed ]

Gaming
Flow is one of the main reasons that people play video games. [50] It improves performance; calling the phenomenon "TV trance", a 1981 BYTE article discussed how "the best seem to enter a trance where they play but don't pay attention to the details of the game". [51] The primary goal of games is to create entertainment through intrinsic motivation , which is related to flow; that is, without intrinsic motivation it is virtually impossible to establish flow. [52] Through the balance of skill and challenge the player's brain is aroused, with attention engaged and motivation high. [53] Thus, the use of flow in games helps foster an enjoyable experience which in turn increases motivation and draws players to continue playing. As such, game designers strive to integrate flow principles into their projects. [54] Overall, the experience of play is fluid and is intrinsically psychologically rewarding independent of scores or in-game successes in the flow state. [53]
In games often much can be achieved thematically through an imbalance between challenge level and skill level. Horror games often keep challenges significantly above the player's level of competency in order to foster a continuous feeling of anxiety. Conversely, so called "relaxation games" keep the level of challenges significantly below the player's competency level, in order to achieve a similar but opposite effect. [ citation needed ] The video game Flow was designed as part of Jenova Chen 's master's thesis for exploring the design decisions that allow players to achieve the flow state, by adjusting the difficulty dynamically during play. [55]
Flow in games has been linked to the Laws of Learning as part of the explanation for why learning-games (the use of games to introduce material, improve understanding, or increase retention) have the potential to be effective. [50] In particular, flow is intrinsically motivating, which is part of the Law of Readiness . The condition of feedback, required for flow, is associated with the feedback aspects of the Law of Exercise . This is exhibited in well designed games, in particular, where players perform at the edge of their competency as they are guided by clear goals and feedback. [53] The positive emotions associated with flow are associated with the Law of Effect . The intense experiences of being in a state of flow are directly associated with the Law of Intensity . Thus, the experience of gaming can be so engaging and motivating as it meets many of the Laws of Learning, which are inextricably connected to creating flow.

Design of intrinsically motivated computer systems
A simplified modification to flow has been combined with the technology acceptance model (TAM) to help guide the design of and explain the adoption of intrinsically motivated computer systems. This model, the hedonic-motivation system adoption model (HMSAM) is model to improve the understanding of hedonic-motivation systems (HMS) adoption. [52] HMS are systems used primarily to fulfill users' intrinsic motivations, such for online gaming, virtual worlds, online shopping, learning/education, online dating, digital music repositories, social networking, online pornography, gamified systems, and for general gamification. Instead of a minor, TAM extension, HMSAM is an HMS-specific system acceptance model based on an alternative theoretical perspective, which is in turn grounded in flow-based concept of cognitive absorption (CA). The HMSAM further builds on van der Heijden's (2004) model of hedonic system adoption [56] by including CA as a key mediator of perceived ease of use (PEOU) and of behavioral intentions to use (BIU) hedonic-motivation systems. Typically, models simplistically represent "intrinsic motivations" by mere perceived enjoyed. Instead, HMSAM uses the more complex, rich construct of CA, which includes joy, control, curiosity, focused immersion, and temporal dissociation. CA is construct that is grounded in the seminal flow literature, yet ironically CA has traditionally been used as a static construct, as if all five of its subconstructs occur at the same time—in direct contradiction to the flow literature. Thus, part of HMSAM's contribution is to return CA closer to its flow roots by re-ordering these CA subconstructs into more natural process-variance order as predicted by flow. Empirical data collection along with mediation tests further support this modeling approach.

Professions and work
Developers of computer software reference getting into a flow state as "wired in", or sometimes as The Zone , [57] [58] hack mode , [59] or operating on software time [60] when developing in an undistracted state. Stock market operators often use the term "in the pipe" to describe the psychological state of flow when trading during high volume days and market corrections. Professional poker players use the term "playing the A-game" when referring to the state of highest concentration and strategical awareness, while pool players often call the state being in "dead stroke".

In the workplace
Conditions of flow, defined as a state in which challenges and skills are equally matched, play an extremely important role in the workplace. Because flow is associated with achievement, its development could have concrete implications in increasing workplace satisfaction and accomplishment. Flow researchers, such as Csikszentmihályi, believe that certain interventions may be performed to enhance and increase flow in the workplace, through which people would gain 'intrinsic rewards that encourage persistence" and provide benefits. In his consultation work, Csikszentmihályi emphasizes finding activities and environments that are conducive to flow, and then identifying and developing personal characteristics to increase experiences of flow. Applying these methods in the workplace, can improve morale by fostering a sense of greater happiness and accomplishment, which may be correlated with increased performance. In his review of Mihály Csikszentmihályi's book "Good Business: Leadership, Flow, and the Making of Meaning," Coert Visser introduces the ideas presented by Csikszentmihályi, including "good work" in which one "enjoys doing your best while at the same time contributing to something beyond yourself." [61] He then provides tools by which managers and employees can create an atmosphere that encourages good work. Some consultants suggest that the experience sampling form (EMS) method be used for individuals and teams in the workplace in order to identify how time is currently being spent, and where focus should be redirected to in order to increase flow experiences. [62]
In order to achieve flow, Csikszentmihályi lays out the following three conditions:
Csikszentmihályi argues that with increased experiences of flow, people experience "growth towards complexity". People flourish as their achievements grow and with that comes development of increasing "emotional, cognitive, and social complexity." [61] Creating a workplace atmosphere that allows for flow and growth, Csikszentmihályi argues, can increase the happiness and achievement of employees. An increasingly popular way of promoting greater flow in the workplace is using Serious Play facilitation methods.

Barriers
There are, however, barriers to achieving flow in the workplace. In his chapter "Why Flow Doesn't Happen on the Job," Csikszentmihályi argues the first reason that flow does not occur is that the goals of one's job are not clear. He explains that while some tasks at work may fit into a larger, organization plan, the individual worker may not see where their individual task fits it. Second, limited feedback about one's work can reduce motivation and leaves the employee unaware of whether or not they did a good job. When there is little communication of feedback, an employee may not be assigned tasks that challenge them or seem important, which could potentially prevent an opportunity for flow.
In the study "Predicting flow at work: Investigating the activities and job characteristics that predict flow states at work", Karina Nielsen and Bryan Cleal used a 9- item flow scale to examine predictors of flow at two levels: activity level (such as brainstorming, problem solving, and evaluation) and at a more stable level (such as role clarity, influence, and cognitive demands). They found that activities such as planning, problem solving, and evaluation predicted transient flow states, but that more stable job characteristics were not found to predict flow at work. This study can help us identify which task at work can be cultivated and emphasized in order to help employees experience flow on the job. [63] In her article in Positive Psychology News Daily , Kathryn Britton examines the importance of experiencing flow in the workplace beyond the individual benefits it creates. She writes, "Flow isn't just valuable to individuals; it also contributes to organizational goals. For example, frequent experiences of flow at work lead to higher productivity, innovation, and employee development (Csikszentmihályi, 1991, 2004). So finding ways to increase the frequency of flow experiences can be one way for people to work together to increase the effectiveness of their workplaces." [64]

Consequences

Positive experiences
Books by Csikszentmihályi suggest that enhancing the time spent in flow makes our lives more happy and successful. Flow experiences are predicated to lead to positive affect as well as to better performance. [31] [65] For example, delinquent behavior was reduced in adolescents after two years of enhancing flow through activities. [66]
However, further empirical evidence is required to substantiate these preliminary indications, as flow researchers continue to explore the problem of how to directly investigate causal consequences of flow experiences using modern scientific instrumentation to observe the neuro-physiological correlates of the flow state. [67]

Positive affect and life satisfaction
Flow is an innately positive experience; it is known to "produce intense feelings of enjoyment". [6] An experience that is so enjoyable should lead to positive affect and happiness in the long run. Also, Csikszentmihályi stated that happiness is derived from personal development and growth – and flow situations permit the experience of personal development. [65]
Several studies found that flow experiences and positive affect go hand in hand, [27] [68] and that challenges and skills above the individual's average foster positive affect. [69] [70] [71] However, the causal processes underlying those relationships remains unclear at present.

Performance and learning
Flow experiences imply a growth principle. When one is in a flow state, he or she is working to master the activity at hand. To maintain that flow state, one must seek increasingly greater challenges. Attempting these new, difficult challenges stretches one's skills. One emerges from such a flow experience with a bit of personal growth and great "feelings of competence and efficacy". [14] By increasing time spent in flow, intrinsic motivation and self-directed learning also increases. [72]
Flow has a documented correlation with high performance in the fields of artistic and scientific creativity, [73] [74] teaching, [75] learning, [76] and sports; [77] [78]
Flow has been linked to persistence and achievement in activities while also helping to lower anxiety during various activities and raise self-esteem. [79]
However, evidence regarding better performance in flow situations is mixed. [67] For sure, the association between the two is a reciprocal one. That is, flow experiences may foster better performance but, on the other hand, good performance makes flow experiences more likely. Results of a longitudinal study in the academic context indicate that the causal effect of flow on performance is only of small magnitude and the strong relationship between the two is driven by an effect of performance on flow. [26] In the long run, flow experiences in a specific activity may lead to higher performance in that activity as flow is positively correlated with a higher subsequent motivation to perform and to perform well. [14]

Criticism
Csikszentmihályi writes about the dangers of flow himself:
Further, he writes:

See also
WebPage index: 00038
Frankfurt
Frankfurt am Main ( German pronunciation: [ˈfʁaŋkfʊɐ̯t am ˈmaɪ̯n] ( listen ) ) is a metropolis and the largest city in the German state of Hesse and the fifth-largest city in Germany , with a 2015 population of 731,095 within its administrative boundaries, [4] and 2.3 million in its urban area . [2] [5] The city is at the centre of the larger Frankfurt Rhine-Main Metropolitan Region , which has a population of 5.8 million [1] and is Germany's second-largest metropolitan region after Rhine-Ruhr . Since the enlargement of the European Union in 2013 , the geographic centre of the EU is about 40 km (25 mi) to the east of Frankfurt's CBD , the Bankenviertel . Frankfurt is culturally and ethnically diverse, with around half of the population, and a majority of young people, having a migration background . A quarter of the population are foreign nationals, including many expatriates .
Frankfurt is an alpha world city and a global hub for commerce, culture, education, tourism and transportation. It's the site of many global and European corporate headquarters. Frankfurt Airport is among the world's busiest. Frankfurt is the major financial centre of the European continent, with the HQs of the European Central Bank , German Federal Bank , Frankfurt Stock Exchange , Deutsche Bank , Commerzbank , DZ Bank , KfW , several cloud and fintech startups [6] and other institutes. Automotive, technology and research, services, consulting, media and creative industries complement the economic base. Frankfurt's DE-CIX is the world's largest internet exchange point . Messe Frankfurt is one of the world's largest trade fairs . Major fairs include the Frankfurt Motor Show , the world's largest motor show, the Music Fair , and the Frankfurt Book Fair , the world's largest book fair.
Frankfurt is home to influential educational institutions, including the Goethe University , the UAS , the FUMPA , and graduate schools like the Frankfurt School of Finance & Management . Its renowned cultural venues include the concert hall Alte Oper , Europe's largest English Theatre and many museums (e.g. the Museumsufer ensemble with Städel and Liebieghaus , Senckenberg Natural Museum , Goethe House ), the Schirn art venue at the old town . Frankfurt's skyline is shaped by some of Europe's tallest skyscrapers. The city is also characterised by various green areas and parks, including the central Wallanlagen , the City Forest and two major botanical gardens , the Palmengarten and the University's Botanical Garden . In electronic music , Frankfurt has been a pioneering city since the 1980s, with renowned DJs including Sven Väth , Marc Trauner , Scot Project , Kai Tracid , and the clubs Dorian Gray , U60311, Omen and Cocoon . In sports, the city is known as the home of the top tier football club Eintracht Frankfurt , the basketball club Frankfurt Skyliners , the Frankfurt Marathon and the venue of Ironman Germany . It's the seat of German sport unions for Olympics , football and motor sports .

Distinctions
Frankfurt is the largest financial centre in continental Europe . It is home to the European Central Bank , Deutsche Bundesbank , Frankfurt Stock Exchange and several large commercial banks.
The Frankfurt Stock Exchange is one of the world's largest stock exchanges by market capitalization and accounts for more than 90 percent of the turnover in the German market.
In 2010, 63 national and 152 international banks had their registered offices in Frankfurt, including Germany's major banks, notably Deutsche Bank , Commerzbank , DZ Bank and KfW , as well as 41 representative offices of international banks. [7]
Frankfurt is considered a global city (alpha world city) as listed by the GaWC group's 2012 inventory. [8] Among global cities it was ranked 10th by the Global Power City Index 2011 and 11th by the Global City Competitiveness Index 2012 . Among financial centres it was ranked 8th by the International Financial Centers Development Index 2013 and 9th by the Global Financial Centres Index 2013 .
Its central location within Germany and Europe makes Frankfurt a major air, rail and road transport hub . Frankfurt Airport is one of the world's busiest international airports by passenger traffic and the main hub for Germany's flag carrier Lufthansa . Frankfurt Central Station is one of the largest rail stations in Europe and the busiest junction operated by Deutsche Bahn , the German national railway company, with 342 trains a day to domestic and European destinations. [9] Frankfurter Kreuz , the Autobahn interchange close to the airport, is the most heavily used interchange in the EU, used by 320,000 cars daily. [10] In 2011 human-resource-consulting firm Mercer ranked Frankfurt as seventh in its annual 'Quality of Living' survey of cities around the world. [11] According to The Economist cost-of-living survey, Frankfurt is Germany's most expensive city and the world's 10th most expensive. [12]
Frankfurt has many high-rise buildings in the city centre, forming the Frankfurt skyline . It is one of the few cities in the European Union to have such a skyline and because of it Germans sometimes refer to Frankfurt as Mainhattan , a portmanteau of the local Main River and Manhattan . The other well known and obvious nickname is Bankfurt . Before World War II the city was globally noted for its unique old town with timber-framed buildings, the largest timber-framed old town in Europe. The Römer area was later rebuilt and is popular with visitors and for events such as Christmas markets . Other parts of the old town are to be reconstructed as part of the Dom-Römer Project by 2016.

Etymology
Frankonovurd (in Old High German ) or Vadum Francorum (in Latin ) were the first names mentioned in written records from 794. It transformed to Frankenfort during the Middle Ages and then to Franckfort and Franckfurth in the modern era . According to Czech historian Dovid Solomon Ganz , the city was named c. 146 AD by its builder, a Frankish king named Zuna, who ruled over the province then known as Sicambri . He hoped thereby to perpetuate the name of his lineage. [13] The name is derived from the Franconofurd of the Germanic tribe of the Franks ; Furt ( cf. English ' ford ) where the river was shallow enough to be crossed on foot.
By the 19th century, the name Frankfurt had been established as the official spelling. The older English spelling of Frankfort is now rarely seen in reference to Frankfurt am Main, although more than a dozen other towns and cities, mainly in the United States, use this spelling (e.g., Frankfort, Kentucky ; Frankfort, New York ; Frankfort, Illinois ).
The suffix 'am Main' has been used regularly since the 14th century. In English, the city's full name of Frankfurt am Main means 'Frankfurt on the Main' (pronounced like English 'mine' or German mein ). Frankfurt is located on an ancient ford (German: Furt ) on the Main River . As a part of early Franconia , the inhabitants were the early Franks , thus the city's name reveals its legacy as "the ford of the Franks on the Main". [14]
Among English speakers, the city is commonly known simply as Frankfurt, but Germans occasionally call it by its full name to distinguish it from the other (significantly smaller) German city of Frankfurt an der Oder in the federated state of Brandenburg on the Polish border.
The city district Bonames has a name probably dating back to Roman times, thought to be derived from bona me(n)sa (good table).
The common abbreviations for the city, primarily used in railway services and on road signs, are Frankfurt (Main) , Frankfurt (M) , Frankfurt a.M. , Frankfurt/Main or Frankfurt/M . The common abbreviation for the name of the city is "FFM". Also in use is "FRA", the IATA code for Frankfurt Airport.

History
Roman settlements were established in the area of the Römer , probably in the first century. Nida ( Heddernheim ) was also a Roman civitas capital.
Alemanni and Franks lived there , and by 794, Charlemagne presided over an imperial assembly and church synod, at which Franconofurd (alternative spellings end with -furt and -vurd) was first mentioned.
Frankfurt was one of the most important cities in the Holy Roman Empire . From 855, the German kings and emperors were elected and crowned in Aachen . From 1562, the kings and emperors were crowned in Frankfurt, initiated for Maximilian II . This tradition ended in 1792, when Franz II was elected. His coronation was deliberately held on Bastille Day , 14 July, the anniversary of the storming of the Bastille . The elections and coronations took place in St. Bartholomäus Cathedral , known as the Kaiserdom (Emperor's Cathedral), or its predecessors.
The Frankfurter Messe (Frankfurt Trade Fair) was first mentioned in 1150. In 1240, Emperor Friedrich II granted an imperial privilege to its visitors, meaning they would be protected by the empire. The fair became particularly important when similar fairs in French Beaucaire lost attraction around 1380. Book trade fairs began in 1478.
In 1372, Frankfurt became a Reichsstadt ( Imperial Free City ), i.e., directly subordinate to the Holy Roman Emperor and not to a regional ruler or a local nobleman.
In 1585, Frankfurt traders established a system of exchange rates for the various currencies that were circulating to prevent cheating and extortion. Therein lay the early roots for the Frankfurt Stock Exchange.
Frankfurt managed to remain neutral during the Thirty Years' War , but suffered from the bubonic plague that refugees brought to the city. After the war, Frankfurt regained its wealth.
In the Napoleonic Wars , Frankfurt was occupied or bombarded several times by French troops. It remained a free city until the collapse of the Holy Roman Empire in 1805/6. In 1806, it became part of the principality of Aschaffenburg under the Fürstprimas ( Prince-Primate ), Karl Theodor Anton Maria von Dalberg . This meant that Frankfurt was incorporated into the confederation of the Rhine . In 1810, Dalberg adopted the title of a Grand Duke of Frankfurt . Napoleon intended to make his adopted son Eugène de Beauharnais , already Prince de Venise (" prince of Venice ", a newly established primogeniture in Italy), Grand Duke of Frankfurt after Dalberg's death (since the latter as a Catholic bishop had no legitimate heirs). The Grand Duchy remained a short episode lasting from 1810 to 1813, when the military tide turned in favour of the Anglo-Prussian lead allies that overturned the Napoleonic order. Dalberg abdicated in favour of Eugène de Beauharnais, which of course was only a symbolic action, as the latter effectively never ruled after the ruin of the French armies and Frankfurt's takeover by the allies.
After Napoleon's final defeat and abdication, the Congress of Vienna (1814–1815) dissolved the grand-duchy, and Frankfurt entered the newly founded German Confederation (till 1866) as a free city, becoming the seat of its Bundestag , the confederal parliament where the nominally presiding Habsburg Emperor of Austria was represented by an Austrian "presidential envoy".
After the ill-fated revolution of 1848 , Frankfurt was the seat of the first democratically elected German parliament, the Frankfurt Parliament , which met in the Frankfurter Paulskirche (St. Paul's Church) and was opened on 18 May 1848. The institution failed in 1849 when the Prussian king declared that he would not accept "a crown from the gutter". In the year of its existence, the assembly developed a common constitution for a unified Germany, with the Prussian king as its monarch.
Frankfurt lost its independence after the Austro-Prussian War in 1866 when Prussia annexed several smaller states, among them the Free City of Frankfurt . Frankfurt had stayed neutral in the war, but its free press bothered the Prussians and they used the opportunity to occupy the city by force: Bismarck had been an ambassador to the German Confederation there and constantly quarrelled with the local press. The Prussian administration incorporated Frankfurt into its province of Hesse-Nassau . The formerly independent towns of Bornheim and Bockenheim were incorporated in 1890.
In 1914, the citizens founded the University of Frankfurt, later named Goethe University Frankfurt . This marked the only civic foundation of a university in Germany; today it is one of Germany's largest.
From 6 April to 17 May 1920, following military intervention to put down the Ruhr Uprising , Frankfurt was occupied by French troops. [15] The French claimed that Articles 42 to 44 of the peace treaty of Versailles concerning the demilitarisation of the Rhineland had been broken. [16] In 1924, Ludwig Landmann became the first Jewish mayor of the city, and led a significant expansion during the following years. During the Nazi era , the synagogues of the city were destroyed.
Frankfurt was severely bombed in World War II (1939–1945). About 5,500 residents were killed during the raids, and the once-famous medieval city centre , by that time the largest in Germany, was almost completely destroyed. It became a ground battlefield on 26 March 1945, when the Allied advance into Germany was forced to take the city in contested urban combat that included a river assault. The 5th Infantry Division and the 6th Armored Division of the United States Army captured Frankfurt after several days of intense fighting, and it was declared largely secure on 29 March 1945. [17]
After the end of the war, Frankfurt became a part of the newly founded state of Hesse, consisting of the old Hesse-(Darmstadt) and the Prussian Hesse provinces. The city was part of the American Zone of Occupation of Germany. The Military Governor for the United States Zone (1945–1949) and the United States High Commissioner for Germany (HICOG) (1949–1952) had their headquarters in the IG Farben Building , intentionally left undamaged by the Allies' wartime bombardment.
Frankfurt was the original choice for the provisional capital city of the newly founded state of West Germany in 1949. The city constructed a parliament building that was never used for its intended purpose (it housed the radio studios of Hessischer Rundfunk ). In the end, Konrad Adenauer , the first postwar Chancellor , preferred the town of Bonn , for the most part because it was close to his hometown, but also because many other prominent politicians opposed the choice of Frankfurt out of concern that Frankfurt would be accepted as the permanent capital, thereby weakening the West German population's support for a reunification with East Germany and the eventual return of the capital to Berlin .
Postwar reconstruction took place in a sometimes simple modern style, thus changing Frankfurt's architectural face. A few landmark buildings were reconstructed historically, albeit in a simplified manner (e.g., Römer , St. Paul's Church , and Goethe House ). The collection of historically significant Cairo Genizah documents of the Municipal Library was destroyed by the bombing. According to Arabist and Genizah scholar S.D. Goitein , "not even handlists indicating its contents have survived." [18]
The end of the war marked Frankfurt's comeback as Germany's leading financial centre, mainly because Berlin, now a city divided into four sectors , could no longer rival it. In 1948, the allies founded the Bank deutscher Länder , the forerunner of Deutsche Bundesbank . Following this decision, more financial institutions were re-established, e.g. Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank . In the 1950s, Frankfurt Stock Exchange regained its position as the country's leading stock exchange.
Frankfurt also re-emerged as Germany's transportation centre and Frankfurt Airport became Europe's second-busiest airport behind London Heathrow Airport in 1961.
During the 1970s, the city created one of Europe's most efficient underground transportation systems. [ citation needed ] That system includes a suburban rail system ( S-Bahn ) linking outlying communities with the city centre, and a deep underground light rail system with smaller coaches ( U-Bahn ) also capable of travelling above ground on rails.
In 1998, the European Central Bank was founded in Frankfurt, followed by the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority and European Systemic Risk Board in 2011.

Geography
It is the largest city in the federated state of Hesse in the south-western part of Germany.

Site
Frankfurt is located on both sides of the Main River , south-east of the Taunus mountain range. The southern part of the city contains the Frankfurt City Forest , Germany's largest city forest. The city area is 248.31 km 2 (95.87 sq mi) and extends over 23.4 km (14.54 mi) east to west and 23.3 km (14.48 mi) north to south. The city centre is north of the River Main in Altstadt district (the historical centre) and the surrounding Innenstadt district. The geographical centre is in Bockenheim district near Frankfurt West station .
Frankfurt is the centre of the densely populated Frankfurt Rhine-Main Metropolitan Region with a population of 5.5 million. Other important cities in the region are Wiesbaden (capital of Hessen ), Mainz (capital of Rhineland-Palatinate ), Darmstadt , Offenbach am Main , Hanau , Aschaffenburg , Bad Homburg vor der Höhe , Rüsselsheim , Wetzlar and Marburg .

Districts
The city is divided into 46 city districts ( Stadtteile ), which are in turn divided into 118 city boroughs ( Stadtbezirke ) and 448 electoral districts ( Wahlbezirke ). The 46 city districts combine into 16 area districts ( Ortsbezirke ), which each have a district committee and chairperson.
The largest city district by population and area is Sachsenhausen , while the smallest is Altstadt , Frankfurt's historical center. Three larger city districts (Sachsenhausen, Westend and Nordend ) are divided for administrative purposes into a northern ( -Nord ) and a southern ( -Süd ) part, respectively a western ( -West ) and an eastern ( -Ost ) part, but are generally considered as one city district (which is why often only 43 city districts are mentioned, even on the City's official website). [19]
Some larger housing areas are often falsely called city districts, even by locals, like Nordweststadt (part of Niederursel , Heddernheim and Praunheim ), Goldstein (part of Schwanheim ), Riedberg (part of Kalbach-Riedberg ) and Europaviertel (part of Gallus ). The Bankenviertel ( banking district ), Frankfurt's financial district, is also not an administrative city district (it covers parts of the western Innenstadt district, the southern Westend district and the eastern Bahnhofsviertel district).
Many city districts are incorporated suburbs ( Vororte ), or were previously independent cities, such as Höchst . Some like Nordend and Westend arose during the rapid growth of the city in the Gründerzeit following the Unification of Germany , while others were formed from territory which previously belonged to other city district(s), such as Dornbusch and Riederwald .

History of incorporations
Until the year 1877 the city's territory consisted of the present-day inner-city districts of Altstadt , Innenstadt , Bahnhofsviertel , Gutleutviertel , Gallus , Westend , Nordend , Ostend and Sachsenhausen .
Bornheim was part of an administrative district called Landkreis Frankfurt , before becoming part of the city on 1 January 1877, followed by Bockenheim on 1 April 1895. Seckbach , Niederrad and Oberrad followed on 1 July 1900. The Landkreis Frankfurt was finally dispersed on 1 April 1910, and therefore Berkersheim , Bonames , Eckenheim , Eschersheim , Ginnheim , Hausen , Heddernheim , Niederursel , Praunheim , Preungesheim and Rödelheim joined the City. In the same year a new city district, Riederwald , was created on territory that had formerly belonged to Seckbach and Ostend.
On 1 April 1928 the City of Höchst became part of Frankfurt, as well as its city districts Sindlingen , Unterliederbach and Zeilsheim . Simultaneously the Landkreis Höchst was dispersed with its member cities either joining Frankfurt ( Fechenheim , Griesheim , Nied , Schwanheim , Sossenheim ) or joining the newly established Landkreis of Main-Taunus-Kreis .
Dornbusch became a city district in 1946. It was created on territory that had formerly belonged to Eckenheim and Ginnheim.
On 1 August 1972 Hesse's smaller suburbs of Harheim , Kalbach , Nieder-Erlenbach , and Nieder-Eschbach became districts while other neighbouring suburbs chose to join the Main-Taunus-Kreis, the Landkreis Offenbach , the Kreis Groß-Gerau , the Hochtaunuskreis , the Main-Kinzig-Kreis or the Wetteraukreis .
Bergen-Enkheim was the last suburb to become part of Frankfurt on 1 January 1977.
Flughafen became an official city district in 1979. It covers the area of Frankfurt Airport that had belonged to Sachsenhausen and the neighbouring city of Mörfelden-Walldorf .
Frankfurt's youngest city district is Frankfurter Berg . It was part of Bonames until 1996.
Kalbach was officially renamed Kalbach-Riedberg in 2006 because of the large residential housing development in the area known as Riedberg.

Neighbouring districts and cities
To the west Frankfurt borders the administrative district ( Landkreis ) of Main-Taunus-Kreis with towns such as Hattersheim am Main , Kriftel , Hofheim am Taunus , Kelkheim (Taunus) , Liederbach am Taunus , Sulzbach (Taunus) , Schwalbach am Taunus and Eschborn ; to the northwest the Hochtaunuskreis with Steinbach (Taunus) , Oberursel (Taunus) and Bad Homburg vor der Höhe ; to the north the Wetteraukreis with Karben and Bad Vilbel ; to the northeast the Main-Kinzig-Kreis with Niederdorfelden and Maintal ; to the southeast the city of Offenbach am Main ; to the south the Kreis Offenbach with Neu-Isenburg and to the southwest the Kreis Groß-Gerau with Mörfelden-Walldorf , Rüsselsheim and Kelsterbach .
Together with these towns (and some larger nearby towns, e.g., Hanau , Rodgau , Dreieich , Langen ) Frankfurt forms a contiguous built-up urban area called Stadtregion Frankfurt which is not an official administrative district. The urban area had an estimated population of 2.3 million in 2010 and is therefore the 13th largest urban area in the European Union .

Climate
Frankfurt has a temperate - oceanic climate ( Köppen : Cfb). Its average annual temperature is 10.6 °C (51.1 °F), with monthly mean temperatures ranging from 1.6 °C (34.9 °F) in January to 20.0 °C (68.0 °F) in July.

Demographics

Population
With a population of 731,095 (2015) within its administrative boundaries [4] and of 2,500,000 in the actual urban area , [5] Frankfurt is the fifth largest city in Germany after Berlin , Hamburg , Munich and Cologne . The city is considered a multicultural city because it is home to people of 180 nationalities. In addition to the ethnic German majority, the city contains sizable immigrant populations from Turkey , Afghanistan , Italy , Croatia , Serbia , Poland , Greece , Macedonia , Russia , Bulgaria , Lebanon , Romania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Spain , Portugal, France, China , Japan, the United States, Austria, the United Kingdom, Pakistan, Morocco and India. [ citation needed ] The Frankfurt urban area is also home to the second-largest Korean community in Europe, and to Germany's largest Sri Lankan Tamil community. Nearly 25 percent of residents are foreign nationals . In addition, 40 percent of residents, and 65 percent of those below the age of five, come from immigrant backgrounds. [22]
Central Frankfurt has been a Großstadt (a city with at least 100,000 residents by definition) since 1875. With 414,576 residents in 1910, it was the ninth largest city in Germany and the number of inhabitants grew to 553,464 before World War II . After the war, at the end of the year 1945, the number had dropped to 358,000. In the following years the population grew again and reached an all-time-high of 691,257 in 1963. It dropped again to 592,411 in 1986 but has increased since then. According to the demographic forecasts for central Frankfurt, the city will have a population up to 825,000 within its administrative boundaries in 2020 and more than 2.5 million inhabitants in its urban area.
During the 1970s the state government of Hesse wanted to include the entire urban area into its administrative boundaries. This would have made Frankfurt officially the second largest city in Germany after Berlin with up to 3 million inhabitants. [23] However, because local authorities did not agree the administrative territory is still much smaller than its actual urban area.

Population by districts

Religion
Frankfurt was historically a Protestant -dominated city. However, during the 19th century an increasing number of Catholics moved there. The Jewish community has a history dating back to Medieval times and has always ranked among the largest in Germany. Two synagogues operate there. Due to the growing immigration of people from Muslim countries beginning in the 1960s, Frankfurt has a large Muslim community. The Ahmadiyya Noor Mosque , constructed in 1959, is the city's largest mosque and the third largest in Germany. [27]
As of 2013 [update] the largest Christian denominations were Roman Catholicism (22.7% of the population) and Protestantism (19.4%). [28] Estimations put the share of Muslim inhabitants at approximately 12% (2006). [29] According to calculations based on census data for 21 countries of origin the number of Muslim migrants in Frankfurt amounted to about 84,000 in 2011, making up 12,6 percent of the population. [30] A large part of them was from Turkey and Morocco. Over 7,000 inhabitants were affiliated with the Jewish community, amounting to approximately 1% of the population. [31]

Politics
Frankfurt is one of five independent district-free cities ( kreisfreie Städte ) in Hesse , which means that it does not form part of another general-purpose local government entity, in this case it is not part of a Landkreis . The other four cities are the second to fifth largest cities in Hesse: Wiesbaden , Kassel , Darmstadt and Offenbach am Main . A kreisfreie Stadt has territorial sovereignty within its defined city limits.
In 1995 Petra Roth of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) became Lord Mayor ( Oberbürgermeisterin ), Frankfurt's municipal leader. In 2012, Peter Feldmann (SPD) succeeded Roth as Lord Mayor. The CDU and the Alliance '90/The Greens ( Bündnis '90/Die Grünen ) formed the government.

International relations
Frankfurt is twinned with:

Partnerships
Partnerships and city friendships are a weaker form of cooperation than the sister city relationship, acting more like a fixed-term cooperation or limited to certain projects. Frankfurt has partnerships with the following cities:

Cityscape

Landmarks
"Römer" is the German word for " Roman " and the name of a complex of nine houses that form Frankfurt city hall ( Rathaus ). The houses were acquired by the city council in 1405 from a wealthy merchant family. The middle house became the city hall and was later connected with its neighbours. The Kaisersaal ("Emperor's Hall") is located on the upper floor and is where the newly crowned emperors held their banquets. The Römer was partially destroyed in World War II and later rebuilt. The surrounding square, the Römerberg, is named after the city hall.
The former Altstadt (old town) quarter between the Römer and the Frankfurt Cathedral was to be redeveloped as the Dom-Römer Quarter through 2016, including reconstructions of historical buildings that were destroyed during World War II.
Saint Bartholomew's Cathedral ( Dom Sankt Bartholomäus ), (named after Bartholomew the Apostle ), is a Gothic building constructed in the 14th and 15th centuries on the foundation of an earlier church from the Merovingian time. From 1356 onwards, kings of the Holy Roman Empire were elected in this church, and from 1562 to 1792, Roman-German emperors were crowned there. It is the city's main church.
Since the 18th century, St. Bartholomew's has been called "the cathedral" by the people, although it was never a bishop's seat. In 1867 it was destroyed by fire and rebuilt in its present style. It was again partially destroyed in World War II and rebuilt in the 1950s. Its height is 95 meters. The cathedral tower has a viewing platform open to the public at a height of 66 meters, accessed through a narrow spiral staircase with 386 steps.
Saint Paul's Church ( Paulskirche ) is a national historic monument in Germany because it was the seat of the first democratically elected Parliament in 1848. It was established in 1789 as a Protestant church, but was not completed until 1833. Its importance has its roots in the Frankfurt Parliament , which met in the church during the revolutionary years of 1848/49 in order to write a constitution for a united Germany. The attempt failed because the monarchs of Prussia and Austria did not want to lose power. In 1849 Prussian troops ended the democratic experiment by force and the parliament dissolved. Afterwards, the building was used for church services again.
St. Paul's was partially destroyed in World War II, particularly its interior, which now has a modern appearance. It was quickly and symbolically rebuilt after the war; today it is used mainly for exhibitions and events.
The Archaeological Garden contains small parts of the oldest recovered buildings: an ancient Roman settlement and the Frankfurt Royal Palace ( Kaiserpfalz Frankfurt ) from the 6th century. The garden is located between the Römerberg and St. Bartholomew's. It was discovered after World War II when the area was heavily bombed and later partly rebuilt. The remains were preserved and are now open to the public. There are plans underway to construct a building on top of the garden but anyhow it is decided that the garden will stay open to the public.
Wertheim House is the only timbered house in the Altstadt district that survived the heavy bombings of World War II undamaged. It is located on the Römerberg next to the Historical Museum.
The Saalhof is the oldest conserved building in the Altstadt district and dates to the 12th century. It was used as an exhibition hall by Dutch clothiers when trade fairs were held during the 14th and 15th century. The Saalhof was partly destroyed in World War II and later rebuilt. Today it serves as a part of the Historical Museum .
The Eiserner Steg (Iron Bridge) is a pedestrian-only bridge over the Main river that connects Römerberg and Sachsenhausen. It was built in 1868 and was the second bridge to cross the river. After World War II, when it was blown up by the Wehrmacht , it was quickly rebuilt in 1946. Today some 10,000 people cross the bridge on a daily basis.
The Alte Oper is a former opera house , hence the name "Old Opera". It was built in 1880 by architect Richard Lucae. It was one of the major opera houses in Germany until it was heavily damaged in World War II. Until the late 1970s, it was a ruin, nicknamed "Germany's Most Beautiful Ruin". Former Frankfurt Lord Mayor Rudi Arndt called for blowing it up in the 1960s, which earned him the nickname "Dynamite-Rudi". (Later on, Arndt said he never had meant his suggestion seriously.)
Public pressure led to its refurbishment and reopening in 1981. Today, it functions as a famous concert hall, while operas are performed at the "new" Frankfurt Opera. The inscription on the frieze of the Alte Oper says: " Dem Wahren, Schönen, Guten " ("To the true, the beautiful, the good").
The Eschenheim Tower ( Eschenheimer Turm ) was erected at the beginning of the 15th century and served as a city gate as part of late-medieval fortifications. It is the oldest and most unaltered building in the Innenstadt district.
St. Catherine's Church ( Katharinenkirche ) is the largest evangelical church, dedicated to the martyred early Christian saint , Catherine of Alexandria . It is located in the city centre at the entrance to the Zeil, the central shopping street.
Although today "Hauptwache" is mostly associated with the inner-city underground train station of the same name , the name originates from a baroque building on the square above the station. The Hauptwache building was constructed in 1730 and was used as a prison, therefore the name that translates as "main guard-house". Today the square surrounding the building is also called "Hauptwache" (formal: An der Hauptwache ). It is situated in the city centre opposite to St. Catherine's Church and houses a famous café.
Frankfurt Central Station ( Frankfurt Hauptbahnhof ), which opened in 1888, was built as the central train station for Frankfurt to replace three smaller train stations in the city centre and to boost the needed capacity for travellers. It was constructed as a terminus station and was the largest train station in Europe by floor area until 1915 when Leipzig Central Station was opened. Its three main halls were constructed in a neorenaissance -style, while the later enlargement with two outer halls in 1924 was constructed in neoclassic -style.
The Frankfurter Hof is a landmarked hotel in the city centre at Kaiserplatz, built from 1872 to 1876. It is part of Steigenberger Hotels group and is considered the city's most prestigious.

20th-century architecture

21st-century architecture

Skyscrapers
Frankfurt is one of the few European cities with a significant number of skyscrapers, (buildings at least 150 m (492.13 ft) tall). It hosts 14 out of Germany's 15 skyscrapers . Most skyscrapers and high-rise office buildings are located in the financial district ( Bankenviertel ) near the city centre, around the trade fair premises ( Europaviertel ) and at Mainzer Landstraße between Opernplatz and Platz der Republik, which connects the two areas.
The 14 skyscrapers are:
Other high-rise buildings include:

History of high-rise buildings
For centuries, St. Bartholomeus's Cathedral was the tallest structure. The first building to exceed the 95-metre-high cathedral was not an office building but a grain silo , the 120-metre high Henninger Turm , built from 1959 to 1961.
The first high-rise building boom came in the 1970s when Westend Gate (then called Plaza Büro Center ) and Silberturm were constructed and became the tallest buildings in Germany with a height of 159.3 metres and 166.3 metres, respectively. Around the same time, Frankfurter Büro Center and City-Haus (142.4 metres and 142.1 metres) were constructed at Mainzer Landstraße and Eurotower (148.0 metres) and Garden Tower (127.0 metres; then called Helaba-Hochhaus ) were constructed in the financial district.
None of the buildings constructed during the 1980s surpassed Silberturm. The most famous buildings from this decade are the Deutsche Bank Twin Towers at Taunusanlage, both 155.0 metres tall.
The 1990s featured a second wave. Messeturm , built on the trade fair site, reached a height of 256.5 metres and became the tallest building in Europe by 1991. It was overtaken by the 259-metre high Commerzbank Tower in 1997. Other tall buildings from this decade are Westendstrasse 1 (208.0 metres), Main Tower (200.0 metres) and Trianon (186.0 metres).
In 21st-century Frankfurt, more high-rise buildings and skyscrapers (e.g., Skyper , Opernturm , Tower 185 , Seat of the European Central Bank , Taunusturm ) emerged, but none have surpassed Commerzbank Tower.

Other tall structures

Shopping streets

Green city
With a large forest, many parks, the Main riverbanks and the two botanical gardens, Frankfurt is considered a "green city": More than 50 percent of the area within the city limits are protected green areas. [37]

Culture

Museums
With more than 30 museums, Frankfurt has one of the largest variety of museums in Europe. 20 museums are part of the Museumsufer ( Museums Riverbank ), located on the front row of both sides of the Main riverbank or nearby.
Ten museums are located on the southern riverbank in Sachsenhausen between the Eiserner Steg and the Friedensbrücke. The street itself, Schaumainkai , is partially closed to traffic on Saturdays for Frankfurt's largest flea market .
Two museums are located on the northern riverbank:
Not directly located on the northern riverbank in the Altstadt district are:
Another important museum is located in the Westend district:
Other museums are the Dialogmuseum (Dialogue Museum) in the Ostend district, Eintracht Frankfurt Museum at Commerzbank-Arena , Explora Museum+Wissenschaft+Technik (Explora Museum of Science and Engineering) in the Nordend district, the Frankfurter Feldbahnmuseum e.V. (Light Railway Museum Frankfurt) in the Gallus district, the Verkehrsmuseum Frankfurt (Transport Museum Frankfurt) in the Schwanheim district, the Hammer Museum in the Bahnhofsviertel district and the Geldmuseum der Deutschen Bundesbank (Money Museum of the German Federal Bank) in the Ginnheim district.

Performing arts
Eurodance and Trance music originated in Frankfurt. In 1989 German producers Michael Münzing and Luca Anzilotti (under the pseudonyms Benito Benites and John "Virgo" Garrett III) formed the Snap! project. Snap! songs combined Rap and Soul vocals adding rhythm by using computer technology and mixing electronic sounds, bass and drums. By doing so a new genre was born: Eurodance. [38] In the early 1990s, DJs including Sven Väth and DJ DAG (of Dance 2 Trance ) first played a harder, deeper style of acid house that became popular worldwide over the next decade as Trance music. Some of the early and most influential Eurodance, Trance and Techno acts, e.g., La Bouche , Jam and Spoon , Magic Affair , Culture Beat , Snap! , Dance 2 Trance , Oliver Lieb and Hardfloor , and record labels such as Harthouse and Eye Q , were based in the city in the early 1990s.

Botanical gardens
Frankfurt is home to two major botanical gardens.

Foreign culture

Festivals

Nightlife
Frankfurt offers a variety of restaurants, bars, pubs and clubs. Clubs concentrate in and around the city centre and in the Ostend district, mainly close to Hanauer Landstraße. Restaurants, bars and pubs concentrate in Sachsenhausen , Nordend , Bornheim and Bockenheim .
One of the main venues of the early Trance music sound was the Omen nightclub (closed 1998). Another popular disco club of the 1980-1990s and a hotspot for Techno/Trance music was the Dorian Gray , located within Terminal 1 at Frankfurt Airport. Because of the location at the airport the club had no restrictions regarding opening hours. The club had to close at the end of 2000 because of stricter fire safety regulations. Also notable for its extraordinary design was Coocoon Club in Fechenheim which opened in 2004 was and voted best techno club of the year by music magazines "Groove" and "Raveline" in 2004, 2005, 2006 and 2007. It closed in 2012. [40]

Domestic culture

Culinary specialties

Transport

Airports

Frankfurt Airport
The city can be accessed from around the world via Frankfurt Airport ( Flughafen Frankfurt am Main ) located 12 km (7 mi) southwest of the city centre. The airport has four runways and serves 265 non-stop destinations. Run by transport company Fraport it ranks among the world's busiest airports by passenger traffic and is the busiest airport by cargo traffic in Europe. The airport also serves as a hub for Condor and as the main hub for German flag carrier Lufthansa . Depending upon whether total passengers or flights are used for calculations, it ranks third or second busiest in Europe alongside London Heathrow Airport and Paris Charles de Gaulle Airport . Passenger traffic at Frankfurt Airport in 2012 was 57.5 million. There are plans to expand the airport with a third passenger terminal to increase the capacity up to 88 million in 2020.
The airport can be reached by car or bus and has two railway stations, one for regional and one for long-distance traffic. The S-Bahn lines S8 and S9 (direction Offenbach Ost or Hanau Hbf ) departing at the regional station take 10–15 minutes from the airport to Frankfurt Central Station and onwards to the city centre ( Hauptwache station ), the IC and ICE trains departing at the long-distance station take 10 minutes to Frankfurt Central Station.

Frankfurt Hahn Airport
Despite the name, Frankfurt Hahn Airport ( Flughafen Frankfurt-Hahn ) is situated approximately 120 km (75 mi) from the city in Lautzenhausen ( Rhineland-Palatinate ). Hahn Airport is a major base for low-cost carrier Ryanair . This airport can only be reached by car or bus. An hourly bus service runs from Frankfurt Central Station , taking about 1-hour and 45 minutes. Passenger traffic at Hahn Airport in 2010 was 3.5 million.

Frankfurt Egelsbach Airport
Frankfurt Egelsbach Airport ( Flugplatz Frankfurt-Egelsbach ) is a busy general aviation airport located south-east of Frankfurt Airport, near Egelsbach .

Roads
Frankfurt is a traffic hub for the German motorway ( Autobahn ) system. The Frankfurter Kreuz is an Autobahn interchange close to the airport, where the Bundesautobahn 3 (A3), Cologne to Würzburg , and the Bundesautobahn 5 (A5), Basel to Hannover , meet. With approximately 320,000 cars passing through it every day it is Europe's most heavily used interchange. The Bundesautobahn 66 (A66) connects Frankfurt with Wiesbaden in the west and Fulda in the east. The Bundesautobahn 661 (A661) is mainly a commuter motorway which starts in the south (Egelsbach), runs through the eastern part and ends in the north ( Oberursel ). The Bundesautobahn 648 (A648) is a very short motorway in the western part which primarily serves as a fast connection between the A 66 and the Frankfurt Trade Fair . The A5 in the west, the A3 in the south and the A661 in the north-east form a ring road around the inner city districts and define a Low-emission zone ( Umweltzone ; established in 2008), meaning that vehicles have to meet certain emission criteria to enter the zone.
The streets of central Frankfurt are usually congested with cars during rush hour . Some areas, especially around the shopping streets Zeil, Goethestraße and Freßgass, are pedestrian-only streets. Car parks are located throughout the city and especially in the city centre.

Railway stations

Frankfurt Central Station
Frankfurt Central Station ( Frankfurt Hauptbahnhof , often abbreviated as Frankfurt (Main) Hbf or F-Hbf ) is the largest railway station in Germany by railway traffic. By daily passenger volume, it ranks second together with Munich Central Station (350,000 each) after Hamburg Central Station (450,000). It is located between the Gallus , the Gutleutviertel and the Bahnhofsviertel district, not far away from the trade fair and the financial district. It serves as a major hub for long-distance trains ( InterCity , ICE ) and regional trains as well as for Frankfurt's public transport system. It is a stop for most of ICE high speed lines, making it Germany's most important ICE station. ICE Trains to London via the Channel Tunnel were planned for 2013. [44] All Rhine-Main S-Bahn lines, two U-Bahn lines (U4, U5), several tram and bus lines stop there. Regional and local trains are integrated in the Public transport system Rhein-Main-Verkehrsverbund (RMV), the second largest integrated public transport systems in the world, after Verkehrsverbund Berlin-Brandenburg .

Frankfurt Airport stations
Frankfurt Airport can be accessed by two railway stations: Frankfurt Airport long-distance station ( Frankfurt Flughafen Fernbahnhof ) is only for long-distance traffic and connects the airport to the main rail network, with most of the ICE services using the Cologne-Frankfurt high-speed rail line . The long-distance station is located outside the actual airport ground but has a connecting bridge for pedestrians to Terminal 1, concourse B. Frankfurt Airport regional station ( Frankfurt Flughafen Regionalbahnhof ) is for local S-Bahn trains (lines S8, S9) and regional trains. The regional station is located within Terminal 1, concourse B.

Frankfurt South station
Frankfurt's third long-distance station is Frankfurt South station ( Frankfurt Südbahnhof , often abbreviated as Frankfurt (Main) Süd or F-Süd ), located in Sachsenhausen . It is an important destination for local trains and trams (lines 14 to 16, 19) and the terminal stop for four U-Bahn lines (U1, U2, U3, U8) and four S-Bahn lines (S3, S4, S5, S6).

Messe stations
The Frankfurt Trade Fair offers two railway stations: Messe station is for local S-Bahn trains (lines S3-S6) and is located at the centre of the trade fair premises while Festhalle/Messe station is served by U-Bahn line U4 and is located at the north-east corner of the premises.

Konstablerwache station and Hauptwache station
Two other major railway stations in the city centre are Konstablerwache and Hauptwache, located on each end of the Zeil. They are the main stations to change from east-to-west-bound S-Bahn trains to north-to-south-bound U-Bahn trains. Konstablerwache station is the second-busiest railway station regarding daily passenger volume (191,000) after the central station. The third-busiest railway station is Hauptwache station (181,000). [ citation needed ]

Public transport
The city has two rapid transit systems: the U-Bahn and the S-Bahn, as well as an above-ground tram system. Information about the U- and S-Bahn can be found on the website of the RMV . [45]

S-Bahn
Nine S-Bahn lines (S1 to S9) connect Frankfurt with the densely populated Rhine Main Region . Most routes have at least 15-minute service during the day, either by one line running every 15 minutes, or by two lines servicing one route at a 30-minute interval. All lines, except line S7, run through the Frankfurt city tunnel and serve the stations Ostendstraße , Konstablerwache , Hauptwache , Taunusanlage and Frankfurt Central Station . When leaving the city the S-Bahn travels above ground. It provides access to the trade fair (S3, S4, S5, S6), the airport (S8, S9), the stadium (S7, S8, S9) and nearby cities such as Wiesbaden , Mainz , Darmstadt , Rüsselsheim , Hanau , Offenbach am Main , Oberursel , Bad Homburg , Kronberg , Friedberg and smaller towns that are on the way.

U-Bahn
The U-Bahn has nine lines (U1 to U9) serving Frankfurt and the larger suburbs of Bad Homburg and Oberursel in the north. The trains that run on the line are in fact light rail as many lines travel along a track in the middle of the street instead of underground further from the city centre. The minimum service interval is 2.5 minutes, although the usual pattern is that each line runs at 7.5 to 10 minute intervals, which produce between 3 and 5 minute intervals on city centre tracks shared by more than one line.

Tram
Frankfurt has ten tram lines (11, 12, 14 to 21), with trams arriving usually every 10 minutes. Many sections are served by two lines, combining to run at 5-minute intervals during rush-hour. The tram runs only above ground and serve more stops than the U-Bahn or the S-Bahn.

Bus
A number of bus lines complete the Frankfurt public transport system. Night buses replace U-Bahn and tram services between 1:30 am and 3:30 am. [46] The central junction for the night bus service is Konstablerwache in the city centre, where all night bus lines start and end.

Taxis
Taxis can usually be found outside the major S-Bahn and U-Bahn stations, at the central station, the south station, the airport, the trade fair and in the crowded inner-city shopping streets. The common way to obtain a taxi is to either call a taxi operator or to go to a taxi rank. However, although not the norm, one can hail a passing taxi on the street.
Uber ceased Frankfurt operations on November 9, 2015. It is unknown when services will resume. [47]

Bicycles
Deutsche Bahn makes bicycles available for hire through their Call a Bike service. The bicycles are stationed all over the city, including at selected railway stations. They can easily be spotted because of their eye-catching silver-red colour. To rent a specific bike, riders either call a service number to get an unlock code or reserve the bike via the smartphone application. To return the bike, the rider locks it within a designated return area (and calls the service number, if not booked via the app). [48]
Nextbike also makes bicycles available for hire in Frankfurt. They are stationed all over the city. These can be spotted with their blue color scheme.
Cycle rickshaws (velotaxis), a type of tricycle designed to carry passengers in addition to the driver, are also available. These are allowed to operate in pedestrian-only areas and are therefore practical for sightseeing.
Frankfurt has a network of cycle routes. Many long-distance bike routes into the city have cycle tracks that are separate from motor vehicle traffic. A number of roads in the city centre are "bicycle streets" where the cyclist has the right of way and where motorised vehicles are only allowed access if they do not disrupt the cycle users. In addition, cyclists are allowed to ride many cramped one-way streets in both directions. As of 2015 [update] , 15 percent of citizens used bicycles. [49]

Economy and business
Frankfurt is one of the world's most important financial centres and Germany's financial capital, followed by Munich . Frankfurt was ranked 8th at the International Financial Centers Development Index (2013), 8th at the Worldwide Centres of Commerce Index (2008), 9th at the Global Financial Centres Index (September 2013), [50] 10th at the Global Power City Index (2011), 11th at the Global City Competitiveness Index (2012), 12th at the Innovation Cities Index (2011), [51] 14th at the World City Survey (2011) and 23rd at the Global Cities Index (2012). [52]
The city's importance as a financial centre has risen since the eurozone crisis . Indications are the establishment of two institutions of the European System of Financial Supervisors ( European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority and European Systemic Risk Board ) in 2011 and the Single Supervisory Mechanism by which the European Central Bank was to assume responsibility for specific supervisory tasks related to the financial stability of the biggest and most important Eurozone banks.
According to an annual study by Cushman & Wakefield , the European Cities Monitor (2010), Frankfurt has been one of the top three cities for international companies in Europe, after London and Paris, since the survey started in 1990. [53] It is the only German city considered to be an alpha world city (category 3) as listed by the Loughborough University group's 2010 inventory, [54] which was a promotion from the group's 2008 inventory when it was ranked as an alpha minus world city (category 4). [55]
With over 922 jobs per 1,000 inhabitants, Frankfurt has the highest concentration of jobs in Germany. On work days and Saturdays one million people commute from all over the Rhein-Main-Area .

Central banks
Frankfurt is home to two important central banks .

European Central Bank
The European Central Bank ( Europäische Zentralbank ) is one of the world's most important central banks. The ECB sets monetary policy for the Eurozone, consisting of 19 European Union member states that have adopted the Euro (€) as their common currency. Since 1998 the ECB Headquarters are located in the Eurotower at Willy-Brandt-Platz and in two other nearby high-rises. The future Seat of the European Central Bank in the Ostend district, consisting of the former wholesale market hall ( Großmarkthalle ) and a newly built 185-metre skyscraper, were expected to be completed by early 2014. The new building complex was to accommodate up to 2,300 ECB personnel. The location is a few kilometres away from the city centre and borders an industrial area as well as the Osthafen ( East Harbour ), It was primarily chosen because of its large premises which allows the ECB to install security arrangements without high fences.
The city honours the importance of the ECB by officially using the slogan "The City of the Euro" since 1998.

German Federal Bank
The German Federal Bank ( Deutsche Bundesbank ), located in Ginnheim , was established in 1957 as the central bank for the Federal Republic of Germany. Until the euro (€) was introduced in 1999, the Deutsche Bundesbank was responsible for the monetary policy of Germany and for the German currency, the Deutsche Mark (DM). The Bundesbank was greatly respected for its control of inflation through the second half of the 20th century. Today the Bundesbank is an integral part of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) which is formed by all 27 European Union member states.

Commercial banks
In 2010, 63 national and 152 international banks had a registered office, including the headquarters of the major German banks, as well as 41 offices of international banks. [7] Frankfurt is therefore known as Bankenstadt ("City of the banks") and nicknamed "Mainhattan" (a portmanteau of the local Main river and Manhattan in New York City) or "Bankfurt". 73,200 people were employed at banks in 2010.
Other major German banks include Frankfurter Volksbank, the second-largest Volksbank in Germany, Frankfurter Sparkasse and old-established private banks such as Bankhaus Metzler , Hauck & Aufhäuser and Delbrück Bethmann Maffei .
Many international banks have a registered or a representative office, e.g., Credit Suisse , UBS , Bank of America , Morgan Stanley , Goldman Sachs , Merrill Lynch , JPMorgan Chase & Co. , Bank of China , Banco do Brasil , Itaú Unibanco Société Générale , BNP Paribas , SEB , Royal Bank of Scotland and Barclays .

Frankfurt Stock Exchange
The Frankfurt Stock Exchange ( Frankfurter Wertpapierbörse ) began in the 9th century. By the 16th century Frankfurt had developed into an important European hub for trade fairs and financial services. Today the Frankfurt Stock Exchange is by far the largest in Germany, with a turnover of more than 90 percent of the German stock market and is the third-largest in Europe after the London Stock Exchange and the European branch of the NYSE Euronext . The most important stock market index is the DAX , the index of the 30 largest German business companies listed at the stock exchange. The stock exchange is owned and operated by Deutsche Börse , which is itself listed in the DAX. Deutsche Börse also owns the European futures exchange Eurex and clearing company Clearstream . Trading takes place exclusively via the Xetra trading system , with redundant floor brokers taking on the role of market-makers on the new platform.
On 1 February 2012 European Commission blocked the proposed merger of Deutsche Börse and NYSE Euronext . "The merger between Deutsche Börse and NYSE Euronext would have led to a near-monopoly in European financial derivatives worldwide. These markets are at the heart of the financial system and it is crucial for the whole European economy that they remain competitive. We tried to find a solution, but the remedies offered fell far short of resolving the concerns." [57] European competition commissioner, Joaquín Almunia , said.
It is located in the city centre at the Börsenplatz. Deutsche Börse's headquarters are formally registered in Frankfurt but it moved most of its employees a high-rise called "The Cube" in Eschborn in 2010, primarily due to significantly lower local corporate taxes .

Frankfurt Trade Fair
Frankfurt Trade Fair ( Messe Frankfurt ) has the third-largest exhibition site in the world with a total of 578,000 square metres (6,221,540 square feet). The trade fair premises are located in the western part between Bockenheim , the Westend and the Gallus district. It houses ten exhibition halls with a total of 321,754 square meters (3,463,331 square feet) of space and 96,078 square metres (1,034,175 square feet) of outdoor space.
Hosted in Frankfurt are the Frankfurt Motor Show ( Internationale Automobil-Ausstellung – IAA ), the world's largest auto show , the Frankfurt Book Fair ( Frankfurter Buchmesse ), the world's largest book fair, the Ambiente Frankfurt, the world's largest consumer goods fair, the Achema, the world's largest plant engineering fair, and many more like Paperworld, Christmasworld, Beautyworld, Tendence Lifestyle or Light+Building.
Messe Frankfurt GmbH, the owner and operator company, organized 87 exhibitions in 2010, 51 thereof in foreign countries. It is one of the largest trade fair companies with commercial activities in over 150 countries.

Messeturm
A landmark building of the trade fair (and of the whole city) is the Messeturm (the name translates as Fair Trade Tower ), which was the tallest building in Europe from 1991 to 1997. It is located on the north-east corner of the trade fair premises at the so-called city entrance. Despite the name it is not used for exhibition but serves as an office tower.

Aviation
Frankfurt Airport is one of the busiest airports in the world and is also the single largest place of work in Germany with over 500 companies which employ 71,500 people (2010). [58]

Lufthansa
The largest employer at Frankfurt Airport is Lufthansa, Germany's flag carrier and Europe's largest airline. Lufthansa employs 35,000 people in Frankfurt. [59] [60] The Lufthansa Aviation Center (LAC) is the main operation base of Lufthansa at Frankfurt Airport. The airport serves as Lufthansa's primary hub with 157 worldwide destinations (compared to 110 destinations at Munich Airport , Lufthansa's second-largest hub). Lufthansa Cargo is based in Frankfurt and operates its largest cargo center (LCC) at Frankfurt Airport. Lufthansa Flight Training is also based here.

Fraport
Fraport is the owner and operator of Frankfurt Airport. It is the airport's second-largest employer (19,800 workers in 2010). [61] Fraport also operates other airports worldwide, e.g., King Abdulaziz International Airport in Jeddah , Jorge Chávez International Airport in Lima and Antalya Airport .

Condor
Condor is a German airline and part of Thomas Cook Group , based at Frankfurt Airport.

Other industries

Accountancy and professional services
Three of the four largest international accountancy and professional services firms ( Big Four ) are present.
PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) German headquarters are located at Tower 185 . KPMG moved its European Headquarters ( KPMG Europe LLP ) to The Squaire . Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu are present, while Ernst & Young is located in Eschborn .

Credit rating agencies
The three major international credit rating agencies – Standard & Poor's , Moody's and Fitch Ratings – have their German headquarters in Frankfurt.

Investment trust companies
DWS Investments is the largest investment trust company in Germany and manages €288 billion fund assets. It is one of the 10 largest investment trust companies in the world. [62] Other large investment trust companies are Allianz Global Investors Europe (a division of Allianz SE , and a top-five global active investment manager with €1,933 billion assets under management globally), Union Investment and Deka Investmentfonds.

Management consultancies
Many of the largest international management consultancies are represented, including Arthur D. Little , McKinsey & Company , Boston Consulting Group , Booz & Company , Oliver Wyman , Bearing Point , Capgemini , Bain & Company and Roland Berger Strategy Consultants .

Real estate services companies
Located in Frankfurt are the German headquarters of Jones Lang LaSalle and BNP Paribas Real Estate .

Law firms
Frankfurt has the highest concentration of lawyers in Germany, with one lawyer per 97 inhabitants (followed by Düsseldorf with a ratio of 1/117 and Munich with 1/124) in 2005. [63]
Most of the large international law firms maintain offices, among them Allen & Overy , Baker & McKenzie , Bird & Bird , Clifford Chance , Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton , Debevoise & Plimpton , DLA Piper , Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer , Hogan Lovells , Jones Day , Latham & Watkins , Linklaters , Mayer Brown , Milbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy , Norton Rose , Shearman & Sterling , Sidley Austin , SJ Berwin , Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom , Sullivan & Cromwell , K&L Gates , Taylor Wessing and White & Case .

Advertising agencies
Although it is best known for its banks and financial institutions, Frankfurt is also a centre for media companies. Around 570 companies of the advertising industry and 270 public relations companies are there.
According to a ranking of German FOCUS magazine (November 2007) seven of the 48 largest advertising agencies in Germany are based in Frankfurt, including McCann-Erickson , Saatchi & Saatchi , JWT , and Publicis . [64]

Food
Frankfurt is home to the German headquarters of Nestlé , the world's largest food company , located in Niederrad . Other important food companies are Ferrero SpA (German headquarters) and Radeberger Gruppe KG, the largest private brewery group in Germany.

Automotive
The South-Korean automobile manufacturer Kia Motors moved its European headquarters to Frankfurt in 2007. In the same year Italian manufacturer Fiat opened its new German headquarters. The automotive supplier Continental AG has the headquarters and a major manufacturing plant of its Chassis & Safety division (formerly ITT Automotive) located in Frankfurt Rödelheim.

Construction
Some of the largest German construction companies have offices, e.g., Bilfinger Berger , Hochtief , Züblin and BAM Deutschland.

Property and real estate
Frankfurt has Germany's highest concentration of homeowners. This is partly attributed to the financial sector, but also to its cosmopolitan nature, with expatriates and immigrants representing one fourth of its population. For this reason Frankfurt's property market often operates differently than the rest of the country where the prices are generally flatter.

Other
Frankfurt is home to companies from the chemical, the transportation, the telecommunication and the energy industry. Some of the larger companies are:

Urban area (suburban) businesses
Within Frankfurt's urban area are several important companies.
The business centre of Eschborn is located right at Frankfurt's city limits in the west and attracts businesses with significantly lower corporate taxes compared to Frankfurt. Major companies in Eschborn include Ernst & Young , Vodafone Germany , Randstad Holding and VR Leasing. Deutsche Börse moved most of its employees to Eschborn in 2010.
Rüsselsheim is internationally known for its automobile manufacturer Opel , one of the biggest automobile manufacturers in Germany. With 20,000 employees in 2003, Opel was one of the five largest employers in Hesse .
Offenbach am Main is home to the European headquarters of automobile manufacturer Hyundai Motor Company , to the German headquarters of automobile manufacturer Honda , to Honeywell Germany and to Deutscher Wetterdienst , the central scientific agency that monitors weather and meteorological conditions over Germany.
Two DAX companies are located in Bad Homburg vor der Höhe , Fresenius SE & Co. KGaA and Fresenius Medical Care . Other major companies are Hewlett-Packard , Bridgestone , Deutsche Leasing and Basler Versicherungen.
Kronberg im Taunus is home of the German headquarters of automobile manufacturer Jaguar Cars as well as the German headquarters of Accenture .
Lufthansa Systems , a subsidiary of Lufthansa , is located in Kelsterbach .
LSG Sky Chefs , another subsidiary of Lufthansa , is located in Neu-Isenburg .
The German headquarters of Thomas Cook Group are based in Oberursel (Taunus) .
Langen is home to Deutsche Flugsicherung , the German air traffic control .

Quality of life
According to a ranking list (2001) produced by the University of Liverpool , Frankfurt is the richest city in Europe by GDP per capita , followed by Karlsruhe , Paris and Munich . [65]
Frankfurt was voted the 7th in the Mercer Quality of Living Survey by the Mercer Quality of Living Survey (2012), [66] seventh in the Mercer Quality of Living Survey (2010) and 18th at the Economist's World's Most Liveable Cities Survey (2011). [67] According to an annual citizen survey (2010), arranged by the city council, 66 percent inhabitants are satisfied or highly satisfied with the city, while only 6 percent said that they are dissatisfied. Compared to the 1993's survey the number of satisfied inhabitants has grown about 22 percent while the number of dissatisfied inhabitants was reduced by 8 percent. 84 percent of the inhabitants like to live in Frankfurt, 13 percent would rather choose to live somewhere else. 37 percent are satisfied with the public safety (1993: only 9 percent), 22 percent are dissatisfied (1993: 64 percent). [68]
Frankfurt consistently has the highest levels of crime per 100,000 inhabitants in Germany (15.976 crimes per annum in 2008) and is therefore dubbed the German "crime capital". [69] However, this statistic is often criticized [ citation needed ] because it ignores major factors: It is calculated based on the administrative 680,000-inhabitant figure while the urban area has 2.5 M inhabitants and on weekdays adds another million people [ citation needed ] (not counting the 53 million passengers passing through the airport each year). The rate for personal safety-relevant crimes such as murder, manslaughter, rape or bodily harm, is 3.4 percent, placing Frankfurt twelfth in the ranking (related to the official 680,000-inhabitant figure) or number 21 (related to the one-million-figure). [70]

Governmental institutions

European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority
The European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) is an institution of the European Union and part of the European System of Financial Supervisors that was created in response to the financial crisis . It was established on 1 January 2011.

Federal Financial Supervisory Authority
Frankfurt is one of two locations of the German Federal Financial Supervisory Authority ( Bundesanstalt für Finanzdienstleistungsaufsicht , short: BaFin ). The BaFin is an independent federal institution and acts as Germany's financial regulatory authority.

International Finance Corporation
Frankfurt is home to the German office of the International Finance Corporation (IFC), which is part of the World Bank Group. The IFC promotes sustainable private sector investment in developing countries .

German National Library
Frankfurt is one of two sites of the German National Library ( Deutsche Nationalbibliothek ), the other being Leipzig . The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek is the largest universal library in Germany. Its task, unique in Germany, is to collect, permanently archive, comprehensively document and record bibliographically all German and German-language publications from 1913 on, foreign publications about Germany, translations of German works and the works of German-speaking emigrants published abroad between 1933 and 1945, and to make them available to the public.

Trade unions and associations
Frankfurt is home to multiple trade unions and associations, including:
trade associations include:

Tourism

Sights
Frankfurt is one of Germany's leading tourist destinations. In addition to its infrastructure and economy, its diversity supports a vibrant cultural scene. This blend of attractions led 4.3 million tourists (2012) to visit Frankfurt. [71] The Hotels in central Frankfurt offer 34,000 beds in 228 hotels, of which 13 are luxury hotels and 46 are first-class hotels. [72]

Sights in the Frankfurt Rhein-Main-Area
Besides the tourist attractions in central Frankfurt many internationally famous sites are within 80 km (50 mi) of the city, such as:

North

West

East

South

Consulates
As a profoundly international city, Frankfurt hosts 92 diplomatic missions ( consulates and consulates-general ). Worldwide, only New York City and Hamburg are non-capital cities with more foreign representation. The Consulate General of the United States in Eckenheim is the largest American consulate in the world.

Courts
Several courts are located in Frankfurt, including:

Media

Newspapers
Two important daily newspapers are published. The conservative Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung , also known as FAZ , was founded in 1949 and is the German newspaper with the widest circulation outside of Germany, with its editors claiming to deliver the newspaper to 148 countries every day. The FAZ has a circulation of over 380,000 copies daily. The other important newspaper, the Frankfurter Rundschau , was first published in 1945 and has a daily circulation of over 181,000.

Magazines
Several magazines also originate from Frankfurt. The local Journal Frankfurt is the best-known magazine for events, parties, and "insider tips". Öko-Test is a consumer-oriented magazine that focuses on ecological topics. Titanic is a well-known and often criticized satirical magazine with a circulation of approximately 100,000.

Radio and TV
Frankfurt's first radio station was the Südwestdeutsche Rundfunkdienst AG (Southwest German Broadcast Service), founded in 1924. Its successor service is the public broadcaster Hessischer Rundfunk (Hessian Broadcast Service). It is located at the "Funkhaus am Dornbusch" in the Dornbusch district and is one of the most important radio and television broadcasters in Hesse, with additional studios in Kassel , Darmstadt and Fulda .
Bloomberg TV and RTL Television have regional studios.
Other radio broadcasters include Main FM and Radio X.
From August 1945 to October 2004, the American Forces Network (AFN) had broadcast from Frankfurt. Due to troop reductions the AFN's location has been closed with AFN now broadcasting from Mannheim .

News agency
Frankfurt is home to the German office of Reuters , the global news agency .

Education and research
Frankfurt hosts two universities and several specialist schools. The two business schools are Goethe University Frankfurt 's Goethe Business School and Frankfurt School of Finance & Management .

Johann Wolfgang Goethe University
The oldest and best-known university is the Johann Wolfgang Goethe University , with locations in Bockenheim, Westend, and Riedberg, and the university hospital in Niederrad. Goethe Business School is part of the University's House of Finance at Campus Westend. The Business School's Full Time MBA program has over 70% international students.

Frankfurt University of Applied Sciences
The Frankfurt University of Applied Sciences was created out of several older organisations in 1971, and offers over 38 study areas, in the arts, sciences, engineering and law. Some of the most important research projects: Planet Earth Simulator, FraLine -IT-School-Service, quantitative analysis of methane in human corpses with the help of a mass spectrometer, software engineering (e.g., fraDesk), analysis of qualitative and quantitative gas in human lungs, long-term studies on photovoltaic modules (to name only a few).

Frankfurt School of Finance & Management
Alongside the university is the banking academy Frankfurt School of Finance & Management , formerly known as the Hochschule für Bankwirtschaft (Institution of Higher Learning for Banking Economics), with its campus in the Ostend (Eastend) neighbourhood. In 2001, it became a specialist institution for Economics and Management, or FOM.

Städelschule
Frankfurt has the State Institution of Higher Learning for Artistic Education known as the Städelschule , founded in 1817 by Johann Friedrich Städel . It was taken over by the city in 1942 and turned into a state art school.

Music schools and conservatory
Music institutions are the Frankfurt University of Music and Performing Arts , and the Hoch Conservatory (Dr. Hoch's Konservatorium) which was founded in 1878. The International Ensemble Modern Academy is a significant institution for the study of contemporary music. [80]

Other notable schools
The Sankt Georgen Graduate School of Philosophy and Theology (German: Philosophisch-Theologische Hochschule Sankt Georgen ), a private institution with membership in the German Jesuit Association, has been located in Sachsenhausen since 1950.
The city is home to three Max Planck Society institutes: the Max Planck Institute for European History of Law (MPIeR), Max Planck Institute for Biophysics , and the Max Planck Institute for Brain Research .
The Frankfurt Institute for Advanced Studies , sponsored by several institutional and private sources, is involved in theoretical research in physics, chemistry, neuroscience, and computer science.
Frankfurt is host to the Römisch-Germanische-Kommission (RGK), the German Archaeological Institute branch for prehistoric archaeology in Germany and Europe. The RGK is involved in a variety of research projects. Its library, with over 130,000 volumes, is one of the largest specialised archaeological libraries in the world.

Education and media
Frankfurt schools rank among the best equipped schools nationwide for availability of PCs and other media facilities. In order to assure maintenance and support of the school PCs, the city in cooperation with the University of Applied Sciences launched the project Fraline – IT-Schul-Service, an initiative employing students to provide basic school IT-support.

Sports
Frankfurt is home to several professional sports teams. Some of them have won German Championships. E.g. the Skyliners Frankfurt won the German Basketball Championship in 2004 and the German Cup in 2000. Frankfurt hosts the following sports teams or clubs:
Frankfurt is host to the classic cycle race Eschborn-Frankfurt City Loop (known as Rund um den Henninger-Turm from 1961 to 2008). The city hosts also the annual Frankfurt Marathon and the Ironman Germany .

Further reading

History

Architecture

Others

See also
WebPage index: 00039
Credential
A credential is an attestation of qualification, competence, or authority issued to an individual by a third party with a relevant or de facto authority or assumed competence to do so.
Examples of credentials include academic diplomas , academic degrees , certifications , security clearances , identification documents , badges , passwords , user names , keys , powers of attorney , and so on. Sometimes publications, such as scientific papers or books , may be viewed as similar to credentials by some people, especially if the publication was peer reviewed or made in a well-known journal or reputable publisher .

Types and documentation of credentials
A person holding a credential is usually given documentation or secret knowledge ( e.g., a password or key) as proof of the credential. Sometimes this proof (or a copy of it) is held by a third, trusted party. While in some cases a credential may be as simple as a paper membership card, in other cases, such as diplomacy , it may involve presentation of letters directly from the issuer of the credential detailing its faith in the person representing them in a negotiation or meeting.
Counterfeiting of credentials is a constant and serious problem, irrespective of the type of credential. A great deal of effort goes into finding methods to reduce or prevent counterfeiting. In general, the greater the perceived value of the credential, the greater the problem with counterfeiting and the greater the lengths to which the issuer of the credential must go to prevent fraud.

Diplomacy
In diplomacy , credentials, also known as a letter of credence , are documents that ambassadors , diplomatic ministers , plenipotentiary , and chargés d'affaires provide to the government to which they are accredited , for the purpose, chiefly, of communicating to the latter the envoy 's diplomatic rank . It also contains a request that full credence be accorded to his official statements. Until his credentials have been presented and found in proper order, an envoy receives no official recognition.
The credentials of an ambassador or minister plenipotentiary are signed by the head of state , those of a chargé d'affaires by the foreign minister . Diplomatic credentials are granted and withdrawn at the pleasure of the issuing authority, based on widely varying criteria. A receiving government may reject a diplomat’s credentials by declining to receive them, but in practice this rarely happens.

Medicine
In medicine, the process of credentialing is a detailed review of all permissions granted a medical doctor, physician assistant or nurse practitioner at every institution at which he or she has worked in the past, to determine a risk profile for them at a new institution. It vets the practitioner for both receiving practice insurance and the ability to bill to insurance for patient care. As well, it certifies legal and administrative body requirements, such as the Joint Commission .
Medical practitioners must also have credentials in the form of licenses issued by the government of the jurisdictions in which they practice, which they obtain after suitable education, training, and/or practical experience. Most medical credentials are granted for a practice specific group. They may also be withdrawn in the event of fraud or malpractice by their holders. Typically they require continuing education validation and renewal to continue practice.

Information technology
Information systems commonly use credentials to control access to information or other resources. The classic combination of a user's account number or name and a secret password is a widely used example of IT credentials. An increasing number of information systems use other forms of documentation of credentials, such as biometrics ( fingerprints , voice recognition , retinal scans ), X.509 , public key certificates , and so on.

Operator licensing
Operators of vehicles such as automobiles , boats , and aircraft must have credentials in the form of government-issued licenses in many jurisdictions. Often the documentation of the license consists of a simple card or certificate that the operator keeps on his person while operating the vehicle, backed up by an archival record of the license at some central location. Licenses are granted to operators after a period of successful training and/or examination.
This type of credential often requires certification of good health and may also require psychological evaluations and screening for substance abuse .
Operator licenses often expire periodically and must be renewed at intervals. Renewal may simply be a formality, or it may require a new round of examinations and training.

Cryptography
Credentials in cryptography establish the identity of a party to communication. Usually they take the form of machine-readable cryptographic keys and/or passwords. Cryptographic credentials may be self-issued, or issued by a trusted third party; in many cases the only criterion for issuance is unambiguous association of the credential with a specific, real individual or other entity. Cryptographic credentials are often designed to expire after a certain period, although this is not mandatory. An x.509 certificate is an example of a cryptographic credential.

Security clearances
In military and government organizations, and some private organizations, a system of compartmenting information exists to prevent the uncontrolled dissemination of information considered to be sensitive or confidential. Persons with a legitimate need to have access to such information are issued security clearances , which can be tracked and verified to ensure that no unauthorized persons gain access to protected information.
Security clearances are among the most carefully guarded credentials. Often they are granted to individuals only after a lengthy investigation and only after their need to have access to protected information has been adequately justified to the issuing authority. The most elaborate security-clearance systems are found in the world's military organizations. Some credentials of this type are considered so sensitive that their holders are not even permitted to acknowledge that they have them (except to authorized parties). Documentation of security clearances usually consists of records keep at a secure facility and verifiable on demand from authorized parties.
Breaches of security involving security clearances are often punished by specific statutory law, particularly if they occur in the context of deliberate espionage , whereas most other counterfeiting and misuse of credentials is punished by law only when used with deliberate intent to defraud in specific contexts. Security clearances are regularly withdrawn when they are no longer justified, or when the person holding them is determined to be too great a security risk.

Journalism
In many democratic nations, press credential are not required at the national or federal level for any publication of any kind. However, individual corporations, and certain government or military entities require press credentials, such as a press pass , as a formal invitation to members of the press which grants them rights to photographs or videos, press conferences , or interviews. Press credentials indicate that a person has been verified as working for a known publication, and holding a press pass typically allows that person special treatment or access rights.
Some governments impose restrictions on who may work as a journalist, requiring anyone working for the press to carry government-issued credentials. Restricting press credentials can be problematic because of its limitations on freedom of the press, particularly if government leaders selectively grant, withhold, or withdraw press credentials to disallow critique of government policy. Any press coverage published under governments that restrict journalism in this way is often treated with skepticism by others, and may not be considered any more truthful or informative than propaganda .

Trade credentials
Some trades and professions in some jurisdictions require special credentials of anyone practicing the trade or profession. These credentials may or may not be associated with specific competencies or skills. In some cases, they exist mainly to control the number of people who are allowed to exercise a trade or profession, in order to control salaries and wages.
Persons acting as merchants, freelancers, etc., may require special credentials in some jurisdictions as well. Here again, the purpose is mainly to control the number of people working in this way, and sometimes also to track them for tax-reporting or other purposes like people evaluation.

Academic and professional credentials
The academic and professional world makes very extensive use of credentials, such as diplomas, degrees, certificates, and certifications, in order to attest to the completion of specific training or education programs by students, to attest to their successful completion of tests and exams, and to provide independent validation of an individual's possession of the knowledge, skills, and ability necessary to practice a particular occupation competently. (For example: Arun Paul MSW, MPHIL)
Documentation of academic and professional credentials usually consists of a printed, formal document. The issuing institution often maintains a record of the credential as well. Academic credentials are normally valid for the lifetime of the person to whom they are issued. Professional certifications are normally valid for a limited number of years, based on the pace of change in the certified profession, and require periodic recertification through reexamination (to demonstrate continuing competency as occupational standards of practice evolve) or continuing professional development (to demonstrate continually enhanced competency). [1]
Acquisition of these credentials often leads to increased economic mobility and work opportunity, especially for low-income people. [2]

Titles
Titles are credentials that identify a person as belonging to a specific group, such as nobility or aristocracy, or a specific command grade in the military, or in other largely symbolic ways. They may or may not be associated with specific authority, and they do not usually attest to any specific competence or skill (although they may be associated with other credentials that do). A partial list of such titles includes

See also
Dynamics:
WebPage index: 00040
Business Insider
Business Insider is a German-owned American news website that also operates international editions in Australia, India, Malaysia, Indonesia, Singapore, China, Italy, and the UK. It also operates a local language German [2] and Polish [3] news site.

History
Business Insider launched in February 2009 and is based in New York City. Founded by DoubleClick 's former CEO Kevin P. Ryan , Dwight Merriman , and Henry Blodget , [4] the publication is the overarching brand of Silicon Alley Insider (launched May 16, 2007) and Clusterstock (launched March 20, 2008). [5] In addition to providing and analyzing business news, the site aggregates top news stories on various subjects from around the web. It reported a profit for the first time ever in the 4th quarter of 2010. [6] In June 2012, it had 5.4 million unique visitors. [7] It now averages around 70 million unique visitors, monthly.
Business Insider also hosts industry conferences, such as IGNITION, [8] which explores the emerging business models of digital media . In January 2015, Business Insider launched BI Intelligence , [9] a subscription-based research service that provides data and analysis on the mobile, payments, eCommerce, social, and digital media industries. The site publishes numerous annual editorial franchises, such as the "Digital 100: The World's Most Valuable Private Tech Companies." [10]

Acquisition
On September 29, 2015, Axel Springer SE announced that it had acquired 88% of the stake in Business Insider, Inc. for a reported $343 million (€306 million). [4] [11] After the purchase, Axel Springer SE will hold a stake of approximately 97%, and Jeff Bezos ' personal investment company will hold the remaining shares.

Tech Insider
In July 2015, Business Insider launched the standalone technology website Tech Insider , with a staff of 40 people working primarily from the company's existing New York headquarters, but separately from the main Business Insider newsroom. [12]

Markets Insider
In October 2016, Business Insider launched Markets Insider , a globally-focused markets data and news service based on Yahoo Finance . Data is provided by Germany-based finance portal Finanzen.net , another Axel Springer holding. [13]

BI Sub-Saharan Africa
In January 2017, Business Insider announced that it would be launching a new sub-saharan site in partnership with Ringier Africa Digital Publishing. [14] [15] Henry Blodget ––co-founder, CEO, and global Editor-in-Chief of Business Insider–– said of the partnership, “Ringier ... is the ideal partner to help us bring to sub-saharan Africa [our] unique voice and attitude.” [16]

Contributors
Business Insider 's CEO and Editor-In-Chief Henry Blodget is a Yale history graduate who previously worked on Wall Street until he was charged with securities fraud in 2003. [17] Nicholas Carlson, whose past experiences include Internet.com and Gawker Media 's Silicon Valley gossip blog, Valleywag , serves as Deputy Editor. And Senior Editor Jim Edwards' previous position was Managing Editor at Adweek .

Reception
In January 2009, the Clusterstock section appeared in Time 's "Best 25 Financial Blogs," [18] and the Silicon Alley Insider section was listed in PC Magazine 's "Our Favorite Blogs 2009." [19] 2009 also saw Business Insider 's selection as an official Webby honoree for Best Business Blog. [20]
In 2012, Business Insider was named to the Inc. 500 . In 2013, the publication was once again nominated in the Blog-Business category at the Webby Awards. [21] In January 2014, The New York Times reported that Business Insider 's web traffic was comparable to that of The Wall Street Journal . [22] In 2017, Digiday included imprint Insider as a candidate in two separate categories––"Best New Vertical" and "Best Use of Instagram"––at their annual Publishing Awards. [23]
The website has, however, faced criticism for its clickbait -style headlines. [24] [25] [26] In 2013, The New Yorker criticized the website for prioritizing publishing speed over accuracy. [27]
WebPage index: 00041
Bloomberg News
Bloomberg News is an international news agency headquartered in New York , United States and a division of Bloomberg L.P.
Content produced by Bloomberg News is disseminated through Bloomberg Terminals , Bloomberg Television , Bloomberg Radio , Bloomberg Businessweek , Bloomberg Markets , Bloomberg.com and Bloomberg's mobile platforms. As of 2015 [update] , John Micklethwait served as editor-in-chief . [2]

History
Bloomberg News, originally known as Bloomberg Business News, was co-founded by Michael Bloomberg and Matthew Winkler in 1990 to deliver financial news reporting to Bloomberg Terminal subscribers. [3]
The Bloomberg News agency was established in 1990 with a team of six people. [4] Winkler was first editor-in-chief. [5] In 2010, Bloomberg News included more than 2,300 editors and reporters in 72 countries and 146 new bureaus worldwide. [6] [7]

Creation–1995
Bloomberg Business News was conceived as a way of expanding the services offered through the terminals. According to Matthew Winkler, then a writer for the Wall Street Journal , Michael Bloomberg telephoned him in November 1989 and asked "What would it take to get into the news business?"
Knowing that Bloomberg had no experience in journalism, Winkler presented him with a hypothetical ethical dilemma:
"You have just published a story that says the chairman --- and I mean chairman --- of your biggest customer has taken $5 million from the corporate till. He is with his secretary at a Rio de Janeiro resort, and the secretary's spurned boyfriend calls to tip you off. You get an independent verification that the story is true. Then the phone rings. The customer's public-relations person says, 'Kill the story or we will return all the terminals we currently rent from you.'"
"What would you do?" Winkler asked.
"Go with the story," Bloomberg replied. "Our lawyers will love the fees you generate." [8]
Winkler recalls this as his "deciding moment," the time at which he became willing to help Bloomberg build his news organization. [8]
The purpose of the service was to provide up-to-the-minute financial news communicated in a concise and intelligent way. [9] As a fledgling company in 1990, Bloomberg hoped that the news service would spread the company name, sell more Bloomberg Terminals and end Bloomberg's reliance on the Dow Jones News Services , a valuable subscriber service for the Terminal. [10]
The creation of Bloomberg Business News required Winkler to open a Bloomberg office in Washington, D.C. in order to report about political effects on the business world. However, the Standing Committee of Correspondents (SCC) in Washington required Bloomberg News be formally accredited to act as a legitimate news source, a title that Bloomberg Business News only accomplished after agreeing to provide free terminals to major newspapers in exchange for news space in the publications. [10] This accreditation led to an annual growth over 35% until 1995. [10] During this growth period Bloomberg News opened a small television station in New York, purchased New York Radio Station WNEW, launched fifteen-minute weekday business news programs for broadcast on PBS and opened offices in Hong Kong and Frankfurt, Germany . [10] By 1995, Bloomberg News had 335 reporters in 56 locations. [11]

1995–2000
The initial goal of Bloomberg Business News to increase terminal sales was adequately met by the mid-nineties and refocused the scope to their news service in order to rival the profitability of other media groups such as Reuters and Dow Jones . This led to the creation of Bloomberg's magazine, Bloomberg Personal in 1995, which would be carried in the Sunday edition of 18 U.S. papers. [11] Also in 1995, Bloomberg launched a 24-hour financial news service through Bloomberg Information Television and began wiring its terminals through DirectTV . This simultaneously occurred with the launch of a web site to provide audio feed of radio broadcasts. [10]
Bloomberg Business News was renamed Bloomberg News in 1997. By this time Bloomberg News content was carried in over 800 newspapers worldwide and was syndicated through Bloomberg Television and 40 international affiliates. [11]

2000–2014
In 2009 Bloomberg News partnered with The Washington Post to launch a global news service known as The Washington Post News Service with Bloomberg News. Hosting content from both news sources, the service hopes to pair the political experience of The Washington Post with the global financial economic news of Bloomberg News. [12]
In April 2014, Bloomberg News launched a new section, Bloomberg Luxury , which focuses on luxury living. According to an internal memo obtained by WWD, Chris Rovzar, the former digital editor of Vanity Fair , will help Bloomberg build its editorial vision for luxury. [13] The section's content provides information on topics including travel, wine news, dining, auto news, gadgets, and more. Review of technology and high-end autos are published weekly. It also highlights content from Bloomberg's quarterly lifestyle and luxury magazine Pursuits . Bloomberg television has been criticized from overseas media claiming that Bloomberg attempts to hire 'young and pretty people especially women showing their bodies in a grotesque manner to increase ratings'.

2015 refocus
A 2015 "leaked internal memo" by editor-in-chief John Micklethwait indicated an intent to refocus the agency to better target their core audience, "the clever customer who is short of time", and better achieve the goal of being "the definitive 'chronicle of capitalism'". [2] This change would lead to a reduction in reporting on "general interest" topics (e.g. sports) in favor of business and economics topics. [2]

China coverage
Bloomberg News received a 2012 George Polk Award for its series of stories about China's political elite, "Revolution to Riches." [14] [15]
One story in the series focused on the family wealth of Chinese leader Xi Jinping . [16] Journalist and author Howard W. French reported in the May/June 2014 issue of the Columbia Journalism Review that prior to publication of the Xi story, high-level Bloomberg officials met with Chinese diplomats twice without informing the journalists who were working on the story. [17]
The first meeting was between Winkler and Zhang Yesui , the Chinese ambassador to the United States. Zhang is said to have told Winkler, "If Bloomberg publishes this story, bad things will happen for Bloomberg in China. If Bloomberg does not publish the story, good things will happen for Bloomberg." The second meeting occurred shortly after in New York and included Bloomberg Chairman Peter Grauer , the company's Chief Executive Daniel Doctoroff , and an unnamed Chinese diplomat.
Around the time of the second meeting, during a lengthy conference call with Bloomberg reporters and editors, Doctoroff insisted on changes in the story that softened its impact by revising the language used to describe the Xi family's assets. [17]
After the Xi story appeared, terminal sales in China slowed because government officials ordered state enterprises not to subscribe. The Bloomberg News website was also blocked on Chinese servers, and the company was unable to get visas for journalists it wanted to send to China. [18]
In 2014, Grauer told staff at the Bloomberg Hong Kong bureau that the company's sales team had done a "heroic job" of mending relations with Chinese officials who had indicated their displeasure about publication of the Xi revelations. He also warned that if Bloomberg "were to do anything like" the Xi story again, the company would "be straight back in the shit-box." [17]
On October 29, 2013, during a conference call, Winkler told four Bloomberg journalists in Hong Kong that the findings of their major investigation into "the hidden financial ties between one of the wealthiest men in China and the families of top Chinese leaders" would not be published. Less than a week later, a second planned article "about the children of senior Chinese officials employed by foreign banks," was also killed, according to Bloomberg employees. [19]
Unnamed Bloomberg employees quoted by The New York Times said the decision not to publish was made by the company's top editors, led by Winkler. According to one employee, Winkler said, "If we run the story, we'll be kicked out of China." [19]
When contacted by the Times, Winkler said in an email that neither story had been killed. "'What you have is untrue,'" he wrote. "'The stories are active and not spiked.'" Laurie Hays, the senior editor on the articles, "echoed" his statement. Winkler declined to discuss the conference call. [19]
The Winkler and Hays denials appeared in a story published by the Times on November 8, 2013. At a mayoral news conference four days later, Michael Bloomberg also denied the accusation. He "insisted" that Bloomberg News "did not do that; the editors said that was just not the case." [20] Noting Winkler's response to the Times, he added, "No one thinks that we are wusses and not willing to stand up and write stories that are of interest to the public and that are factually correct." [20] He also said that because he was mayor of New York, he was not involved in the operations of the news agency. "I've recused myself from anything to do with the company," he said. [20]
Three journalists left the company after news reports about the decision appeared --- reporter Michael Forsythe, editor and reporter Amanda Bennett , and Ben Richardson, an editor at large for Asia news. [21] [22] Forsythe was the lead writer on the Xi Jinping story. [17] Richardson said, "I left Bloomberg because of the way the story was mishandled, and because of how the company made misleading statements in the global press and senior executives disparaged the team that worked so hard to execute an incredibly demanding story." He also said that the company has threatened the journalists who worked on the story with legal action if they discuss the incident publicly. [23]
Taiwan-based Next Media Animation produced an animated cartoon ridiculing Winkler and Michael Bloomberg. [24]
According to French, Bloomberg's handling of the episode "has tainted its corporate identity and journalism brand to a degree that could last for years." [17]

Bloomberg Businessweek
Bloomberg L.P. bought weekly business magazine Businessweek from McGraw-Hill in 2009. [25] The company acquired the magazine to attract general business to its media audience composed primarily of terminal subscribers. [26] Following the acquisition, Businessweek was renamed Bloomberg Businessweek . [26]

Bloomberg Television
Bloomberg Television is a 24-hour financial news television network. It was introduced in 1994 as a subscription service transmitted on satellite television provider DirecTV , 13 hours a day, 7 days a week. [27] In 1995, the network entered the cable television market and by 2000, Bloomberg's 24-hour news programming was being aired to 200 million households. [28] Justin Smith serves as CEO of the Bloomberg Media Group which includes Bloomberg Radio, Bloomberg Television and mobile, online and advertising supported components of Bloomberg's media offerings. [29]

Bloomberg Markets
Originally launched in July 1992 under the title Bloomberg: A Magazine for Bloomberg Users , Bloomberg Markets was a monthly magazine given to all Bloomberg Professional Service subscribers. [30] In addition to providing international financial news to industry professionals, the magazine included points for navigating terminal functionality. In 2010, the magazine was redesigned in an effort to update its readership beyond terminal users. [31] Ron Henkoff has served as editor of Bloomberg Markets since 1999 [32] and Michael Dukmejian has served as the magazine's publisher since 2009. [33]

Bloomberg View
Bloomberg View is an editorial division of Bloomberg News which launched in May 2011, and provides content from columnists, authors and editors about current news issues. [34] David Shipley , former Op-Ed page editor at The New York Times , is Bloomberg View ' s executive editor. [35]

Bloomberg Politics
Bloomberg Politics provides political coverage via digital, print and broadcast media. [36] [37] [38] The multimedia venture, which debuted in October 2014, featured the daily television news program With All Due Respect , hosted by Bloomberg Politics Managing Editors Mark Halperin and John Heilemann . [38] The program came to an end on December 2 2016. [39] [40]
In 2016, Bloomberg Politics began producing a documentary on the 2016 US presidential election called The Circus: Inside the Greatest Political Show on Earth . [41]
WebPage index: 00042
French Wikipedia
The French Wikipedia ( French : Wikipédia francophone, Wikipédia en français ) is the French language edition of the free online encyclopedia Wikipedia . This edition was started in March 2001, and has 1,873,209 articles as of May 25, 2017, making it the fifth-largest Wikipedia overall, after the English -, Dutch -, German -, Swedish - and Cebuano -language editions, the largest Wikipedia edition in a Romance language . It has the third-largest number of edits. It was also the third edition, after the English Wikipedia and German Wikipedia, to exceed 1 million encyclopedia articles: this occurred on 23 September 2010. [1] In April 2016, the project had 4657 active editors who made at least five edits in that month.
In 2008, the French encyclopaedia, Quid , cancelled its 2008 edition, citing falling sales on competition from the French edition of Wikipedia. [2]
As of June 2014, Wikipedia has an Alexa ranking of 6 and 5.06% of those visits are to the French-language edition. [3] As of May 2017, there are 2,803,000 users, 162 admins and 51,371 files on the French Wikipedia. [4]
On December 2, 2014, the French-language Wikipedia encyclopedia became the 3rd [5] linguistic edition by number of registered users since its creation, overtaking for the first time the German edition, with 2,022,504 registered users, [6] [7] behind the English (23,300,456) [8] and Spanish (3,401,493) [9] language editions.
According to a 2013 study by the Oxford Internet Institute , Ségolène Royal ( FR ) and unidentified flying object ( objet volant non identifié ) were the most controversial articles on the French Wikipedia. [10]

Statistics
The audience measurement company Médiamétrie questioned a sample of 8,500 users residing in France with access to Internet at home or at their place of work. Médiamétrie found that in June 2007, French Wikipedia had: 7,910,000 unique visitors that visited the site at least once during the month of June 2007 (compared to 4,355,000 unique visitors in June 2006); 2.7 visits per visitor during the period (2.0 visits in June 2006); had held the 12th position (21st in 2006) in "the Top 30 most visited sites in France, excluding Internet applications," according to the criterion of the number of unique visitors and 12th position in "the Top 30 most visited sites in France, including Internet applications," like eMule or Real Networks (22nd position in June 2006).
By August 2011, French Wikipedia was the 7th most visited site in France, with nearly 16 million unique visitors a month (according to Médiamétrie). In April 2012, it had 20 million unique visitors per month, or 2.4 million per day [12] with over 700 million page views. [13]
WebPage index: 00043
Polish Wikipedia
The Polish Wikipedia ( Polish : Polska Wikipedia ) is the Polish-language edition of Wikipedia , a free online encyclopedia . Founded on September 26, 2001, it now has around 1,224,000 articles, making it the 11th-largest Wikipedia edition overall. [1] It is also the second-largest edition in a Slavic language , after the Russian Wikipedia .

History
The Polish Wikipedia originated in September 2001 as an independent project under the domain wiki.rozeta.com.pl . At the suggestion of the founders of the English Wikipedia, the site was incorporated into the international project as http://pl.wikipedia.com on January 12, 2002, and as http://pl.wikipedia.org on November 22 that year. [ citation needed ] To avoid domain squatting that could frustrate potential users, the Polish Wikipedia also has its own domain, wikipedia.pl, which redirects to pl.wikipedia.org.
On January 27, 2005 the founders of the Polish Wikipedia, Krzysztof P. Jasiutowicz and Paweł Jochym, received the Internet Citizen of the Year 2004 award issued by the Internet Obywatelski ("Public Internet") society. [2]
In July 2005, the tsca.bot bot program was instructed to upload statistics from official government pages about French, Polish and Italian municipalities to the Polish Wikipedia. In a few months, the bot uploaded more than 40,000 articles. [ citation needed ] On October 13, 2009 the Polish Wikipedia received a "special recognition for social innovation" at the 2009 Jan Łukasiewicz Award ceremony, which recognises the most innovative Polish IT companies. [3] [4] The Polish Wikipedia exceeded 1,000,000 articles on September 24, 2013. [ citation needed ] In April 2016, the project had 1,140 active editors who made at least five edits in that month.

Polish Wikipedia on DVD
The text of the Polish Wikipedia was first published on a DVD together with the paper edition of the magazine Enter SPECIAL in August 2005. The publisher did not make any attempt to contact the Wikimedia Foundation prior to making the DVD available on the market, and the edition itself turned out to be illegal, as it violated the GNU FDL license. Additionally, the software used on the DVD worked improperly on Microsoft Windows 98 .
A second DVD edition was prepared as a joint project of Wikimedia Polska (the Polish branch of the Wikimedia Foundation) and the Polish publisher Helion . It contained articles written before June 4, 2006. The edition was completed on November 24, 2006, and released at the end of July 2007 with a purchase price of 39 zlotys . [5]
WebPage index: 00044
Ukrainian Wikipedia
The Ukrainian Wikipedia ( Ukrainian : Українська Вікіпедія , Ukrayins'ka Vikipediya ) is the Ukrainian language edition of the free online encyclopedia Wikipedia . The first article was written on January 30, 2004. Currently (May 2017), Ukrainian Wikipedia has 698,184 articles and is the 16th largest Wikipedia edition. [1]

Quality of articles and popularity
In the Ukrainian Wikipedia one area of knowledge has been covered to an extent greater than all other Wikipedias — the subject of mining, due to the considerable contribution by one person, Volodymyr Biletsky , a professor at Donetsk National Technical University . Using as a basis his published Encyclopedia of Mining , Biletsky has contributed over 10,000 articles on the subject to Ukrainian Wikipedia. [2] Also, in 2013 the Institute of History of Ukraine at the National Academy of Science gave permission to the Ukrainian Wikipedia to use the digital version of the Encyclopedia of Ukraine's History that was published online. The Higher School Academy of Science and Forest Engineering also allowed Wikipedia to freely use their information resources. [3]
One of the areas where activity is notable is in Wiki Loves Monuments project, an annual international photo contest focused on cultural and historical monuments. Ukrainian Wikipedians were ranked 4th among 36 participating countries for the number of uploads of images as part of this project in 2012. [3] [4] In 2014 Ukrainian Wikipedians were winners.

Articles about the history of Ukrainian language
A significant number of articles in Ukrainian Wikipedia relate to the history of the development of the Ukrainian language . A study in August 2012 counted over 8,000 articles mentioning the term "Ukrainian language" and over 1,400 articles with the term "history of Ukrainian language" and concluded that collectively represented a good coverage of its history and concepts. Articles about the history of Ukrainian language included articles about early publications like bibles printed in Ukrainian, grammar books, changes in phonetics through time, Ukrainian calligraphy, history of Ukrainian language within the context of the Soviet Union , linguicide and the banning of Ukrainian language by the Russian Government. [5]

Articles about history and science
At the end of 2012 Ukrainian Wikipedia contained over 1,500 articles relating to Ukrainian history . [6] As of June 2012 the Ukrainian Wikipedia contained 52 specific articles about Ukrainian astronomers and astronomo-geodesists , which have now been collated into a published book. [7]

Blackout
On January 21, 2014, the Ukrainian Wikipedia community decided to block access to the portal every day between 4:00 and 4:30 PM in protest of "dictatorship laws" in Ukraine , that restrict the freedom of speech and pose a threat to the portal. [8] [9]

Statistics
On October 1, 2005, Ukrainian Wikipedia reached the 20,000-article mark. The milestone of 250,000 articles was officially reached on 21 December 2010, and 860,000 people had viewed 30 million articles in that month alone. [10]
By 2012, with over 400,000 articles and 100 million words, Ukrainian Wikipedia many times over had content larger than the largest printed encyclopedia at that time — the Ukrainian Soviet Encyclopedia . [2]
As of May 2017, Ukrainian Wikipedia has 698184 articles and nearly 2.5 million visitors every day. [11] [12] Ukrainian Wikipedia at that time was on the 16th place in the ranking of the World's Wikipedias. [11]

Milestones

Notes
WebPage index: 00045
Waray Wikipedia
The Waray Wikipedia is the Waray language edition of Wikipedia . It is hosted on servers run by the Wikimedia Foundation since 25 September 2005. [1] As of May 19, 2017, this edition has 1,262,508 articles [2] and is the 10th largest Wikipedia edition. [3] Despite having very few active users (78), the Waray Wikipedia has a high number of automatically generated articles created by bots , most of them by Swedish Wikipedian Sverker Johansson's Lsjbot . [4] [5] [6]
Waray (or Waray-Waray) is spoken by approximately 2.6 million [7] people in the Eastern Visayas region of the Philippines .

History
The Waray Wikipedia was first organized in Tacloban on 25 September 2005 by Harvey Fiji. The wiki had a small number of contributors, with fewer than ten editors per month until April 2009. The first meet-up of editors took place in January 2013 in Tacloban . [8] [9]
By early 2011 the Waray Wikipedia had attracted notice for including more than twice as many articles as the Tagalog Wikipedia , which is based on the principal language of The Philippines . This discrepancy was explained by the very large number of articles added automatically by bots, with no direct human input. [10] [11] By early June 2014 the Waray Wikipedia had attained a very high article count of 1 million, but a very low article depth of less than 3. Article depth is an attempt to measure the collaborative quality of articles, based on the number of edits per article.
According to automatically updated Wikimedia data, as of May 19, 2017, the Waray Wikipedia has 2,873,593 pages (including user pages, help pages, etc.), 78 active users, and 6,295,832 total edits. The article depth of Waray Wikipedia is 3.57—a rough indicator of the article's collaborative quality—compared to 33.61 for the Tagalog Wikipedia. (Waray and Tagalog are related languages belonging to the Malayo-Polynesian branch of the Austronesian language family .)

Milestones

See also
WebPage index: 00046
Color
Color ( American English ) or colour ( Commonwealth English ) is the characteristic of human visual perception described through color categories , with names such as red , yellow , purple , or blue . This perception of color derives from the stimulation of cone cells in the human eye by electromagnetic radiation in the spectrum of light . Color categories and physical specifications of color are associated with objects through the wavelength of the light that is reflected from them. This reflection is governed by the object's physical properties such as light absorption, emission spectra, etc.
By defining a color space , colors can be identified numerically by coordinates. The RGB color space for instance is a color space corresponding to human trichromacy and to the three cone cell types that respond to three bands of light: long wavelengths, peaking near 564–580 nm ( red ); medium-wavelength, peaking near 534–545 nm ( green ); and short-wavelength light, near 420–440 nm ( blue ). [1] [2] There may also be more than three color dimensions in other color spaces, such as in the CMYK color model , wherein one of the dimensions relates to a colour's colorfulness ).
The photo-receptivity of the "eyes" of other species also varies considerably from our own and so results in correspondingly different color perceptions that cannot readily be compared to one another. Honeybees and bumblebees for instance have trichromatic color vision sensitive to ultraviolet (an electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength from 10 nm (30 PHz ) to 400 nm (750 THz ), shorter than that of visible light but longer than X-rays ) but is insensitive to red. Papilio butterflies possess six types of photoreceptors and may have pentachromatic vision. [3] The most complex color vision system in the animal kingdom has been found in stomatopods (such as the mantis shrimp ) with up to 12 spectral receptor types thought to work as multiple dichromatic units. [4]
The science of color is sometimes called chromatics , colorimetry , or simply color science . It includes the perception of color by the human eye and brain, the origin of color in materials, color theory in art , and the physics of electromagnetic radiation in the visible range (that is, what is commonly referred to simply as light ).

Physics of color
Electromagnetic radiation is characterized by its wavelength (or frequency ) and its intensity . When the wavelength is within the visible spectrum (the range of wavelengths humans can perceive, approximately from 390 nm to 700 nm), it is known as "visible light".
Most light sources emit light at many different wavelengths; a source's spectrum is a distribution giving its intensity at each wavelength. Although the spectrum of light arriving at the eye from a given direction determines the color sensation in that direction, there are many more possible spectral combinations than color sensations. In fact, one may formally define a color as a class of spectra that give rise to the same color sensation, although such classes would vary widely among different species, and to a lesser extent among individuals within the same species. In each such class the members are called metamers of the color in question.

Spectral colors
The familiar colors of the rainbow in the spectrum – named using the Latin word for appearance or apparition by Isaac Newton in 1671 – include all those colors that can be produced by visible light of a single wavelength only, the pure spectral or monochromatic colors . The table at right shows approximate frequencies (in terahertz ) and wavelengths (in nanometers ) for various pure spectral colors. The wavelengths listed are as measured in air or vacuum (see refractive index ).
The color table should not be interpreted as a definitive list – the pure spectral colors form a continuous spectrum, and how it is divided into distinct colors linguistically is a matter of culture and historical contingency (although people everywhere have been shown to perceive colors in the same way [6] ). A common list identifies six main bands: red, orange, yellow, green, blue, and violet. Newton's conception included a seventh color, indigo , between blue and violet. It is possible that what Newton referred to as blue is nearer to what today is known as cyan , and that indigo was simply the dark blue of the indigo dye that was being imported at the time. [7]
The intensity of a spectral color, relative to the context in which it is viewed, may alter its perception considerably; for example, a low-intensity orange-yellow is brown , and a low-intensity yellow-green is olive-green.

Color of objects
The color of an object depends on both the physics of the object in its environment and the characteristics of the perceiving eye and brain. Physically, objects can be said to have the color of the light leaving their surfaces, which normally depends on the spectrum of the incident illumination and the reflectance properties of the surface, as well as potentially on the angles of illumination and viewing. Some objects not only reflect light, but also transmit light or emit light themselves, which also contribute to the color. A viewer's perception of the object's color depends not only on the spectrum of the light leaving its surface, but also on a host of contextual cues, so that color differences between objects can be discerned mostly independent of the lighting spectrum, viewing angle, etc. This effect is known as color constancy .
Some generalizations of the physics can be drawn, neglecting perceptual effects for now:
To summarize, the color of an object is a complex result of its surface properties, its transmission properties, and its emission properties, all of which contribute to the mix of wavelengths in the light leaving the surface of the object. The perceived color is then further conditioned by the nature of the ambient illumination, and by the color properties of other objects nearby, and via other characteristics of the perceiving eye and brain.

Perception

Development of theories of color vision
Although Aristotle and other ancient scientists had already written on the nature of light and color vision , it was not until Newton that light was identified as the source of the color sensation. In 1810, Goethe published his comprehensive Theory of Colors in which he ascribed physiological effects to color that are now understood as psychological.
In 1801 Thomas Young proposed his trichromatic theory , based on the observation that any color could be matched with a combination of three lights. This theory was later refined by James Clerk Maxwell and Hermann von Helmholtz . As Helmholtz puts it, "the principles of Newton's law of mixture were experimentally confirmed by Maxwell in 1856. Young's theory of color sensations, like so much else that this marvelous investigator achieved in advance of his time, remained unnoticed until Maxwell directed attention to it." [10]
At the same time as Helmholtz, Ewald Hering developed the opponent process theory of color, noting that color blindness and afterimages typically come in opponent pairs (red-green, blue-orange, yellow-violet, and black-white). Ultimately these two theories were synthesized in 1957 by Hurvich and Jameson, who showed that retinal processing corresponds to the trichromatic theory, while processing at the level of the lateral geniculate nucleus corresponds to the opponent theory. [11]
In 1931, an international group of experts known as the Commission internationale de l'éclairage ( CIE ) developed a mathematical color model, which mapped out the space of observable colors and assigned a set of three numbers to each.

Color in the eye
The ability of the human eye to distinguish colors is based upon the varying sensitivity of different cells in the retina to light of different wavelengths . Humans are trichromatic —the retina contains three types of color receptor cells, or cones . One type, relatively distinct from the other two, is most responsive to light that is perceived as blue or blue-violet, with wavelengths around 450 nm ; cones of this type are sometimes called short-wavelength cones , S cones , or blue cones . The other two types are closely related genetically and chemically: middle-wavelength cones , M cones , or green cones are most sensitive to light perceived as green, with wavelengths around 540 nm, while the long-wavelength cones , L cones , or red cones , are most sensitive to light is perceived as greenish yellow, with wavelengths around 570  nm.
Light, no matter how complex its composition of wavelengths, is reduced to three color components by the eye. Each cone type adheres to the Principle of Univariance , which is that each cone's output is determined by the amount of light that falls on it over all wavelengths. For each location in the visual field, the three types of cones yield three signals based on the extent to which each is stimulated. These amounts of stimulation are sometimes called tristimulus values .
The response curve as a function of wavelength varies for each type of cone. Because the curves overlap, some tristimulus values do not occur for any incoming light combination. For example, it is not possible to stimulate only the mid-wavelength (so-called "green") cones; the other cones will inevitably be stimulated to some degree at the same time. The set of all possible tristimulus values determines the human color space . It has been estimated that humans can distinguish roughly 10 million different colors. [9]
The other type of light-sensitive cell in the eye, the rod , has a different response curve. In normal situations, when light is bright enough to strongly stimulate the cones, rods play virtually no role in vision at all. [12] On the other hand, in dim light, the cones are understimulated leaving only the signal from the rods, resulting in a colorless response. (Furthermore, the rods are barely sensitive to light in the "red" range.) In certain conditions of intermediate illumination, the rod response and a weak cone response can together result in color discriminations not accounted for by cone responses alone. These effects, combined, are summarized also in the Kruithof curve , that describes the change of color perception and pleasingness of light as function of temperature and intensity.

Color in the brain
While the mechanisms of color vision at the level of the retina are well-described in terms of tristimulus values, color processing after that point is organized differently. A dominant theory of color vision proposes that color information is transmitted out of the eye by three opponent processes , or opponent channels, each constructed from the raw output of the cones: a red–green channel, a blue–yellow channel, and a black–white "luminance" channel. This theory has been supported by neurobiology, and accounts for the structure of our subjective color experience. Specifically, it explains why humans cannot perceive a "reddish green" or "yellowish blue", and it predicts the color wheel : it is the collection of colors for which at least one of the two color channels measures a value at one of its extremes.
The exact nature of color perception beyond the processing already described, and indeed the status of color as a feature of the perceived world or rather as a feature of our perception of the world – a type of qualia – is a matter of complex and continuing philosophical dispute.

Nonstandard color perception

Color deficiency
If one or more types of a person's color-sensing cones are missing or less responsive than normal to incoming light, that person can distinguish fewer colors and is said to be color deficient or color blind (though this latter term can be misleading; almost all color deficient individuals can distinguish at least some colors). Some kinds of color deficiency are caused by anomalies in the number or nature of cones in the retina. Others (like central or cortical achromatopsia ) are caused by neural anomalies in those parts of the brain where visual processing takes place.

Tetrachromacy
While most humans are trichromatic (having three types of color receptors), many animals, known as tetrachromats , have four types. These include some species of spiders , most marsupials , birds , reptiles , and many species of fish . Other species are sensitive to only two axes of color or do not perceive color at all; these are called dichromats and monochromats respectively. A distinction is made between retinal tetrachromacy (having four pigments in cone cells in the retina, compared to three in trichromats) and functional tetrachromacy (having the ability to make enhanced color discriminations based on that retinal difference). As many as half of all women are retinal tetrachromats. [13] :p.256 The phenomenon arises when an individual receives two slightly different copies of the gene for either the medium- or long-wavelength cones, which are carried on the X chromosome . To have two different genes, a person must have two X chromosomes, which is why the phenomenon only occurs in women. [13] There is one scholarly report that confirms the existence of a functional tetrachromat. [14]

Synesthesia
In certain forms of synesthesia / ideasthesia , perceiving letters and numbers ( grapheme–color synesthesia ) or hearing musical sounds (music–color synesthesia) will lead to the unusual additional experiences of seeing colors. Behavioral and functional neuroimaging experiments have demonstrated that these color experiences lead to changes in behavioral tasks and lead to increased activation of brain regions involved in color perception, thus demonstrating their reality, and similarity to real color percepts, albeit evoked through a non-standard route.

Afterimages
After exposure to strong light in their sensitivity range, photoreceptors of a given type become desensitized. For a few seconds after the light ceases, they will continue to signal less strongly than they otherwise would. Colors observed during that period will appear to lack the color component detected by the desensitized photoreceptors. This effect is responsible for the phenomenon of afterimages , in which the eye may continue to see a bright figure after looking away from it, but in a complementary color .
Afterimage effects have also been utilized by artists, including Vincent van Gogh .

Color constancy
When an artist uses a limited color palette , the eye tends to compensate by seeing any gray or neutral color as the color which is missing from the color wheel. For example, in a limited palette consisting of red, yellow, black, and white, a mixture of yellow and black will appear as a variety of green, a mixture of red and black will appear as a variety of purple, and pure gray will appear bluish. [15]
The trichromatic theory is strictly true when the visual system is in a fixed state of adaptation. In reality, the visual system is constantly adapting to changes in the environment and compares the various colors in a scene to reduce the effects of the illumination. If a scene is illuminated with one light, and then with another, as long as the difference between the light sources stays within a reasonable range, the colors in the scene appear relatively constant to us. This was studied by Edwin Land in the 1970s and led to his retinex theory of color constancy .
It should be noted, that both phenomena are readily explained and mathematically modeled with modern theories of chromatic adaptation and color appearance (e.g. CIECAM02 , iCAM). [16] There is no need to dismiss the trichromatic theory of vision, but rather it can be enhanced with an understanding of how the visual system adapts to changes in the viewing environment.

Color naming
Colors vary in several different ways, including hue (shades of red , orange , yellow , green , blue , and violet ), saturation , brightness , and gloss . Some color words are derived from the name of an object of that color, such as " orange " or " salmon ", while others are abstract, like "red".
In the 1969 study Basic Color Terms: Their Universality and Evolution , Brent Berlin and Paul Kay describe a pattern in naming "basic" colors (like "red" but not "red-orange" or "dark red" or "blood red", which are "shades" of red). All languages that have two "basic" color names distinguish dark/cool colors from bright/warm colors. The next colors to be distinguished are usually red and then yellow or green. All languages with six "basic" colors include black, white, red, green, blue, and yellow. The pattern holds up to a set of twelve: black, gray, white, pink, red, orange, yellow, green, blue, purple, brown, and azure (distinct from blue in Russian and Italian , but not English).

Associations
Individual colors have a variety of cultural associations such as national colors (in general described in individual color articles and color symbolism ). The field of color psychology attempts to identify the effects of color on human emotion and activity. Chromotherapy is a form of alternative medicine attributed to various Eastern traditions. Colors have different associations in different countries and cultures. [17]
Different colors have been demonstrated to have effects on cognition. For example, researchers at the University of Linz in Austria demonstrated that the color red significantly decreases cognitive functioning in men. [18]

Spectral colors and color reproduction
Most light sources are mixtures of various wavelengths of light. Many such sources can still effectively produce a spectral color, as the eye cannot distinguish them from single-wavelength sources. For example, most computer displays reproduce the spectral color orange as a combination of red and green light; it appears orange because the red and green are mixed in the right proportions to allow the eye's cones to respond the way they do to the spectral color orange.
A useful concept in understanding the perceived color of a non-monochromatic light source is the dominant wavelength , which identifies the single wavelength of light that produces a sensation most similar to the light source. Dominant wavelength is roughly akin to hue .
There are many color perceptions that by definition cannot be pure spectral colors due to desaturation or because they are purples (mixtures of red and violet light, from opposite ends of the spectrum). Some examples of necessarily non-spectral colors are the achromatic colors (black, gray, and white) and colors such as pink , tan , and magenta .
Two different light spectra that have the same effect on the three color receptors in the human eye will be perceived as the same color. They are metamers of that color. This is exemplified by the white light emitted by fluorescent lamps, which typically has a spectrum of a few narrow bands, while daylight has a continuous spectrum. The human eye cannot tell the difference between such light spectra just by looking into the light source, although reflected colors from objects can look different. (This is often exploited; for example, to make fruit or tomatoes look more intensely red.)
Similarly, most human color perceptions can be generated by a mixture of three colors called primaries . This is used to reproduce color scenes in photography, printing, television, and other media. There are a number of methods or color spaces for specifying a color in terms of three particular primary colors. Each method has its advantages and disadvantages depending on the particular application.
No mixture of colors, however, can produce a response truly identical to that of a spectral color, although one can get close, especially for the longer wavelengths, where the CIE 1931 color space chromaticity diagram has a nearly straight edge. For example, mixing green light (530 nm) and blue light (460 nm) produces cyan light that is slightly desaturated, because response of the red color receptor would be greater to the green and blue light in the mixture than it would be to a pure cyan light at 485 nm that has the same intensity as the mixture of blue and green.
Because of this, and because the primaries in color printing systems generally are not pure themselves, the colors reproduced are never perfectly saturated spectral colors, and so spectral colors cannot be matched exactly. However, natural scenes rarely contain fully saturated colors, thus such scenes can usually be approximated well by these systems. The range of colors that can be reproduced with a given color reproduction system is called the gamut . The CIE chromaticity diagram can be used to describe the gamut.
Another problem with color reproduction systems is connected with the acquisition devices, like cameras or scanners. The characteristics of the color sensors in the devices are often very far from the characteristics of the receptors in the human eye. In effect, acquisition of colors can be relatively poor if they have special, often very "jagged", spectra caused for example by unusual lighting of the photographed scene. A color reproduction system "tuned" to a human with normal color vision may give very inaccurate results for other observers.
The different color response of different devices can be problematic if not properly managed. For color information stored and transferred in digital form, color management techniques, such as those based on ICC profiles , can help to avoid distortions of the reproduced colors. Color management does not circumvent the gamut limitations of particular output devices, but can assist in finding good mapping of input colors into the gamut that can be reproduced.

Additive coloring
Additive color is light created by mixing together light of two or more different colors. Red , green , and blue are the additive primary colors normally used in additive color systems such as projectors and computer terminals.

Subtractive coloring
Subtractive coloring uses dyes, inks, pigments, or filters to absorb some wavelengths of light and not others. The color that a surface displays comes from the parts of the visible spectrum that are not absorbed and therefore remain visible. Without pigments or dye, fabric fibers, paint base and paper are usually made of particles that scatter white light (all colors) well in all directions. When a pigment or ink is added, wavelengths are absorbed or "subtracted" from white light, so light of another color reaches the eye.
If the light is not a pure white source (the case of nearly all forms of artificial lighting), the resulting spectrum will appear a slightly different color. Red paint, viewed under blue light, may appear black . Red paint is red because it scatters only the red components of the spectrum. If red paint is illuminated by blue light, it will be absorbed by the red paint, creating the appearance of a black object.

Structural color
Structural colors are colors caused by interference effects rather than by pigments. Color effects are produced when a material is scored with fine parallel lines, formed of one or more parallel thin layers, or otherwise composed of microstructures on the scale of the color's wavelength . If the microstructures are spaced randomly, light of shorter wavelengths will be scattered preferentially to produce Tyndall effect colors: the blue of the sky (Rayleigh scattering, caused by structures much smaller than the wavelength of light, in this case air molecules), the luster of opals , and the blue of human irises. If the microstructures are aligned in arrays, for example the array of pits in a CD, they behave as a diffraction grating : the grating reflects different wavelengths in different directions due to interference phenomena, separating mixed "white" light into light of different wavelengths. If the structure is one or more thin layers then it will reflect some wavelengths and transmit others, depending on the layers' thickness.
Structural color is studied in the field of thin-film optics . A layman's term that describes particularly the most ordered or the most changeable structural colors is iridescence . Structural color is responsible for the blues and greens of the feathers of many birds (the blue jay, for example), as well as certain butterfly wings and beetle shells. Variations in the pattern's spacing often give rise to an iridescent effect, as seen in peacock feathers, soap bubbles , films of oil, and mother of pearl , because the reflected color depends upon the viewing angle. Numerous scientists have carried out research in butterfly wings and beetle shells, including Isaac Newton and Robert Hooke. Since 1942, electron micrography has been used, advancing the development of products that exploit structural color, such as " photonic " cosmetics. [19]

Additional terms

See also
WebPage index: 00047
Simple English Wikipedia
The Simple English Wikipedia is an English edition of the online encyclopedia Wikipedia , primarily written in Basic English and Special English . [1] It was launched on November 17, 2003. It is one of five Wikipedias written in an Anglic language , the others being the English Wikipedia , the Pitkern-Norfuk Wikipedia, the Scots Wikipedia , and the Old English Wikipedia, though the last is largely unintelligible to speakers of the modern language. The site has the stated aim of providing an encyclopedia for "people with different needs, such as students, children, adults with learning difficulties , and people who are trying to learn English". [2] As of May 2017, the site contains over 125,000 content pages, and has more than 606,000 registered users, of whom 841 are currently active. [3]
The articles on the Simple English Wikipedia are usually shorter than their English Wikipedia counterparts, typically presenting only basic information: Tim Dowling of The Guardian newspaper explained that "the Simple English version tends to stick to commonly accepted facts". [4] The interface is also more simply labeled; for instance, the "Random article" link on the English Wikipedia is replaced with a "Show Any Page" link; users are invited to "change" rather than "edit" pages; clicking on a red link shows a "not yet started" message rather than the usual "page does not exist". [5] The project uses around 2,000 common English words, [1] and is based on Basic English , an 850-word auxiliary international language created by Charles Kay Ogden in the 1920s. [4]
Simple English Wikipedia's basic presentation style makes it ideal for beginners learning English. [6] Its simpler word structure and syntax, while detracting from the raw information standpoint, can make the information easy to understand. Material from the Simple English Wikipedia forms the basis for One Encyclopedia per Child, [7] a One Laptop per Child project. [8]
The English edition of the children's wiki encyclopedia Vikidia has also been compared to the Simple English Wikipedia but is more targeted to younger readers rather than language learners.
WebPage index: 00048
The Chronicle of Higher Education
The Chronicle of Higher Education is a newspaper and website that presents news, information, and jobs for college and university faculty and Student Affairs professionals (staff members and administrators). A subscription is required to read some articles. [5]
The Chronicle , based in Washington, D.C. , is a major news service in United States academic affairs. It is published every weekday online and appears weekly in print except for every other week in June, July, and August and the last three weeks in December (a total of 42 issues a year). In print, The Chronicle is published in two sections: section A with news and job listings, and section B, The Chronicle Review, a magazine of arts and ideas.
It also publishes The Chronicle of Philanthropy , a newspaper for the nonprofit world; The Chronicle Guide to Grants , an electronic database of corporate and foundation grants; and the Web portal Arts & Letters Daily .

History
Corbin Gwaltney was the founder and had been the editor of the alumni magazine of the Johns Hopkins University since 1949. In 1957, he joined in with editors from magazines of several other colleges and universities for an editorial project to investigate issues in higher education in perspective. The meeting occurred on the day the first Sputnik circled the Earth, October 4, 1957, so the "Moonshooter" project was formed as a supplement on higher education for the college magazines. The college magazine editors promised 60 percent of one issue of their magazine to finance the supplement. The first Moonshooter Report was 32 pages long and titled American Higher Education, 1958 . They sold 1.35 million copies to 15 colleges and universities. By the project's third year, circulation was over three million for the supplement. [6] [7]
In 1959, Gwaltney left Johns Hopkins Magazine to become the first full-time employee of the newly created "Editorial Projects for Education" (EPE, later renamed "Editorial Projects in Education") starting in an office in his apartment in Baltimore and later moving to an office near the Johns Hopkins campus. [8] He realized that higher education would benefit from a news publication. [6]
He and other board members of EPE met to plan a new publication which would be called The Chronicle of Higher Education . [6]
The Chronicle of Higher Education was officially founded in 1966 by Corbin Gwaltney. [6] [7] [8] and its first issue was launched in November 1966. [9] [10]
Although it was meant for those involved in higher education, one of the founding ideas was that the general public had very little knowledge about what was going on in higher education and the real issues involved. [8] Originally, it didn't accept any advertising and didn't have any staff-written editorial opinions. It was supported by grants from the Carnegie Foundation and the Ford Foundation . [11] Later on in its history, advertising would be accepted, especially for jobs in higher education, and this would allow the newspaper to be financially independent. [8] [11]
By the 1970s, the Chronicle was attracting enough advertising to become self-sufficient, and in 1978 the board of EPE agreed to sell the newspaper to its editors. [12] EPE sold the Chronicle to the editors for $2,000,000 in cash and $500,000 in services that Chronicle would provide to EPE. [8] Chronicle went from a legal non-profit status to a for-profit company.
This sale shifted the focus of non-profit EPE to K-12 education. Inspired by the model established by the Chronicle , and with the support of the Carnegie Corporation and other philanthropies, EPE founded Education Week in September 1981. [9] [12]
In 1993, the Chronicle was one of the first newspapers to appear on the Internet, as a Gopher service. It released an iPad version in 2011.
The Chronicle grossed $33 million in advertising revenues and $7 million in circulation revenues in 2003. [1]

Awards
Over the years, the paper has been a finalist and winner of many journalism awards. In 2005, two special reports – on diploma mills and plagiarism – were selected as finalists in the reporting category for a National Magazine Award . It was a finalist for the award in general excellence every year from 2001 to 2005.
In 2007, The Chronicle won an Utne Reader Independent Press Award for political coverage. [13] In its award citation, Utne called The Chronicle Review "a fearless, free-thinking section where academia's best and brightest can take their gloves off and swing with abandon at both sides of the increasingly predictable political divide." The New Republic , The Nation , Reason , and The American Prospect were among the finalists in the category.
WebPage index: 00049
Reliability of Wikipedia
The reliability of Wikipedia (primarily of the English-language edition ), compared to other encyclopedias and more specialized sources, has been assessed in many ways, including statistically , through comparative review, analysis of the historical patterns, and strengths and weaknesses inherent in the editing process unique to Wikipedia. [1] Recent incidents of conflicted editing, and the use of Wikipedia for 'revenge editing' (inserting false, defamatory or biased statements into biographies) have attracted frequent publicity. [2] [3]
An early study in the journal Nature said that in 2005, Wikipedia 's scientific articles came close to the level of accuracy in Encyclopædia Britannica and had a similar rate of "serious errors". [4] The study by Nature was disputed by Encyclopædia Britannica , [5] and later Nature replied to this with both a formal response and a point-by-point rebuttal of Britannica ' s main objections. [6] Between 2008 and 2012, Wikipedia articles on medical and scientific fields such as pathology , [7] toxicology , [8] oncology , [9] pharmaceuticals , [10] and psychiatry [11] were compared to professional and peer reviewed sources and it was found that Wikipedia's depth and coverage were of a high standard. Concerns regarding readability were raised in a study published by the American Society of Clinical Oncology [12] and a study published in Psychological Medicine (2012), [11] while a study published in the European Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology raised concerns about reliability. [13]
Wikipedia is open to anonymous and collaborative editing , so assessments of its reliability usually include examination of how quickly false or misleading information is removed. An early study conducted by IBM researchers in 2003—two years following Wikipedia's establishment—found that "vandalism is usually repaired extremely quickly—so quickly that most users will never see its effects" [15] and concluded that Wikipedia had "surprisingly effective self-healing capabilities". [16]
A number of Incidents have also been publicized in which false information has lasted for a long time on Wikipedia. In May 2005, an anonymous editor started a controversy when he created an article about John Seigenthaler containing several false and defamatory statements. [17] The inaccurate information remained uncorrected for four months. A biographical article on French Wikipedia portrayed a "Léon-Robert de L'Astran" as an 18th-century anti-slavery ship owner, which led Ségolène Royal , a presidential candidate, to praise him. A student investigation later determined that the article was a hoax and de L'Astran had never existed. [18]

Wikipedia editing model
Wikipedia allows anonymous editing; contributors are not required to provide any identification, or even an email address. A 2007 study at Dartmouth College of the English Wikipedia noted that, contrary to usual social expectations, anonymous editors were some of Wikipedia's most productive contributors of valid content. [19] However, the Dartmouth study was criticized by John Timmer of the Ars Technica website for its methodological shortcomings. [20]
Wikipedia trusts the same community to self-regulate and become more proficient at quality control . Wikipedia has harnessed the work of millions of people to produce the world's largest knowledge-based site along with software to support it, resulting in more than nineteen million articles written, across more than 280 different language versions, in fewer than twelve years. [21] For this reason, there has been considerable interest in the project both academically and from diverse fields such as information technology , business , project management , knowledge acquisition, software programming , other collaborative projects and sociology , to explore whether the Wikipedia model can produce quality results, what collaboration in this way can reveal about people, and whether the scale of involvement can overcome the obstacles of individual limitations and poor editorship which would otherwise arise.

Areas of reliability
The reliability of Wikipedia articles can be measured by the following criteria:
The first four of these have been the subjects of various studies of the project, while the presence of bias is strongly disputed, and the prevalence and quality of citations can be tested within Wikipedia. [23] In addition, the scientific research in the area of computational mechanism for trust and reputation in virtual societies was oriented to increase the reliability and performance of electronic communities such as Wikipedia with more quantitative methods and temporal factors. [24]
In contrast with all the previous intrinsic metrics, several "market-oriented" extrinsic measures demonstrate that large audiences trust Wikipedia in one way or another. For instance, "50 percent of [US] physicians report that they've consulted ... [Wikipedia] for information on health conditions", according to a report from IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics. [25]

Assessments

Comparative studies
On October 24, 2005, British newspaper The Guardian published a story titled "Can you trust Wikipedia?" in which a panel of experts was asked to review seven entries related to their fields, giving each article reviewed a number designation out of ten points. [26] Scores ranged from 0 to 8, but most received marks between 5 and 8. The most common criticisms were:
The most common praises were:
In December 2005, the journal Nature published results of an attempted blind study seeking reviewer evaluations of the accuracy of a small subset of articles from Wikipedia and Encyclopædia Britannica . The non-peer-reviewed study was based on Nature ' s selection of 42 articles on scientific topics, including biographies of well-known scientists. The articles were compared for accuracy by anonymous academic reviewers, a customary practice for journal article reviews. Based on their reviews, on average the Wikipedia articles were described as containing 4 errors or omissions, while the Britannica articles 3. Only 4 serious errors were found in Wikipedia, and 4 in Encyclopædia Britannica . The study concluded that "Wikipedia comes close to Britannica in terms of the accuracy of its science entries", [4] although Wikipedia's articles were often "poorly structured". [4]
Encyclopædia Britannica expressed concerns, leading Nature to release further documentation of its survey method. [27] Based on this additional information, Encyclopædia Britannica denied the validity of the Nature study, stating that it was "fatally flawed". Among Britannica ' s criticisms were that excerpts rather than the full texts of some of their articles were used, that some of the extracts were compilations that included articles written for the youth version, that Nature did not check the factual assertions of its reviewers, and that many points which the reviewers labeled as errors were differences of editorial opinion. [28] Nature acknowledged the compiled nature of some of the Britannica extracts, but denied that this invalidated the conclusions of the study. [29] Encyclopædia Britannica also argued that a breakdown of the errors indicated that the mistakes in Wikipedia were more often the inclusion of incorrect facts, while the mistakes in Britannica were "errors of omission", making " Britannica far more accurate than Wikipedia , according to the figures". [28] Nature has since rejected the Britannica response, [30] stating that any errors on the part of its reviewers were not biased in favor of either encyclopedia, that in some cases it used excerpts of articles from both encyclopedias, and that Britannica did not share particular concerns with Nature before publishing its "open letter" rebuttal. [31] [32]
The point-for-point disagreement between these two parties that addressed the compilation/text excerpting and very small sample size issues—argued to bias the outcome in favor of Wikipedia, versus a comprehensive, full article, large sample size study favoring the quality-controlled format of Britannica—have been echoed in online discussions, [33] [34] including of articles citing the Nature study, e.g., where a "flawed study design" for manual selection of articles/article portions, the lack of study "statistical power" in its comparing 4 × 10 1 articles from > 10 5 Britannica and > 10 6 English Wikipedia articles, and the absence of any study statistical analyses (e.g., reported confidence intervals for study results) has also been noted. [35]
In June 2006, Roy Rosenzweig , a professor specializing in American history, published a comparison of the Wikipedia biographies of 25 Americans to the corresponding biographies found on Encarta and American National Biography Online . He wrote that Wikipedia is "surprisingly accurate in reporting names, dates, and events in U.S. history" and described some of the errors as "widely held but inaccurate beliefs". However, he stated that Wikipedia often fails to distinguish important from trivial details, and does not provide the best references. He also complained about Wikipedia's lack of "persuasive analysis and interpretations, and clear and engaging prose". [36] Wikipedia's policies on original research , including unpublished synthesis of published data , disallow new analysis and interpretation not found in reliable sources.
A web-based survey conducted from December 2005 to May 2006 by Larry Press, a professor of Information Systems at California State University at Dominguez Hills , assessed the "accuracy and completeness of Wikipedia articles". [37] Fifty people accepted an invitation to assess an article. Of the fifty, seventy-six percent (76%) agreed or strongly agreed that the Wikipedia article was accurate, and forty-six percent (46%) agreed or strongly agreed that it was complete. Eighteen people compared the article they reviewed to the article on the same topic in the Encyclopædia Britannica . Opinions on accuracy were almost equal between the two encyclopedias (6 favoring Britannica, 7 favoring Wikipedia, 5 stating they were equal), and eleven of the eighteen (61%) found Wikipedia somewhat or substantially more complete, compared to seven of the eighteen (39%) for Britannica. The survey did not attempt random selection of the participants, and it is not clear how the participants were invited. [38]
The German computing magazine c't performed a comparison of Brockhaus Multimedial , Microsoft Encarta , and the German Wikipedia in October 2004: Experts evaluated 66 articles in various fields. In overall score, Wikipedia was rated 3.6 out of 5 points (B-). [39] A second test by c't in February 2007 used 150 search terms, of which 56 were closely evaluated, to compare four digital encyclopedias: Bertelsmann Enzyklopädie 2007, Brockhaus Multimedial premium 2007, Encarta 2007 Enzyklopädie and Wikipedia. It concluded: "We did not find more errors in the texts of the free encyclopedia than in those of its commercial competitors." [40]
Viewing Wikipedia as fitting the economists' definition of a perfectly competitive marketplace of ideas, George Bragues ( University of Guelph-Humber ), examined Wikipedia's articles on seven top Western philosophers: Aristotle , Plato , Immanuel Kant , René Descartes , Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel , Thomas Aquinas , and John Locke . Wikipedia's articles were compared to a consensus list of themes culled from four reference works in philosophy. Bragues found that, on average, Wikipedia's articles only covered 52% of consensus themes. No errors were found, though there were significant omissions. [41]
PC Pro magazine (August 2007) asked experts to compare four articles (a small sample ) in their scientific fields between Wikipedia, Britannica and Encarta. In each case Wikipedia was described as "largely sound", "well handled", "performs well", "good for the bare facts" and "broadly accurate". One article had "a marked deterioration towards the end" while another had "clearer and more elegant" writing, a third was assessed as less well written but better detailed than its competitors, and a fourth was "of more benefit to the serious student than its Encarta or Britannica equivalents". No serious errors were noted in Wikipedia articles, whereas serious errors were noted in one Encarta and one Britannica article. [42]
In October 2007, Australian magazine PC Authority published a feature article on the accuracy of Wikipedia. The article compared Wikipedia's content to other popular online encyclopedias, namely Britannica and Encarta . The magazine asked experts to evaluate articles pertaining to their field. A total of four articles were reviewed by three experts. Wikipedia was comparable to the other encyclopedias, topping the chemistry category. [43]
In December 2007, German magazine Stern published the results of a comparison between the German Wikipedia and the online version of the 15-volume edition of Brockhaus Enzyklopädie . The test was commissioned to a research institute (Cologne-based WIND GmbH ), whose analysts assessed 50 articles from each encyclopedia (covering politics, business, sports, science, culture, entertainment, geography, medicine, history and religion) on four criteria (accuracy, completeness, timeliness and clarity), and judged Wikipedia articles to be more accurate on the average (1.6 on a scale from 1 to 6 versus 2.3 for Brockhaus, with 1 as the best and 6 as the worst). Wikipedia's coverage was also found to be more complete and up to date; however, Brockhaus was judged to be more clearly written, while several Wikipedia articles were criticized as being too complicated for non-experts, and many as too lengthy. [44] [45] [46]
In its April 2008 issue British computing magazine PC Plus compared the English Wikipedia with the DVD editions of World Book Encyclopedia and Encyclopædia Britannica , assessing for each the coverage of a series of random subjects. It concluded, "The quality of content is good in all three cases" and advised Wikipedia users "Be aware that erroneous edits do occur, and check anything that seems outlandish with a second source. But the vast majority of Wikipedia is filled with valuable and accurate information." [47]
A 2008 paper in Reference Services Review compared nine Wikipedia entries on historical topics to their counterparts in Encyclopædia Britannica , The Dictionary of American History and American National Biography Online . The paper found that Wikipedia's entries had an overall accuracy rate of 80 percent, whereas the other encyclopedias had an accuracy rate of 95 to 96 percent. [48]
In April 2011, a study was published by Adam Brown of Brigham Young University in the journal PS Political Science & Politics which examined "thousands of Wikipedia articles about candidates, elections, and officeholders". The study found that while information in these articles tended to be accurate, the articles examined contained many errors of omission. [49]
A 2012 study co-authored by Shane Greenstein examined a decade of Wikipedia articles on United States politics and found that the more contributors there were to a given article, the more neutral it tended to be, in line with a narrow interpretation of Linus's Law . [50]
Reavley et al. (2012) compared the quality of articles on select mental health topics on Wikipedia with corresponding articles in Encyclopaedia Britannica and a psychiatry textbook. They asked experts to rate article content with regard to accuracy, up-to-dateness, breadth of coverage, referencing and readability. Wikipedia scored highest on all criteria except readability, and the authors concluded that Wikipedia is as good as or better than Britannica and a standard textbook. [11]
A 2014 perspective piece in the New England Journal of Medicine examined Wikipedia pages about 22 prescription drugs to determine if they had been updated to include the most recent FDA safety warnings. It found that 41% of these pages were updated within two weeks after the warning, 23% were updated more than two weeks later, and the remaining 36% had not been updated to include the warning as of more than 1 year later as of January 2014. [51]
A 2014 study in the Journal of the American Pharmacists Association examined 19 Wikipedia articles about herbal supplements , and concluded that all of these articles contained information about their "therapeutic uses and adverse effects", but also concluded that "several lacked information on drug interactions, pregnancy, and contraindications". The study's authors therefore recommended that patients not rely solely on Wikipedia as a source for information about the herbal supplements in question. [52]
Another study published in 2014 in PLOS ONE found that Wikipedia's information about pharmacology was 99.7% accurate when compared to a pharmacology textbook, and that the completeness of such information on Wikipedia was 83.8%. The study also determined that completeness of these Wikipedia articles was lowest (68%) in the category "pharmacokinetics" and highest (91.3%) in the category "indication". The authors concluded that "Wikipedia is an accurate and comprehensive source of drug-related information for undergraduate medical education". [53]

Expert opinion

Librarians' views
In a 2004 interview with The Guardian , self-described information specialist and Internet consultant [54] Philip Bradley said that he would not use Wikipedia and was "not aware of a single librarian who would". He then explained that "the main problem is the lack of authority. With printed publications, the publishers have to ensure that their data are reliable, as their livelihood depends on it. But with something like this, all that goes out the window." [55]
A 2006 review of Wikipedia by Library Journal , using a panel of librarians, "the toughest critics of reference materials, whatever their format", asked "long standing reviewers" to evaluate three areas of Wikipedia (popular culture, current affairs, and science), and concluded: "While there are still reasons to proceed with caution when using a resource that takes pride in limited professional management, many encouraging signs suggest that (at least for now) Wikipedia may be granted the librarian's seal of approval". A reviewer who "decided to explore controversial historical and current events, hoping to find glaring abuses" said, "I was pleased by Wikipedia's objective presentation of controversial subjects" but that "as with much information floating around in cyberspace, a healthy degree of skepticism and skill at winnowing fact from opinion are required". Other reviewers noted that there is "much variation" but "good content abounds". [56]
In 2007, Michael Gorman , former president of the American Library Association (ALA) stated in an Encyclopædia Britannica blog that "A professor who encourages the use of Wikipedia is the intellectual equivalent of a dietician who recommends a steady diet of Big Macs with everything". [57]
The library at Trent University in Ontario states of Wikipedia that many articles are "long and comprehensive", but that there is "a lot of room for misinformation and bias [and] a lot of variability in both the quality and depth of articles". It adds that Wikipedia has advantages and limitations, that it has "excellent coverage of technical topics" and articles are "often added quickly and, as a result, coverage of current events is quite good", comparing this to traditional sources which are unable to achieve this task. It concludes that, depending upon the need, one should think critically and assess the appropriateness of one's sources, "whether you are looking for fact or opinion, how in-depth you want to be as you explore a topic, the importance of reliability and accuracy, and the importance of timely or recent information", and adds that Wikipedia can be used in any event as a "starting point". [58]
An article for the Canadian Library Association (CLA) [59] discusses the Wikipedia approach, process and outcome in depth, commenting for example that in controversial topics, "what is most remarkable is that the two sides actually engaged each other and negotiated a version of the article that both can more or less live with". The author comments that:
Information Today (March 2006) cites librarian Nancy O'Neill (principal librarian for Reference Services at the Santa Monica Public Library System) as saying that "there is a good deal of skepticism about Wikipedia in the library community" but that "she also admits cheerfully that Wikipedia makes a good starting place for a search. You get terminology, names, and a feel for the subject." [60]
PC Pro (August 2007) cites the head of the European and American Collection at the British Library , Stephen Bury, as stating "Wikipedia is potentially a good thing—it provides a speedier response to new events, and to new evidence on old items". The article concludes: "For [Bury], the problem isn't so much the reliability of Wikipedia's content so much as the way in which it's used." "It's already become the first port of call for the researcher", Bury says, before noting that this is "not necessarily problematic except when they go no further". According to Bury, the trick to using Wikipedia is to understand that "just because it's in an encyclopedia (free, web or printed) doesn't mean it's true. Ask for evidence ... and contribute." [42]

Academe
Academics have also criticized Wikipedia for its perceived failure as a reliable source and because Wikipedia editors may have no expertise, competence, or credentials in the topics on which they contribute. [61] [62] Adrian Riskin, a mathematician in Whittier College commented that while highly technical articles may be written by mathematicians for mathematicians, the more general maths topics, such as the article on polynomials , are written in a very amateurish fashion with a number of obvious mistakes. [63]
Because Wikipedia can not be considered a reliable source, the use of Wikipedia is not accepted in many schools and universities in writing a formal paper, and some educational institutions have banned it as a primary source while others have limited its use to only a pointer to external sources. [61] [64] [65] The criticism of not being a reliable source, however, may not only apply to Wikipedia but to encyclopedias in general—some university lecturers are not impressed when students cite print-based encyclopedias in assigned work. [66] However, it seems that instructors have dully underestimated the use of Wikipedia in academia because of these concerns. Researchers and academics contend that while Wikipedia may not be used as a 100 percent accurate source for final papers, it is a valuable jumping off point for research that can lead to many possibilities if approached critically. What may be missing in academia is the emphasis on critical analysis in regards to the use of Wikipedia in secondary and higher education. We should not dismiss Wikipedia entirely (there are less inaccuracies than there are errors of omission) but rather begin to support it, and teach the use of Wikipedia as an education tool in tandem with critical thinking skills that will allow students to filter the information found on the online encyclopedia and help them critically analyze their findings. [67]
An empirical study conducted in 2006 by a Nottingham University Business School lecturer in Information Systems, [68] the subject of a review on the technical website Ars Technica , [69] involving 55 academics asked to review specific Wikipedia articles that either were in their expert field (group 1) or chosen at random (group 2), concluded that: "The experts found Wikipedia's articles to be more credible than the non-experts. This suggests that the accuracy of Wikipedia is high. However, the results should not be seen as support for Wikipedia as a totally reliable resource as, according to the experts, 13 percent of the articles contain mistakes (10% of the experts reported factual errors of an unspecified degree, 3% of them reported spelling errors)." [70]
The Gould Library at Carleton College in Minnesota has a web-page describing the use of Wikipedia in academia. It asserts that "Wikipedia is without question a valuable and informative resource", but that "there is an inherent lack of reliability and stability" to its articles, again drawing attention to similar advantages and limitations as other sources. As with other reviews it comments that one should assess one's sources and what is desired from them, and that "Wikipedia may be an appropriate resource for some assignments, but not for others." It cited Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales ' view that Wikipedia may not be ideal as a source for all academic uses, and (as with other sources) suggests that at the least, one strength of Wikipedia is that it provides a good starting point for current information on a very wide range of topics. [71]
In 2007, the Chronicle of Higher Education published an article written by Cathy Davidson , Professor of Interdisciplinary Studies and English at Duke University , in which she asserts that Wikipedia should be used to teach students about the concepts of reliability and credibility. [72]
In 2008, Hamlet Isakhanli , founder and president of Khazar University , compared the Encyclopædia Britannica and English Wikipedia articles on Azerbaijan and related subjects. His study found that Wikipedia covered the subject much more widely, more accurately and in more detail, though with some lack of balance, and that Wikipedia was the best source for the first approximation. [73]
Geoffrey Nunberg , an adjunct full professor at UC Berkeley's School of Information, has criticized Wikipedia for relying too much on citing sources even though the said sources may not be more accurate than Wikipedia itself. [74] [75]
Some academic journals do refer to Wikipedia articles, but are not elevating it to the same level as traditional references. For instance, Wikipedia articles have been referenced in "enhanced perspectives" provided on-line in the journal Science . The first of these perspectives to provide a hyperlink to Wikipedia was "A White Collar Protein Senses Blue Light", [76] and dozens of enhanced perspectives have provided such links since then. The publisher of Science states that these enhanced perspectives "include hypernotes—which link directly to websites of other relevant information available online—beyond the standard bibliographic references". [77]

Science and medicine
Science and medicine are areas where accuracy is of high importance and peer review is the norm. While some of Wikipedia's content has passed a form of peer review, most has not. [78]
A 2008 study examined 80 Wikipedia drug entries. The researchers found few factual errors in this set of articles, but determined that these articles were often missing important information, like contraindications and drug interactions . One of the researchers noted that "If people went and used this as a sole or authoritative source without contacting a health professional...those are the types of negative impacts that can occur." The researchers also compared Wikipedia to Medscape Drug Reference (MDR), by looking for answers to 80 different questions covering eight categories of drug information, including adverse drug events, dosages, and mechanism of action. They have determined that MDR provided answers to 82.5 percent of the questions, while Wikipedia could only answer 40 percent, and that answers were less likely to be complete for Wikipedia as well. None of the answers from Wikipedia were determined factually inaccurate, while they found four inaccurate answers in MDR. But the researchers found 48 errors of omission in the Wikipedia entries, compared to 14 for MDR. The lead investigator concluded: "I think that these errors of omission can be just as dangerous [as inaccuracies]", and he pointed out that drug company representatives have been caught deleting information from Wikipedia entries that make their drugs look unsafe. [10]
A 2009 survey asked US toxicologists how accurately they rated the portrayal of health risks of chemicals in different media sources. It was based on the answers of 937 members of the Society of Toxicology and found that these experts regarded Wikipedia's reliability in this area as far higher than that of all traditional news media:
In 2010 researchers compared information about 10 types of cancer on Wikipedia to similar data from the National Cancer Institute 's Physician Data Query and concluded "the Wiki resource had similar accuracy and depth to the professionally edited database" and that "sub-analysis comparing common to uncommon cancers demonstrated no difference between the two", but that ease of readability was an issue. [79]
A study in 2011 came to the result that categories most frequently absent in Wikipedia's drug articles are those of drug interactions and medication use in breastfeeding. [80] Other categories with incomplete coverage were descriptions of off-label indications, contraindications and precautions, adverse drug events and dosing. [80] Information most frequently deviating from other sources used in the study were that of contraindications and precautions, drug absorption and adverse drug events. [80]
A 2012 study reported that Wikipedia articles about pediatric otolaryngology contained twice as many errors and omissions as the medical database eMedicine . [81]
In a U.S. study in 2014, 10 researchers examined 10 Wikipedia health articles of the most costly medical conditions in the United States and found that 90% of the entries contained errors and statements that contradicted latest medical research. However, according to Stevie Benton of Wikimedia UK the sample size used in the research may have been too small to be considered representative. [82] [83]
A 2014 study published in PLOS One looked at the quality of Wikipedia articles on pharmacology , comparing articles from English and German Wikipedia with academic textbooks. It found that "the collaborative and participatory design of Wikipedia does generate high quality information on pharmacology that is suitable for undergraduate medical education". [84]

Editors of 
In a 2004 piece called "The Faith-Based Encyclopedia", Robert McHenry , a former editor-in-chief of Encyclopædia Britannica , stated that Wikipedia errs in billing itself as an encyclopedia, because that word implies a level of authority and accountability that he believes cannot be possessed by an openly editable reference. McHenry argued that "the typical user doesn't know how conventional encyclopedias achieve reliability, only that they do". [85] He added:
Similarly, Britannica ' s executive editor, Ted Pappas , was quoted in The Guardian as saying:
In the September 12, 2006 edition of The Wall Street Journal , Jimmy Wales debated with Dale Hoiberg , editor-in-chief of Encyclopædia Britannica . Hoiberg focused on a need for expertise and control in an encyclopedia and cited Lewis Mumford that overwhelming information could "bring about a state of intellectual enervation and depletion hardly to be distinguished from massive ignorance". Wales emphasized Wikipedia's differences, and asserted that openness and transparency lead to quality. Hoiberg replied that he "had neither the time nor space to respond to [criticisms]" and "could corral any number of links to articles alleging errors in Wikipedia", to which Wales responded: "No problem! Wikipedia to the rescue with a fine article", and included a link to the Wikipedia article Criticism of Wikipedia . [86]

Information loop
Circular reporting was reported to be a reliability problem for Wikipedia. Sources accepted as reliable for Wikipedia may in fact rely on Wikipedia as a reference source, sometimes indirectly. The danger is that if the original information in Wikipedia was false, once it has been reported in sources considered reliable, Wikipedia may use them to reference the false information, giving an apparent respectability to a falsehood. This in turn increases the likelihood of the false information being reported in other media. [87] A known example is the Sacha Baron Cohen article, where false information added in Wikipedia was apparently used by two newspapers, leading to it being treated as reliable in Wikipedia. [88] This process of creating reliable sources for false facts has been termed "citogenesis" by webcomic artist Randall Munroe . [89] [90] [91]

Propagation of misinformation
Somewhat related to the "information loop", but perhaps more worrisome, is the propagation of misinformation to other websites (Answers.com is just one of many) which will often quote misinformation from Wikipedia verbatim, and without mentioning that it has come from Wikipedia. A piece of misinformation originally taken from a Wikipedia article will live on in perhaps dozens of other websites, even if Wikipedia itself has deleted the unreliable material. [92]

Other
In one article, Information Today (March 2006) likens [60] comparisons between Wikipedia and Britannica to " apples and oranges ":
Jonathan Sidener of The San Diego Union-Tribune wrote that "vandalism and self-serving misinformation [are] common particularly in the political articles". [93]
Andrew Orlowski , a columnist for The Register , expressed similar criticisms in 2005, writing that the use of the term "encyclopedia" to describe Wikipedia may lead users into believing it is more reliable than it may be. [94]
BBC technology specialist Bill Thompson wrote that "Most Wikipedia entries are written and submitted in good faith, and we should not let the contentious areas such as politics, religion or biography shape our view of the project as a whole", that it forms a good starting point for serious research but that: [95]
Thompson adds the observation that since most popular online sources are inherently unreliable in this way, one byproduct of the information age is a wiser audience who are learning to check information rather than take it on faith due to its source, leading to "a better sense of how to evaluate information sources". [95]
The Supreme Court of India in its judgment in Commr. of Customs, Bangalore vs. ACER India Pvt. (Citation 2007(12)SCALE581) has held that "We have referred to Wikipedia, as the learned Counsel for the parties relied thereupon. It is an online encyclopaedia and information can be entered therein by any person and as such it may not be authentic." [96]
In his 2007 Guide to Military History on the Internet , Simon Fowler rated Wikipedia as "the best general resource" for military history research, and stated that "the results are largely accurate and generally free of bias". [97] When rating Wikipedia as the No. 1 military site he mentioned that "Wikipedia is often criticised for its inaccuracy and bias, but in my experience the military history articles are spot on." [98]
In July 2008, The Economist magazine described Wikipedia as "a user-generated reference service" and noted that Wikipedia's "elaborate moderation rules put a limit to acrimony" generated by cyber-nationalism. [99]
Jimmy Wales, a co-founder of Wikipedia, stresses that encyclopedias of any type are not usually appropriate as primary sources, and should not be relied upon as being authoritative. [100]
Carnegie Mellon Professor Randy Pausch offered the following anecdote in his book The Last Lecture . He was surprised that his entry to World Book Encyclopedia on virtual reality was accepted without question, so he concluded, "I now believe Wikipedia is a perfectly fine source for your information, because I know what the quality control is for real encyclopedias." [101]

Removal of false information
Fernanda Viégas of the MIT Media Lab and Martin Wattenberg and Kushal Dave of IBM Research studied the flow of editing in the Wikipedia model, with emphasis on breaks in flow (from vandalism or substantial rewrites), showing the dynamic flow of material over time. [102] From a sample of vandalism edits on the English Wikipedia during May 2003, they found that most such acts were repaired within minutes, summarizing:
They also stated that "it is essentially impossible to find a crisp definition of vandalism". [102]
Lih (2004) compared articles before and after they were mentioned in the press, and found that externally referenced articles are of higher quality work.
An informal assessment by the popular IT magazine PC Pro for its 2007 article "Wikipedia Uncovered" [42] tested Wikipedia by introducing 10 errors that "varied between bleeding obvious and deftly subtle" into articles (the researchers later corrected the articles they had edited). Labeling the results "impressive" it noted that all but one was noted and fixed within the hour, and that "the Wikipedians' tools and know-how were just too much for our team." A second series of another 10 tests, using "far more subtle errors" and additional techniques to conceal their nature, met similar results: "despite our stealth attempts the vast majority... were discovered remarkably quickly... the ridiculously minor Jesse James error was corrected within a minute and a very slight change to Queen Anne's entry was put right within two minutes". Two of the latter series were not detected. The article concluded that "Wikipedia corrects the vast majority of errors within minutes, but if they're not spotted within the first day the chances... dwindle as you're then relying on someone to spot the errors while reading the article rather than reviewing the edits".
A study in late 2007 systematically inserted inaccuracies into Wikipedia entries about the lives of philosophers. Depending on how exactly the data are interpreted, either one third or one half of the inaccuracies were corrected within 48 hours. [104]
A 2007 peer-reviewed study [105] that measured the actual number of page views with "damaged" content concluded:
Loc Vu-Quoc , professor for Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at the University of Florida , stated in 2008 that "sometimes errors may go for years without being corrected as experts don't usually read Wikipedia articles in their own field to correct these errors". [106]

Susceptibility to bias

Individual bias and the WikiScanner tool
In August 2007, WikiScanner, a tool developed by Virgil Griffith of the California Institute of Technology, was released to match anonymous IP edits in the encyclopedia with an extensive database of addresses. News stories appeared about IP addresses from various organizations such as the Central Intelligence Agency , the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee , Diebold, Inc. and the Australian government being used to make edits to Wikipedia articles, sometimes of an opinionated or questionable nature. [107] The BBC quoted a Wikimedia spokesperson as praising the tool: "We really value transparency and the scanner really takes this to another level. Wikipedia Scanner may prevent an organization or individuals from editing articles that they're really not supposed to." [108]
The WikiScanner story was also covered by The Independent , which stated that many "censorial interventions" by editors with vested interests on a variety of articles in Wikipedia had been discovered:
Not everyone hailed WikiScanner as a success for Wikipedia. Oliver Kamm , in a column for The Times , argued instead that: [110]
WikiScanner only reveals conflict of interest when the editor does not have a Wikipedia account and their IP address is used instead. Conflict of interest editing done by editors with accounts is not detected, since those edits are anonymous to everyone—except for a handful of privileged Wikipedia admins . [111]

Coverage
Wikipedia has been accused of systemic bias , which is to say its general nature leads, without necessarily any conscious intention, to the propagation of various prejudices. Although many articles in newspapers have concentrated on minor, indeed trivial, factual errors in Wikipedia articles, there are also concerns about large-scale, presumably unintentional effects from the increasing influence and use of Wikipedia as a research tool at all levels. In an article in the Times Higher Education magazine (London) philosopher Martin Cohen frames Wikipedia of having "become a monopoly" with "all the prejudices and ignorance of its creators", which he describes as a "youthful cab-drivers" perspective. [112] Cohen's argument, however, finds a grave conclusion in these circumstances: "To control the reference sources that people use is to control the way people comprehend the world. Wikipedia may have a benign, even trivial face, but underneath may lie a more sinister and subtle threat to freedom of thought." [112] That freedom is undermined by what he sees as what matters on Wikipedia, "not your sources but the 'support of the community'." [112]
Critics also point to the tendency to cover topics in a detail disproportionate to their importance. For example, Stephen Colbert once mockingly praised Wikipedia for having a "longer entry on ' lightsabers ' than it does on the ' printing press '." [113] In an interview with The Guardian , Dale Hoiberg, the editor-in-chief of Encyclopædia Britannica , noted:
This critical approach has been satirised as "Wikigroaning", a term coined by Jon Hendren [114] of the website Something Awful . [115] In the game, two articles (preferably with similar names) are compared: one about an acknowledged serious or classical subject and the other about a popular topic or current event. [116] Defenders of a broad inclusion criteria have held that the encyclopedia's coverage of pop culture does not impose space constraints on the coverage of more serious subjects (see " Wiki is not paper "). As Ivor Tossell noted:
Wikipedia has been accused of deficiencies in comprehensiveness because of its voluntary nature, and of reflecting the systemic biases of its contributors. Former Nupedia editor-in-chief Larry Sanger stated in 2004, "when it comes to relatively specialized topics (outside of the interests of most of the contributors), the project's credibility is very uneven." [118] In a GamesRadar editorial, columnist Charlie Barrat juxtaposed Wikipedia's coverage of video game -related topics with its smaller content about topics that have greater real-world significance, such as God, World War II and former U.S. presidents. [119]
Wikipedia has been praised for making it possible for articles to be updated or created in response to current events. Its editors have also argued that, as a website, Wikipedia is able to include articles on a greater number of subjects than print encyclopedias can. [120]
A 2011 study reported evidence of cultural bias in Wikipedia articles about famous people on both the English and Polish Wikipedias. These biases included those pertaining to the cultures of both the United States and Poland on each of the corresponding-language Wikipedias, as well as a pro-U.S./English-language bias on both of them. [121]

Notability of article topics
Wikipedia's notability guidelines , which are used by editors to determine if a subject merits its own article, and the application thereof, are the subject of much criticism. [122] Nicholson Baker considers the notability standards arbitrary and essentially unsolvable: [123]
Criticizing the " deletionists ", Baker then writes: [122]
Another criticism about the deletionists is: "The increasing difficulty of making a successful edit; the exclusion of casual users; slower growth—all are hallmarks of the deletionists approach." [124]
Complaining that his own biography was on the verge of deletion for lack of notability, Timothy Noah argued that:
In the same article, Noah mentions that the Pulitzer Prize-winning writer Stacy Schiff was not considered notable enough for a Wikipedia entry before she wrote an extensive New Yorker article on Wikipedia itself.
A 2014 study found no correlation between characteristics of a given Wikipedia page about an academic and the academic's notability as determined by citation counts. The metrics of each Wikipedia page examined included length, number of links to the page from other articles, and number of edits made to the page. This study also found that Wikipedia did not cover notable ISI highly cited researchers properly. [126]

Liberal bias
According to Jimmy Wales: "The Wikipedia community is very diverse, from liberal to conservative to libertarian and beyond. If averages mattered, and due to the nature of the wiki software (no voting) they almost certainly don't, I would say that the Wikipedia community is slightly more liberal than the U.S. population on average, because we are global and the international community of English speakers is slightly more liberal than the U.S. population. There are no data or surveys to back that." [127] A number of politically conservative commentators have argued that Wikipedia's coverage is affected by liberal bias . Andrew Schlafly created Conservapedia because he found Wikipedia "increasingly anti-Christian and anti-American" for its frequent use of British spelling and coverage of topics like creationism and the effect of Christianity on the Renaissance . [128] In 2007, an article in The Christian Post criticised Wikipedia's coverage of intelligent design , saying that it was biased and hypocritical. [129] Lawrence Solomon of the National Review stated that Wikipedia articles on subjects like global warming , intelligent design, and Roe v. Wade are slanted in favor of liberal views. [130]
In a September 2010 issue of the conservative weekly Human Events , Rowan Scarborough presented a critique of Wikipedia's coverage of American politicians prominent in the approaching midterm elections as evidence of systemic liberal bias. Scarborough compared the biographical articles of liberal and conservative opponents in Senate races in the Alaska Republican primary and the Delaware and Nevada general election, emphasizing the quantity of negative coverage of tea party -endorsed candidates. He also cites some criticism by Lawrence Solomon and quotes in full the lead section of Wikipedia's article on the conservative wiki Conservapedia as evidence of an underlying bias. [131]

American and corporate media bias
Tim Anderson, a senior lecturer in political economy at the University of Sydney , said that Wikipedia administrators display a U.S.-oriented bias in their interaction with editors, and in their determination of sources that are appropriate for use on the site. Anderson was outraged after several of the sources he used in his edits to Hugo Chávez , including Venezuela Analysis and Z Magazine , were disallowed as "unusable". Anderson also described Wikipedia's neutral point of view policy to ZDNet Australia as "a facade", and that Wikipedia "hides behind a reliance on corporate media editorials". [132]
A 2015 study found negative facts are more likely to be removed from Wikipedia articles on U.S. senators than positive facts. [133]

Reliability as a source in other contexts
Although Wikipedia is stated not to be a primary source, it has been used as evidence in legal cases. In January 2007, The New York Times reported that U.S. courts vary in their treatment of Wikipedia as a source of information, with over 100 judicial rulings having relied on the encyclopedia, including those involving taxes, narcotics, and civil issues such as personal injury and matrimonial issues. [134]
In April 2012, The Wall Street Journal reported that in the five years since the 2007 New York Times story, federal courts of appeals had cited Wikipedia about 95 times. The story also reported that the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit vacated convictions in a cockfighting case because a juror used Wikipedia to research an element of the crime, expressing in its decision concerns about Wikipedia's reliability. [135]
In one notable case, the trademark of Formula One racing decision, [136] the UK Intellectual Property Office considered both the reliability of Wikipedia, and its usefulness as a reliable source of evidence:
In the United States, the United States Court of Federal Claims has ruled that "Wikipedia may not be a reliable source of information." [137] and "...Articles [from Wikipedia] do not—at least on their face—remotely meet this reliability requirement...A review of the Wikipedia website reveals a pervasive and, for our purposes, disturbing series of disclaimers ...". [134] [138] Such disclaimers include the Wikipedia not being able to guarantee the validity of the information on its articles and having no formal peer review.
Among other reasons for these statements about Wikipedia's reliability are the stability of the articles (which due to editing may cause new readers to find information that differs from the originally cited) and, according to Stephen Gillers, a professor at New York University Law School, "the most critical fact is public acceptance", therefore "a judge should not use Wikipedia when the public is not prepared to accept it as authority". [139]
Wikipedia has also become a key source for some current news events such as the 2007 Virginia Tech massacre , when The New York Times cites Wikimedia to report 750,000 page views of the article in the two days after the event:
The Washington Post commented, in the context of 2008 Presidential election candidate biographies, that despite occasional brief vandalism, "it's hard to find a more up-to-date, detailed, thorough article on Obama than Wikipedia's. As of Friday (14 September 2007), Obama's article—more than 22 pages long, with 15 sections covering his personal and professional life—had a reference list of 167 sources." [141]

Broad opinions
Several commentators have drawn a middle ground, asserting that the project contains much valuable knowledge and has some reliability, even if the degree is not yet assessed with certainty.
Others taking this view include danah boyd , [sic] who in 2005 discussed Wikipedia as an academic source, concluding that "[i]t will never be an encyclopedia, but it will contain extensive knowledge that is quite valuable for different purposes", [142] and Bill Thompson who stated "I use the Wikipedia a lot. It is a good starting point for serious research, but I would never accept something that I read there without checking." [95]
Information Today ' s March 2006 article [60] concludes on a similar theme:
Dan Gillmor , a Silicon Valley commentator and author commented in October 2004 that, "I don't think anyone is saying Wikipedia is an absolute replacement for a traditional encyclopedia. But in the topics I know something about, I've found Wikipedia to be as accurate as any other source I've found." [55]
Larry Sanger stated on Kuro5hin in 2001 that "Given enough eyeballs, all errors are shallow", [143] which is a paraphrase of Linus' Law of open-source development.
Likewise, technology figure Joi Ito wrote on Wikipedia's authority, "[a]lthough it depends a bit on the field, the question is whether something is more likely to be true coming from a source whose resume sounds authoritative, or a source that has been viewed by hundreds of thousands of people (with the ability to comment) and has survived." [144]
In a 2008 letter to the editor of Physics Today , Gregg Jaeger , an associate professor at Boston University , [145] has characterized Wikipedia as a medium that is susceptible to fostering "anarchy and distortions" in relation to scientific information. [146] The letter was in response to a review of his book Quantum Information: An Overview , that had questioned "whether there is an audience for such encyclopedic texts, especially given the easy access to online sources of information such as the arXiv e-print server and Wikipedia."
People known to use or recommend Wikipedia as a reference source include film critic Roger Ebert , [147] [148] [149] [150] comedian Rosie O'Donnell , [151] University of Maryland physicist Robert L. Park , [152] Rutgers University sociology professor Ted Goertzel [153] [154] and scientific skepticism promoter and investigator James Randi . [155] Periodicals that publish articles featuring citations of Wikipedia as a source include the American science magazines Skeptic [156] [157] and Skeptical Inquirer . [158] In the January 2013 episode of his talk show, Stossel , about how ideas can flourish without regulation, journalist John Stossel interviewed Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales, and discussed the success of Wikipedia's model versus that of Britannica, during which Stossel stated that his own Wikipedia article exhibited only one error. [159]
Jean Goodwin wrote on the reasons why Wikipedia may be trusted. According to him, while readers may not assess the actual expertise of the authors of a given article, they may assess the passion of Wikipedians, and in so far provide a reason for trust. [160]

Tools for testing the reliability of articles
While experienced editors can view the article history and discussion page, for normal users it is not so easy to check whether information from Wikipedia is reliable. University projects from California, Switzerland and Germany try to improve that by methods of formal analysis and data mining. Wiki-Watch from Germany, which was inspired by the WikiBu from Switzerland , shows an evaluation up to five-stars for every English or German article in Wikipedia. Part of this rating is the tool WikiTrust which shows the trustworthiness of single text parts of Wikipedia articles by white (trustworthy) or orange (not trustworthy) markings. [161]

Notable incidents

False biographical information
Inaccurate information may persist in Wikipedia for a long time before it is challenged. The most prominent cases reported by mainstream media involved biographies of living persons.
The Seigenthaler incident demonstrated that the subject of a biographical article must sometimes fix blatant lies about his or her own life. In May 2005, a user edited the biographical article on John Seigenthaler Sr. so that it contained several false and defamatory statements. [17] The inaccurate claims went unnoticed between May and September 2005 when they were discovered by Victor S. Johnson, Jr. , a friend of Seigenthaler. Wikipedia content is often mirrored at sites such as Answers.com , which means that incorrect information can be replicated alongside correct information through a number of web sources. Such information can develop a misleading air of authority because of its presence at such sites: [163]
Seth Finkelstein reported in an article in The Guardian on his efforts to remove his own biography page from Wikipedia, simply because it was subjected to defamation : [164]
In the same article Finkelstein recounts how he voted his own biography as "not notable enough" in order to have it removed from Wikipedia. He goes on to recount a similar story involving Angela Beesley, previously a prominent member of the foundation which runs Wikipedia.
In November 2005, the biography of Jens Stoltenberg , the Norwegian Prime Minister, was edited to contain libelous statements. [165]
Taner Akçam , a Turkish history professor at the University of Minnesota , was detained at the Montreal airport, as his article was vandalized by Turkish nationalists in 2007. While this mistake was resolved, he was again arrested in US for the same suspicion two days later. [166]
In another example, on March 2, 2007, msnbc.com reported that Hillary Clinton had been incorrectly listed for 20 months in her Wikipedia biography as valedictorian of her class of 1969 at Wellesley College . (Hillary Rodham was not the valedictorian, though she did speak at commencement .) [167] The article included a link to the Wikipedia edit, [168] where the incorrect information was added on July 9, 2005. After the msnbc.com report, the inaccurate information was removed the same day. [169] Between the two edits, the wrong information had stayed in the Clinton article while it was edited more than 4,800 times over 20 months.
Attempts to perpetrate hoaxes may not be confined to editing Wikipedia articles. In October 2005 Alan Mcilwraith , a former call center worker from Scotland created a Wikipedia article in which he claimed to be a highly decorated war hero. The article was quickly identified by other users as unreliable (see Wikipedia Signpost article 17 April 2006 ). However, Mcilwraith had also succeeded in convincing a number of charities and media organizations that he was who he claimed to be: [170]
In May 2010, French politician Ségolène Royal publicly praised the memory of Léon-Robert de l'Astran, an 18th-century naturalist , humanist and son of a slave trader, who had opposed the slave trade. The newspaper Sud-Ouest revealed a month later that de l'Astran had never existed—except as the subject of an article in the French Wikipedia . Historian Jean-Louis Mahé discovered that de l'Astran was fictional after a student, interested by Royal's praise of him, asked Mahé about him. Mahé's research led him to realize that de l'Astran did not exist in any archives, and he traced the hoax back to the Rotary Club of La Rochelle . The article, created by members of the Club in January 2007, had thus remained online for three years—unsourced—before the hoax was uncovered. Upon Sud-Ouest' s revelation—repeated in other major French newspapers—French Wikipedia administrator DonCamillo immediately deleted the article. [18] [162] [171] [172] [173] [174] [175]
There have also been instances of users deliberately inserting false information into Wikipedia in order to test the system and demonstrate its alleged unreliability. For example, Gene Weingarten , a journalist, ran such a test in 2007 by anonymously inserting false information into his own biography. The fabrications were removed 27 hours later by a Wikipedia editor who was regularly watching changes to that article. [176] Television personality Stephen Colbert lampooned this drawback of Wikipedia, calling it wikiality .
"Death by Wikipedia" is a phenomenon in which a person is erroneously proclaimed dead through vandalism. Articles about the comedian Paul Reiser , British television host Vernon Kay , and the West Virginia Senator Robert Byrd , who died on June 28, 2010, have been vandalized in this way. [177] [178] [179]
Wikipedia considers vandalism as "any addition, removal, or change of content in a deliberate attempt to compromise the integrity of Wikipedia". The Wikipedia page " Researching with Wikipedia " states:

Other false information
In June 2007, an anonymous Wikipedia contributor became involved in the Chris Benoit double murder and suicide because of an unverified piece of information he added to the Chris Benoit English Wikipedia article. This information regarding Benoit's wife's death was added fourteen hours before police discovered the bodies of Benoit and his family. [180] Police detectives seized computer equipment from the man held responsible for the postings, but believed he was uninvolved and did not press charges. [181]
The IP address from which the edit was made was traced to earlier instances of Wikipedia vandalism. The contributor apologized on Wikinews , saying:
On 29 August 2008, shortly after the first round draw was completed for UEFA Europa League football cup, an edit was made to the article for the football club AC Omonia , apparently by users of the website B3ta , [183] which added the following erroneous information to the section titled "The fans".
On 18 September 2008, David Anderson, a British journalist writing for the Daily Mirror , quoted this in his match preview ahead of Omonia's game with Manchester City , which appeared in the web and print versions of the Mirror and the nickname was quoted in subsequent editions on 19 September. [184] [185]
In a 2009 incident, University College Dublin sociology student Shane Fitzgerald added an incorrect quote to the article on the recently deceased composer Maurice Jarre . Fitzgerald wanted to demonstrate the potential dangers of news reporters' reliance on the internet for information. [186] Although Fitzgerald's edits were removed three times from the Wikipedia article for lack of sourcing, [187] they were nevertheless copied into obituary columns in newspapers worldwide. [188] Fitzgerald believes that if he had not come forward his quote would have remained in history as fact. [187]
The death of Norman Wisdom in October 2010 led several major newspapers to repeat the false claim, drawn from Wikipedia, that he was the author of the lyrics of the Second World War song " (There'll Be Bluebirds Over) The White Cliffs of Dover ". [189]
After the 2010 FIFA World Cup , FIFA president Sepp Blatter was presented with the Order of the Companions of Oliver Reginald Tambo . The citation, however, read: "The Order of the Companions of OR Tambo in Gold—awarded to Joseph Sepp Bellend Blatter (1936–) for his exceptional contribution to the field of football and support for the hosting of the Fifa World Cup on the African continent," after the name on his Wikipedia entry was vandalised. [190]
In October 2012 the Asian Football Confederation official website published an article about the United Arab Emirates national football team 's bid to qualify for the 2015 AFC Asian Cup, in which the team's nickname was stated to be the "Sand Monkeys". This was the indirect result of vandalism of the Wikipedia article on the team, and the AFC was forced to apologise for what was perceived as a racist slur. [191] [192]
In November 2012, Lord Leveson was embarrassed when he named a "Brett Straub" as one of the founders of The Independent newspaper in the Leveson report . The name had been added to the Wikipedia article on The Independent over a year prior, and turned out to be that of a 25-year-old Californian, whose friend had added his name to a string of Wikipedia pages as a prank. [193] Straub was tracked down by The Telegraph and commented, "The fact someone, especially a judge, has believed something on Wikipedia is kind of shocking. My friend went on and edited a bunch of Wikipedia pages and put my name there. [...] I knew my friend had done it but I didn't know how to change them back and I thought someone would. At one point I was the creator of Coca-Cola or something. You know how easy it is to change Wikipedia. Every time he came across a red linked name he put my name in its place." [194]
In December 2012, an article titled "Bicholim conflict" was deleted after standing since 2007. [195] It talked about a war that took place in India between the years 1640 and 1641, but was later confirmed to be completely fictitious. [196] The hoax article had won Wikipedia's "Good Article" award, a status conferred on fewer than 1 percent of articles on the site, a few months after its creation in 2007, and held that status for five years. [197]
In March 2013, it was discovered that both Wikipedia and IMDB had for three-and-a-half years contained articles on a fictitious Russian filmmaker named Yuri Gadyukin. False information had been planted in both sites as part of a viral promotion campaign for an upcoming film. [198]
In May 2014, The New Yorker reported that a 17-year-old student had added an invented nickname to the Wikipedia article on the coati in 2008, saying coatis were also known as "Brazilian aardvarks ". The taxonomically false information, inserted as a private joke, lasted for six years in Wikipedia and over this time came to be propagated by hundreds of websites, several newspapers (one of which was later cited as a source in Wikipedia) and even a book published by a university press. It was only removed from Wikipedia after publication of the New Yorker article, in which the student explained how the joke had come about. [14]
In March 2015, it became known that an article on Wikipedia entitled " Jar'Edo Wens ", purportedly about an Australian aboriginal deity of that name, was a hoax. The article had survived for more than nine years before being deleted, making it the longest-lived documented hoax article in Wikipedia's history. The article spawned mentions of the fake god on numerous other websites as well as in an academic book titled Atheism and the Case Against Christ . [199] [200] [201]

Conflict-of-interest editing on Wikipedia

Political interests and advocacy
While Wikipedia policy requires articles to have a neutral point of view, there have been attempts to place a spin on articles. In January 2006 several staffers of members of the U.S. House of Representatives attempted to cleanse their respective bosses' biographies on Wikipedia, and to insert negative remarks on political opponents. References to a campaign promise by Martin Meehan to surrender his seat in 2000 were deleted, and negative comments were inserted into the articles on U.S. Senator Bill Frist and Eric Cantor , a congressman from Virginia . Numerous other changes were made from an IP address which is assigned to the House of Representatives. [202] In an interview, Jimmy Wales remarked that the changes were "not cool." [203]
On August 31, 2008, The New York Times ran an article detailing the edits made to the biography of Sarah Palin in the wake of her nomination as running mate of John McCain . During the 24 hours before the McCain campaign announcement, 30 edits , many of them flattering details, were made to the article by Wikipedia single-purpose user identity Young Trigg. This person later acknowledged working on the McCain campaign, and having several Wikipedia user accounts. [204] [205]
Larry Delay and Pablo Bachelet write that from their perspective, some articles dealing with Latin American history and groups (such as the Sandinistas and Cuba ) lack political neutrality and are written from a sympathetic Marxist perspective which treats socialist dictatorships favorably at the expense of alternate positions. [206] [207] [208]
In November 2007, libelous accusations were made against two politicians from southwestern France, Jean-Pierre Grand and Hélène Mandroux-Colas , on their Wikipedia biographies. Jean-Pierre Grand asked the president of the French National Assembly and the Prime Minister of France to reinforce the legislation on the penal responsibility of Internet sites and of authors who peddle false information in order to cause harm. [209] Senator Jean Louis Masson then requested the Minister of Justice to tell him whether it would be possible to increase the criminal responsibilities of hosting providers, site operators, and authors of libelous content; the minister declined to do so, recalling the existing rules in the LCEN law. [210]
In 2009, Wikipedia banned the Church of Scientology from editing any articles on its site. The Wikipedia articles concerning Scientology were edited by members of the group to improve its portrayal. [211]
On August 25, 2010, the Toronto Star reported that the Canadian "government is now conducting two investigations into federal employees who have taken to Wikipedia to express their opinion on federal policies and bitter political debates." [212]
In 2010, Al Jazeera 's Teymoor Nabili suggested that the article Cyrus Cylinder had been edited for political purposes by "an apparent tussle of opinions in the shadowy world of hard drives and 'independent' editors that comprise the Wikipedia industry." He suggested that after the Iranian presidential election, 2009 and the ensuing "anti-Iranian activities" a "strenuous attempt to portray the cylinder as nothing more than the propaganda tool of an aggressive invader" was visible. The edits following his analysis of the edits during 2009 and 2010, represented "a complete dismissal of the suggestion that the cylinder, or Cyrus' actions, represent concern for human rights or any kind of enlightened intent," in stark contrast to Cyrus ' own reputation (among the people of Babylon) as written in the Old Testament . [213]

Arab-Israeli conflict
In April 2008, the Boston-based Committee for Accuracy in Middle East Reporting in America ( CAMERA ) organized an e-mail campaign to encourage readers to correct perceived Israel-related biases and inconsistencies in Wikipedia. [214] Excerpts of some of the e-mails were published in the July 2008 issue of Harper's Magazine under the title of "Candid camera". [215]
CAMERA argued the excerpts were unrepresentative and that it had explicitly campaigned merely "toward encouraging people to learn about and edit the online encyclopedia for accuracy". [216] According to some defenders of CAMERA, serious misrepresentations of CAMERA's role emanated from the competing Electronic Intifada group; moreover, it is said, some other Palestinian advocacy groups have been guilty of systematic misrepresentations and manipulative behaviors but have not suffered bans of editors amongst their staff or volunteers. [217] [218]
Five editors involved in the campaign were sanctioned by Wikipedia administrators. [219] Israeli diplomat David Saranga said that Wikipedia is generally fair in regard to Israel. When confronted with the fact that the entry on Israel mentioned the word "occupation" nine times, whereas the entry on the Palestinian People mentioned "terror" only once, he replied
Political commentator Haviv Rettig Gur, reviewing widespread perceptions in Israel of systemic bias in Wikipedia articles, has argued that there are deeper structural problems creating this bias: anonymous editing favors biased results, especially if those Gur calls "pro-Palestinian activists" organize concerted campaigns as has been done in articles dealing with Arab-Israeli issues, and current Wikipedia policies, while well-meant, have proven ineffective in handling this. [221]
On 3 August 2010, it was reported that the Yesha Council together with Israel Sheli (My Israel), a network of online pro-Israel activists committed to spreading Zionism online, were organizing people at a workshop in Jerusalem to teach them how to edit Wikipedia articles in a pro-Israeli way. [222] [223] [224] Around 50 people took part in the course. [225]
The project organiser, Ayelet Shaked , who has since been elected to Israel's parliament, was interviewed on Arutz Sheva Radio . She emphasized that the information has to be reliable and meet Wikipedia rules. She cited some examples such as the use of the term "occupation" in Wikipedia entries, as well as in the editing of entries that link Israel with Judea and Samaria and Jewish history ". [226]
"We don't want to change Wikipedia or turn it into a propaganda arm," commented Naftali Bennett , director of the Yesha Council. "We just want to show the other side. People think that Israelis are mean, evil people who only want to hurt Arabs all day." [227] "The idea is not to make Wikipedia rightist but for it to include our point of view," he said in another interview. [225]
A course participant explained that the course is not a "Zionist conspiracy to take over Wikipedia"; rather, it is an attempt to balance information about disputed issues presented in the online encyclopedia.
Following the course announcement, Abdul Nasser An-Najar, the head of Palestinian Journalists Syndicate said there were plans to set up a counter group to ensure the Palestinian view is presented online as the "next regional war will be [a] media war." [227]
In 2011, Wikipedia founder Jimmy Wales stated in retrospect about the course organized by Israel Sheli, "we saw absolutely no impact from that effort whatsoever. I don't think it ever—it was in the press but we never saw any impact." [229]

Corporate public relations industry
In January, 2012, members of the public relations industry created the Corporate Representatives for Ethical Wikipedia Engagement (CREWE) Facebook group with the stated goal of maintaining accurate articles about corporations. [230]

Editing for financial rewards
In an October 2012 Salon story, Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales stated that he was against the practice of paid editing of Wikipedia, as are a number long-time members of Wikipedia's community. Nonetheless, a number of organizations do pay employees to edit Wikipedia articles, with one writer, Soraya Field Fiorio, stating that she writes commissioned Wikipedia articles for writers and musicians for $30 an hour. According to Fiorio, her clients control the article's content in the same way that they control press releases, which function as part of publicity strategies. [231] In January 2007, Rick Jelliffe claimed in a story carried by CBS [232] and IDG News Service [233] [234] that Microsoft had offered him compensation in exchange for his future editorial services on OOXML . A Microsoft spokesperson, quoted by CBS, commented that "Microsoft and the writer, Rick Jelliffe, had not determined a price and no money had changed hands, but they had agreed that the company would not be allowed to review his writing before submission". CBS also quoted Jimmy Wales as having expressed his disapproval of Microsoft's involvement: "We were very disappointed to hear that Microsoft was taking that approach."
In a story covered by the BBC , Jeffrey Merkey claimed that in exchange for a donation his Wikipedia entry was edited in his favor. Jay Walsh, a spokesman for Wikipedia, flatly denied the allegations in an interview given to the Daily Telegraph . [235]
In a story covered by InformationWeek , Eric Goldman , assistant law professor at Santa Clara University in California argued that "eventually, marketers will build scripts to edit Wikipedia pages to insert links and conduct automated attacks on Wikipedia", [236] thus putting the encyclopedia beyond the ability of its editors to provide countermeasures against the attackers, particularly because of a vicious circle where the strain of responding to these attacks drives core contributors away, increasing the strain on those who remain. [237] However, Wikipedia operates bots to aid in the detection and removal of vandalism, and uses nofollow and a CAPTCHA to discourage and filter additions of external links.

Conflicts involving Wikipedia policy makers
In February 2008, British technology news and opinion website The Register stated that a prominent administrator of Wikipedia had edited a topic area where he had a conflict of interest to keep criticism to a bare minimum, as well as altering the Wikipedia policies regarding personal biography and conflict of interest to favour his editing.
Some of the most scathing criticism of Wikipedia's claimed neutrality came in The Register , which in turn was allegedly criticized by founding members of the project. According to The Register : [238]
Charles Arthur in The Guardian said that "Wikipedia, and so many other online activities, show all the outward characteristics of a cult ." [239]
In February 2015, a longstanding Wikipedia administrator was site-banned after Wikipedia's arbitration committee found that he or she had, over a period of several years, manipulated the content of Wikipedia articles to add positive content and remove negative content about the controversial Indian Institute of Planning and Management and its dean, Arindam Chaudhuri . An Indian journalist commented in Newsweek on the importance of the Wikipedia article to the institute's PR campaign and voiced the opinion that "by letting this go on for so long, Wikipedia has messed up perhaps 15,000 students' lives". [240] [241]

Scientific disputes
The 2005 Nature study also gave two brief examples of challenges that Wikipedian science writers purportedly faced on Wikipedia. The first concerned the addition of a section on violence to the schizophrenia article, which exhibited the view of one of the article's regular editors, neuropsychologist Vaughan Bell , that it was little more than a "rant" about the need to lock people up, and that editing it stimulated him to look up the literature on the topic. [4]
The second dispute reported by Nature involved the climatologist William Connolley related to protracted disputes between editors of climate change topics, in which Connolley was placed on parole and several opponents banned from editing climate related articles for six months; [4] a separate paper commented that this was more about etiquette than bias and that Connolley did "not suffer fools gladly ". [242]

See also
WebPage index: 00050
Deutsche Welle
Deutsche Welle ( German pronunciation: [ˈdɔʏtʃə ˈvɛlə] ; "German Wave" in German) or DW is Germany 's public international broadcaster . The service is available in 30 languages. DW's satellite television service consists of channels in English, German, Spanish, and Arabic. DW is a member of the European Broadcasting Union (EBU).
DW offers regularly updated articles on its online news website and runs its own center for international media development, DW Akademie. The broadcaster's stated goals are to convey Germany as a "liberal, democratic state based on the rule of law", to produce reliable news coverage and to provide access to the German language . [1]
DW has been broadcasting since 1953. It is headquartered in Bonn, where its radio programmes are produced. Television broadcasts are produced almost entirely in Berlin. Both locations create content for DW's news website.
Around 3,000 people work for Deutsche Welle in over 60 countries. According to DW, its output reaches 100 million people worldwide every week. The Director General of DW is Peter Limbourg .

History
DW's first shortwave broadcast took place on 3 May 1953 with an address by the then West German President, Theodor Heuss . On 11 June 1953, ARD public broadcasters signed an agreement to share responsibility for Deutsche Welle. At first, it was controlled by Nordwestdeutscher Rundfunk (NWDR). In 1955, NWDR split into Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR) and Westdeutscher Rundfunk (WDR), WDR assumed responsibility for Deutsche Welle programming. In 1960, Deutsche Welle became an independent public body after a court ruled that broadcasting from Germany was part of the federal government's foreign-affairs function. On 7 June 1962 DW joined ARD as a national broadcasting station. Deutsche Welle was originally headquartered in the West German city of Cologne . After reunification , when much of the government relocated to Berlin, the station's headquarters moved to Bonn.

Logos

Broadcast languages

German reunification
With German reunification in 1990, Radio Berlin International (RBI), East Germany's international broadcaster ceased to exist. Some of the RBI staff joined Deutsche Welle and DW inherited some broadcasting facilities, including transmitting facilities at Nauen , as well as RBI's frequencies.
DW (TV) began as RIAS-TV , a television station launched by the West Berlin broadcaster RIAS (Radio in the American Sector / Rundfunk im Amerikanischen Sektor) in August 1988. The fall of the Berlin Wall the following year and German reunification in 1990 meant that RIAS-TV was to be closed down. On 1 April 1992, Deutsche Welle inherited the RIAS-TV broadcast facilities, using them to start a German and English-language television channel broadcast via satellite , DW (TV), adding a short Spanish broadcast segment the following year. In 1995, it began 24-hour operation (12 hours German, 10 hours English, 2 hours Spanish). At that time, DW (TV) introduced a new news studio and a new logo .
Deutsche Welle took over some of the former independent radio broadcasting service Deutschlandfunk 's foreign-language programming in 1993, when Deutschlandfunk was absorbed into the new Deutschlandradio .
In addition to radio and television programming, DW sponsored some published material. For example, the South-Asia Department published German Heritage: A Series Written for the South Asia Programme in 1967 and in 1984 published African Writers on the Air . Both publications were transcripts of DW programming.

World Wide Web presence
In September 1994, Deutsche Welle was the first public broadcaster in Germany with a World Wide Web presence , initially www-dw.gmd.de , hosted by the GMD Information Technology Research Center. For its first two years, the site listed little more than contact addresses, although DW's News Journal was broadcast in RealAudio from Real's server beginning in 1995, and Süddeutsche Zeitung 's initial web presence, which included news articles from the newspaper, shared the site. Around 1998, it evolved into a news website using the URL dwelle.de ; in 2001, the URL changed to www.dw-world.de , and was changed again in 2012, to www.dw.de . Deutsche Welle purchased the domain dw.com , which previously belonged to DiamondWare , in 2013; DW had attempted to claim ownership of the address in 2000, without success. DW eventually moved to the www.dw.com domain on 22 June 2015.
DW's news site is in seven core languages ( Arabic , Chinese , English, German, Spanish, Portuguese for Brazil , and Russian), as well as a mixture of news and information in 23 other languages in which Deutsche Welle broadcasts. Persian became the site's eighth focus language in 2007.
German and European news is DW's central focus, but the site also offers background information about Germany and German language courses.

Recent events
In 2001, Deutsche Welle (in conjunction with ARD and ZDF ) founded the German TV subscription TV channel for North American viewers. The project was shut down after four years owing to low subscriber numbers. It has since been replaced by the DW-TV channel (also a subscription service).
Unlike most other international broadcasters, DW-TV does not charge terrestrial stations for use of its programming, and as a result, its News Journal and other programmes are rebroadcast on numerous public broadcasting stations in several countries, including the United States, Australia, and New Zealand. In the Philippines , it is shown nationwide on Net 25 .
Deutsche Welle is still suffering from financial and staffing cuts. Its budget was reduced by about €75 million over five years, and of the 2,200 employees it had in 1994, only 1,200 remain. Further cuts are still expected.
In 2003, the German government passed a new "Deutsche Welle Law", which defined DW as a tri-media organization, making the Deutsche Welle website an equal partner with DW-TV and DW Radio. The website is available in 30 languages, but focuses on German, English, Spanish, Russian, Brazilian Portuguese, Chinese, and Arabic. Persian became the eighth focus language in 2007.
In March 2009, DW-TV expanded its television services in Asia with two new channels, namely DW-TV Asia and DW-TV Asia+. DW-TV Asia (DW-TV Asien in German) contains 16 hours of German programming and 8 hours in English, whilst DW-TV Asia+ contains 18 hours of English programmes plus 6 hours of German programmes. [11]
In August 2009, DW-TV's carriage in the United Kingdom on Sky channel 794 ceased, although the channel continues to be available via other European satellites receivable in the UK. [12]
In 2011, DW announced a major reduction of service including the closure of most of its FM services in the Balkans (except for Romani ), but that it would expand its network of FM partners in Africa. The radio production for Hausa, Kiswahili, French, and Portuguese for Africa were optimized for FM broadcasts and DW also produces a regional radio magazine daily in English, to be rebroadcast by partners in Africa.
Audio content in Arabic is distributed online, via mobile, or rebroadcast by partners.
DW announced it would focus on FM partnerships for Bengali, Urdu, Dari/Pashtu, and Indonesian for South Asia, India, Pakistan, and Afghanistan.
On 1 November 2011, DW discontinued shortwave broadcasts in German, Russian, Persian, and Indonesian and ended its English service outside of Africa. Chinese programming was reduced from 120 minutes to 60 minutes a week. As of November 2011, DW only broadcast radio programming via shortwave in: Amharic, Chinese, Dari, English and French for Africa, Hausa, Kiswahili, Pashtu, Portuguese for Africa and Urdu. [13]
On August 2016, DW has been accused of showing a pro-Russian bias , especially after the head of its Moscow office, Juri Rescheto, took part "in a Russian propaganda trip" to Crimea and then used the hashtag #CrimeaisRussia on twitter . [14]

Rebranding television news
On 22 June 2015, DW TV launched a 24-hour English-language news channel with a new design and a new studio as part of a rebrand to 'DW News'. Previously, DW's news programmes were called 'Journal' and broadcast in English in 3, 15 and 30-minute blocks. The new channel offers 30-minute updates every hour and 60-minute programmes twice a day on weekdays. DW News broadcasts from Berlin but frequently has live social media segments hosted from a specially-designed studio in Bonn. The German, Spanish and Arabic channels also received a new design.
At the same time, DW's news website moved from a .de URL to .com and added a social media stream to its front page. The refreshed DW services were launched under the tagline 'Made for Minds'.

Shortwave relay stations

Domestic shortwave relay stations

Transmitter sites in Germany
The Jülich radio transmitter site began operation in 1956 with eleven 100 kW Telefunken transmitters.
The Wertachtal site was authorized in 1972 and began service with four 500 kW transmitters. By 1989 there were 15 transmitters, four of which relayed the Voice of America .
The Nauen transmitter site was inherited from Radio Berlin International. RBI's Russian-made three 500 kW and one 100 kW transmitters were replaced by four Telefunken 500 kW transmitters and four rotatable antennas. Deutsche Welle no longer uses any of transmitters in Germany.

Shortwave relay stations outside Germany
DW used a relay station in Malta had three SW and one 600 kW-MW transmitter and gave partial coverage of the Americas, Southern Asia and the Far East. [16] It was inaugurated on 29 July 1974 in exchange for a grant of almost 1 million GBP. The station closed in January 1996.
Formerly, DW shared a transmitting station on Antigua in the Caribbean with the BBC. It was inaugurated on 1 November 1976 and closed on 31 March 2005. It had a relay-exchange with the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation that allowed DW to use two 250 kW transmitters in Sackville, New Brunswick until that facility closed down in 2012. [17]

Relay stations leasing transmitter time to DW
In 2013, DW leased time on the following relay stations: [18]

Directors General

DW services

DW Akademie
DW Akademie is Deutsche Welle's international center for media development , media consulting and journalism training. It offers training and consulting services to partners around the world. It works with broadcasting stations, media organizations, and universities especially in developing- and transition countries to promote free and independent media. The work is funded mainly by the German Federal Ministry of Economic Cooperation and Development . [19]
DW Akademie's journalism traineeship is an 18-month program for young journalists that provides editorial training in the three areas in which Deutsche Welle produces content: radio, television and online. It is aimed at aspiring journalists from Germany as well as from regions to which Deutsche Welle broadcasts. [20]
The Master's Program "International Media Studies" offered in cooperation with the University of Bonn and the University Bonn-Rhein-Sieg of Applied Sciences is based at DW Akademie. The four-semester program combines the disciplines media development, media regulation, and communications. The seminars are held in English and German and the degree is aimed at media representatives from developing and transition countries.
The managing director of DW Akademie is Gerda Meuer, who has worked as a journalist for different media outlets and as a correspondent for Inter Press Service, a news agency focused on development issues. [21]

See also

Notes and references

External links
WebPage index: 00051
Stephen Colbert
Stephen Tyrone Colbert [1] ( / k oʊ l ˈ b ɛər / , né: / ˈ k oʊ l b ər t / ; [2] born May 13, 1964) [3] is an American comedian, television host, and author. Colbert has hosted The Late Show with Stephen Colbert , a late-night television talk show on CBS , since September 8, 2015. [4] [5]
Colbert originally studied to be a dramatic actor, but became interested in improvisational theatre while attending Northwestern University , where he met Second City director Del Close . Colbert first performed professionally as an understudy for Steve Carell at Second City Chicago, where his troupe mates included Paul Dinello and Amy Sedaris , comedians with whom he developed the sketch comedy series, Exit 57 . He wrote and performed on the short-lived Dana Carvey Show before collaborating with Sedaris and Dinello again on the cult television series Strangers with Candy . He gained considerable attention for his role on the latter as closeted gay history teacher Chuck Noblet . His work as a correspondent on Comedy Central 's news-parody series The Daily Show gained him wide recognition.
In 2005, he left The Daily Show to host a spin-off series, The Colbert Report . Following The Daily Show ' s news-parody concept, The Colbert Report was a parody of personality-driven political opinion shows including The O'Reilly Factor , in which he portrayed a caricatured version of conservative political pundits . The series became one of Comedy Central's highest-rated series, earning Colbert an invitation to perform as featured entertainer at the White House Correspondents' Association Dinner in 2006.
Colbert has won nine Primetime Emmy Awards , two Grammy Awards , and two Peabody Awards . Colbert was named one of Time ' s 100 Most Influential People in 2006 and 2012. [6] [7] His book, I Am America (And So Can You!) , was #1 on The New York Times Best Seller list in 2007.

Early life
Colbert was born in Washington, D.C., [2] [8] the youngest of 11 children in a Catholic family. [9] [10]
He grew up on James Island, South Carolina . Colbert and his siblings, in descending order by age, are James, Edward, Mary, William, Margo, Thomas, Jay, Elizabeth , Paul, Peter, and Stephen. His father, James William Colbert, Jr. , was an immunologist and medical school dean at Yale University , Saint Louis University , and finally at the Medical University of South Carolina where he served as vice president for academic affairs. Stephen's mother, Lorna Elizabeth Colbert (née Tuck), was a homemaker. [11] [12] [13]
In interviews, Colbert has described his parents as devout people who also strongly valued intellectualism and taught their children that it was possible to question the church and still be Catholic. [14] The emphasis his family placed on intelligence and his observation of negative stereotypes of Southerners led Colbert to train himself to suppress his Southern accent while he was still quite young.
As a child, he observed that Southerners were often depicted as being less intelligent than other characters on scripted television; to avoid that stereotype, he taught himself to imitate the speech of American news anchors . [15] [16]
While Colbert sometimes comedically claims his surname is French, he is of 15/16ths Irish ancestry (one of his paternal great-great-grandmothers was of German and English descent). [17] [18] Many of his ancestors emigrated from Ireland to North America in the 19th century before and during the Great Famine . [11] [19]
Originally, his surname was pronounced / ˈ k oʊ l b ər t / ( KOHL -bərt ) in English; Stephen Colbert's father, James, wanted to pronounce the name / k oʊ l ˈ b ɛər / ( kohl- BAIR ), but maintained the /ˈkoʊlbərt/ pronunciation out of respect for his own father. He offered his children the option to pronounce the name whichever way they preferred. [9] Stephen started using /koʊlˈbɛər/ later in life when he transferred to Northwestern University , taking advantage of the opportunity to reinvent himself in a new place where no one knew him. [2] Stephen's elder brother, Edward, an intellectual property attorney, retained /ˈkoʊlbərt/ ; this was shown in a February 12, 2009, appearance on The Colbert Report , when his youngest brother asked him, " /ˈkoʊlbərt/ or /koʊlˈbɛər/ ?" Ed responded " /ˈkoʊlbərt/ ", to which Stephen jokingly replied, "See you in Hell". [20]
On September 11, 1974, when Colbert was ten years old, his father and two closest male siblings (by age), Peter and Paul, died in the crash of Eastern Air Lines Flight 212 while it was attempting to land in Charlotte, North Carolina . They were en route to enroll the two boys at Canterbury School in New Milford, Connecticut . [10] [21] Lorna Colbert relocated the family downtown to the more urban environment of East Bay Street in Charleston . Colbert found the transition difficult and did not easily make new friends in his new neighborhood. [9] Colbert later described himself during this time as detached, lacking a sense of importance regarding the things with which other children concerned themselves. [16] [22]
He developed a love of science fiction and fantasy novels, especially the works of J. R. R. Tolkien , of which he remains an avid fan. During his adolescence, he also developed an intense interest in fantasy role-playing games , especially Dungeons & Dragons , [22] [23] a pastime which he later characterized as an early experience in acting and improvisation . [24]
Colbert attended Charleston's Episcopal Porter-Gaud School , where he participated in several school plays and contributed to the school newspaper but was not highly motivated academically. [22] During his adolescence, he briefly fronted A Shot in the Dark , a Rolling Stones cover band . [25] [26] When he was younger, he had hoped to study marine biology , but surgery intended to repair a severely perforated eardrum caused him inner ear damage. The damage was severe enough that he was unable to pursue a career that would involve scuba diving . The damage also left him deaf in his right ear. [9] [27]
For a while, he was uncertain whether he would attend college, [28] but ultimately he applied and was accepted to Hampden–Sydney College in Virginia , where a friend had also enrolled. Arriving in 1982, he continued to participate in plays while studying mainly philosophy. [29] [22] He found the curriculum rigorous, but was more focused than he had been in high school and was able to apply himself to his studies. Despite the lack of a significant theater community at Hampden–Sydney, Colbert's interest in acting escalated during this time. After two years, he transferred in 1984 to Northwestern University as a theater major to study performance, emboldened by the realization that he loved performing, even when no one was coming to shows. [22] He graduated from Northwestern's School of Communication in 1986. [30]

Early career in comedy
While at Northwestern, Colbert studied with the intent of becoming a dramatic actor; mostly he performed in experimental plays and was uninterested in comedy. He began performing improvisation while in college, both in the campus improv team No Fun Mud Piranhas [31] and at the Annoyance Theatre in Chicago as a part of Del Close 's ImprovOlympic at a time when the project was focused on competitive, long-form improvisation , rather than improvisational comedy. "I wasn't gonna do Second City ", Colbert later recalled, "because those Annoyance people looked down on Second City because they thought it wasn't pure improv – there was a slightly snobby, mystical quality to the Annoyance people". [24] After Colbert graduated in 1986, however, he was in need of a job. A friend who was employed at Second City's box office offered him work answering phones and selling souvenirs. [22] Colbert accepted and discovered that Second City employees were entitled to take classes at their training center for free. [24] Despite his earlier aversion to the comedy group, he signed up for improvisation classes and enjoyed the experience greatly.
Shortly thereafter, he was hired to perform with Second City's touring company, initially as an understudy for Steve Carell . It was there he met Amy Sedaris and Paul Dinello , with whom he often collaborated later in his career. By their retelling, the three comedians did not get along at first – Dinello thought Colbert was uptight, pretentious and cold, while Colbert thought of Dinello as "an illiterate thug" [32] – but the trio became close friends while touring together, discovering that they shared a similar comic sensibility. [22]
When Sedaris and Dinello were offered the opportunity to create a television series for HBO Downtown Productions , Colbert left The Second City and relocated to New York to work with them on the sketch comedy show Exit 57 . [22] The series debuted on Comedy Central in 1995 and aired through 1996. Although it lasted for only 12 episodes, the show received favorable reviews [33] [34] and was nominated for five CableACE Awards in 1995, in categories including best writing, performance, and comedy series. [35]
Following the cancelation of Exit 57 , Colbert worked for six months as a cast member and writer on The Dana Carvey Show , alongside former Second City castmate Steve Carell, and also Robert Smigel , Charlie Kaufman , Louis C.K. , and Dino Stamatopoulos , among others. The series, described by one reviewer as " kamikaze satire" in "borderline-questionable taste", had sponsors pull out after its first episode aired and was cancelled after seven episodes. [36] Colbert then worked briefly as a freelance writer for Saturday Night Live with Robert Smigel. Smigel brought his animated sketch, The Ambiguously Gay Duo , to SNL from The Dana Carvey Show ; Colbert provided the voice of Ace on both series, opposite Steve Carell as Gary. Needing money, he also worked as a script consultant for VH1 and MTV , before taking a job filming humorous correspondent segments for Good Morning America . [22] Only two of the segments he proposed were ever produced and only one aired, but the job led his agent to refer him to The Daily Show 's then-producer, Madeline Smithberg , who hired Colbert on a trial basis in 1997. [37]

Television career

Strangers with Candy
During the same period, Colbert worked again with Sedaris and Dinello to develop a new comedy series for Comedy Central, Strangers with Candy . Comedy Central picked up the series in 1998 after Colbert had already begun working on The Daily Show . As a result, he accepted a reduced role, filming only around 20 Daily Show segments a year while he worked on the new series. [22]
Strangers with Candy was conceived of as a parody of after school specials , following the life of Jerri Blank , a 46-year-old dropout who returns to finish high school after 32 years of life on the street. Most noted by critics for its use of offensive humor, it concluded each episode by delivering to the audience a skewed, politically incorrect moral lesson. [38] Colbert served as a main writer alongside Sedaris and Dinello, and portrayed Jerri's strict but uninformed history teacher, Chuck Noblet , seen throughout the series dispensing inaccurate information to his classes. Colbert has likened this to the character he played on The Daily Show and later The Colbert Report , claiming that he has a very specific niche in portraying "poorly informed, high-status idiot" characters. [10] Another running joke throughout the series was that Noblet, a closeted homosexual, was having a "secret" affair with fellow teacher Geoffrey Jellineck , despite the fact that their relationship was apparent to everyone around them. This obliviousness also appears in Colbert's Daily Show and Colbert Report character.
Thirty episodes of Strangers with Candy were made, which aired on Comedy Central in 1999 and 2000. Though its ratings were not remarkable during its initial run, it has been characterized as a cult show with a small but dedicated audience. [39] Colbert reprised his role for a film adaptation , which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in 2005 and had a limited release in 2006. The film received mixed reviews. Colbert also co-wrote the screenplay with Sedaris and Dinello. [40]

The Daily Show
Colbert joined the cast of Comedy Central's parody-news series The Daily Show in 1997, when the show was in its second season. Originally one of four correspondents who filmed segments from remote locations in the style of network news field reporters, Colbert was referred to as "the new guy" on-air for his first two years on the show, during which time Craig Kilborn served as host. When Kilborn left the show prior to the 1999 season, Jon Stewart took over hosting duties, also serving as a writer and co-executive producer. From this point, the series gradually began to take on a more political tone and increase in popularity, particularly in the latter part of the 2000 U.S. presidential election season. The roles of the show's correspondents were expanded to include more in-studio segments and international reports, which were almost always done in the studio with the aid of a greenscreen . [22]
Unlike Stewart, who essentially hosted The Daily Show as himself, [41] Colbert developed a correspondent character for his pieces on the series. Colbert has described his correspondent character as "a fool who has spent a lot of his life playing not the fool – one who is able to cover it at least well enough to deal with the subjects that he deals with". [22] Colbert was frequently pitted against knowledgeable interview subjects, or against Stewart in scripted exchanges, with the resultant dialogue demonstrating the character's lack of knowledge of whatever subject he is discussing. [42] [22] Colbert also made generous use of humorous fallacies of logic in explaining his point of view on any topic. Other Daily Show correspondents have adopted a similar style; former correspondent Rob Corddry recalls that when he and Ed Helms first joined the show's cast in 2002, they "just imitated Stephen Colbert for a year or two". [43] Correspondent Aasif Mandvi has stated "I just decided I was going to do my best Stephen Colbert impression". [44]
Colbert appeared in several recurring segments for The Daily Show , including " Even Stevphen " with Steve Carell , [45] in which both characters were expected to debate a selected topic but instead would unleash their anger at one another. Colbert commonly hosted " This Week in God ", a report on topics in the news pertaining to religion, presented with the help of the "God Machine". Colbert filed reports from the floor of the Democratic National Convention and the Republican National Convention as a part of The Daily Show's award-winning coverage of the 2000 and 2004 U.S. Presidential elections ; many from the latter were included as part of their The Daily Show: Indecision 2004 DVD release. Other pieces that have been named as his signature segments include "Grouse Hunting in Shropshire", in which he reported on the "gayness" of British aristocracy, his mock lionization of a smoking-rights activist and apparent chain-smoker, and his cameo appearances during his faux campaign for President. [46] In several episodes of The Daily Show , Colbert filled in as anchor in the absence of Jon Stewart, including the full week of March 3, 2002, when Stewart was scheduled to host Saturday Night Live . After Colbert left the show, Rob Corddry took over "This Week in God" segments, although a recorded sample of Colbert's voice is still used as the sound effect for the God Machine. Later episodes of The Daily Show have reused older Colbert segments under the label "Klassic Kolbert". Colbert won three Emmys as a writer of The Daily Show in 2004, 2005, and 2006. [47]

The Colbert Report
Colbert hosted his own television show, The Colbert Report , from October 17, 2005, through December 18, 2014. [48] The Colbert Report was a Daily Show spin-off that parodied the conventions of television news broadcasting , [15] particularly cable-personality political talk shows like The O'Reilly Factor , Hannity , and Glenn Beck . [24] [49] Colbert hosted the show in-character as a blustery right-wing pundit , generally considered to be an extension of his character on The Daily Show . Conceived by co-creators Stewart, Colbert, and Ben Karlin in part as an opportunity to explore "the character-driven news", the series focused less on the day-to-day news style of the Daily Show , instead frequently concentrating on the foibles of the host-character himself. [50]
The concept for The Report was first seen in a series of Daily Show segments which advertised the then-fictional series as a joke. It was later developed by Stewart's Busboy Productions and pitched to Comedy Central , which green-lighted the program; Comedy Central had already been searching for a way to extend the successful Daily Show franchise beyond a half-hour. [51] The series opened to strong ratings, averaging 1.2 million viewers nightly during its first week on the air. Comedy Central signed a long-term contract for The Colbert Report within its first month on the air, when it immediately established itself among the network's highest-rated shows. [52] [53]
Much of Colbert's personal life was reflected in his character on The Colbert Report . With the extended exposure of the character on the show, he often referenced his interest in and knowledge of Catholicism, science fiction, and The Lord of the Rings , as well as using real facts to create his character's history. His alternate persona was also raised in South Carolina , is the youngest of 11 siblings and is married. [54] The actual Colbert's career history in acting and comedy, however, was often downplayed or even denied outright, and he frequently referred to having attended Dartmouth College (which was at the forefront of the conservative campus movement in the 1980s) rather than his actual alma mater, Northwestern. In July 2012, Colbert added two years to his contract with Comedy Central, extending the run of The Colbert Report until the end of 2014. [55]
The final episode on December 18, 2014, featured a rendition of " We'll Meet Again " and appearances from former guests of the show, including Jon Stewart , Randy Newman , Bryan Cranston , Willie Nelson , Yo-Yo Ma , Mandy Patinkin , Neil deGrasse Tyson , Tom Brokaw , David Gregory , J. J. Abrams , Big Bird , Gloria Steinem , Ken Burns , James Franco , Barry Manilow , Bob Costas , Jeff Daniels , Sam Waterston , Bill de Blasio , Katie Couric , Patrick Stewart , George Lucas , Henry Kissinger , Cookie Monster , Alan Alda , Eliot Spitzer , Vince Gilligan , Paul Krugman , and a text from Bill Clinton , and appearances by Alex Trebek, U.S. and coalition Afghanistan forces, and further characters (a space station astronaut, Santa, Abraham Lincoln, etc.). [48]

The Late Show
On April 10, 2014, CBS announced in a press release [56] that Colbert "will succeed David Letterman as the host of The Late Show , effective when Mr. Letterman retires from the broadcast." On January 12, 2015, CBS announced that Colbert would premiere as the Late Show host on Tuesday, September 8, 2015. [57]
The first guest of the new Late Show was George Clooney . [58] The show has a much more political focus than David Letterman's Late Show.

2017 Emmy Awards
Colbert will host the 69th Primetime Emmy Awards on September 17, 2017. [59]

Politics

2006 White House Correspondents' Association Dinner
On Saturday, April 29, 2006, Colbert was the featured entertainer for the 2006 White House Correspondents' Association Dinner. Standing a few yards from U.S. President George W. Bush [60] – in front of an audience the Associated Press called a "Who's Who of power and celebrity" [61] – Colbert delivered a searing routine targeting the president and the media. [62] In his politically conservative character from The Colbert Report , Colbert satirized the George W. Bush Administration and the White House Press Corps with such lines as:
Colbert received a chilly response from the audience. [64] His jokes were often met with silence and muttering, apart from the enthusiastic laughter of a few in the audience. [65] The major media outlets paid little attention to it initially. Washington Post columnist Dan Froomkin and Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism professor Todd Gitlin claimed that this was because Colbert's routine was as critical of the media as it was of Bush. [66] [67] Richard Cohen , also writing for The Washington Post , responded that the routine was not funny. [68] The video of Colbert's performance became an internet and media sensation, [69] [70] while, in the week following the speech, ratings for The Colbert Report rose by 37% to average just under 1.5 million total viewers per episode. [71] In Time magazine James Poniewozik called it "the political-cultural touchstone issue of 2006". [72] Writing six months later, New York Times columnist Frank Rich referred to Colbert's speech as a "cultural primary" and called it the "defining moment" of the 2006 midterm elections . [73] [74]

2008 Presidential bid
Under his fictional persona in The Colbert Report , Colbert dropped hints of a potential presidential run throughout 2007, with speculation intensifying following the release of his book, I Am America (And So Can You!) , which was rumored to be a sign that he was indeed testing the waters for a future bid for the White House. On October 16, 2007, he announced his candidacy on his show, stating his intention to run both on the Republican and Democratic platforms, but only as a " favorite son " in his native South Carolina. [75] He later abandoned plans to run as a Republican due to the $35,000 fee required to file for the South Carolina primary, [76] however he continued to seek a place on the Democratic ballot and on October 28, 2007, campaigned in the South Carolina state capital of Columbia, where he was presented with the key to the city by Mayor Bob Coble. [77]
After announcing his presidential ticket, he asked his viewers to cast their votes by donating to Donorschoose.org , an online charity connecting individuals to classrooms in need. [78] Colbert's promotion inspired $68,000 in donations to South Carolina classrooms, which benefited over 14,000 low-income students. [79] Colbert teamed up with Donorschoose.org again in 2008 by asking supporters of Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton to do the same. As a lead-up to the Pennsylvania primary, he created a "straw poll that makes a difference", where people could donate to Pennsylvania classroom projects in honor of their favorite candidate. [80] Colbert viewers donated $185,000 to projects reaching 43,000 students in Pennsylvania public schools. [81]
On November 1, 2007, the South Carolina Democratic Party executive council voted 13–3 to refuse Colbert's application onto the ballot. "The general sense of the council was that he wasn't a serious candidate and that was why he wasn't selected to be on the ballot", stated John Werner, the party's director. In addition, he was declared "not viable", [82] as he was running in only one state. [83] Several days later he announced that he was dropping out of the race, saying that he did not wish to put the country through an agonizing Supreme Court battle . [84] CNN has reported that Obama supporters pressured the South Carolina Democratic Executive Council to keep Colbert off the ballot. One anonymous member of the council told CNN that former State Superintendent of Education Inez Tenenbaum had placed pressure on them to refuse Colbert's application despite his steady rise in polls. [85]
Though Colbert's real-life presidential campaign had ended, Marvel Comics editor-in-chief Joe Quesada established in an interview on The Colbert Report that Colbert's campaign was still going strong in the fictional Marvel Universe , citing the cover art of a then-recent issue of The Amazing Spider-Man which featured a Colbert campaign billboard in the background. Background appearances of Colbert campaign ads continued to appear in Marvel Comics publications, as late as August 2008's Secret Invasion No. 5 (which also features a cameo of an alien Skrull posing as Colbert). In October 2008, Colbert made an extended 8-page appearance webslinging with Spider-Man in The Amazing Spider-Man issue No. 573. [86] Colbert voiced the president of the U.S. in the 2009 film Monsters vs. Aliens .

2009 solidarity with U.S. troops in Iraq War
Stephen Colbert arrived in Baghdad, Iraq , on June 5, 2009, to film a week of shows called "Operation Iraqi Stephen: Going Commando " sponsored by the USO (United Service Organizations). [87] Colbert had a suit tailored for him in the Army Combat Uniform pattern. [88] During the first episode (which featured a cameo appearance from U.S. president Barack Obama ), Colbert had his hair cropped in a military style to show his solidarity with the troops. One Army major said that "shaving of the hair is an amazing show of support" that was "very touching." USO Senior Vice President John Hanson said the shows are an important diversion for the troops. [89]

2010 Congressional testimony
On September 24, 2010, Colbert testified in character before the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration, Citizenship, and Border Security. He was invited by committee chairwoman Zoe Lofgren to describe his experience participating in the United Farm Workers ' "Take Our Jobs" program, where he spent a day working alongside migrant workers in upstate New York. [90] [91] [92] At the end of his often-humorous testimony, Colbert broke character in responding to a question from Rep. Judy Chu , D-CA, and explained his purpose for being at the hearing:
Democratic committee member John Conyers questioned whether it was appropriate for the comedian to appear before Congress and asked him to leave the hearing. [94] Though Colbert offered to depart at the direction of the committee chairwoman, Lofgren requested that he stay at least until all opening testimony had been completed, whereupon Conyers withdrew his request. [95]
Conservative pundits took aim at Colbert's Congress testimony not long after. [96]

2010 Washington D.C. rallies
In September 2010, following Glenn Beck 's Restoring Honor rally , a campaign developed that called for Colbert to hold his own rally at the Lincoln Memorial . [99] On the September 10, 2010, episode of the Daily Show [100] and The Colbert Report , Stewart and Colbert made preannouncements of a future event. On September 16, 2010, Stewart and Colbert announced competing rallies on the Washington, DC, Mall on October 30, 2010, Stewart's " Rally to Restore Sanity ", and Colbert's " March to Keep Fear Alive ". Both were eventually merged into the Rally to Restore Sanity and/or Fear .

Super PAC and President of the United States of South Carolina
In May 2011, Colbert filed a request with the Federal Election Commission (FEC) asking for a media exemption for coverage of his political action committee , ColbertPAC, on The Colbert Report . [101] [102]
In June 2011, during a public meeting, the FEC voted 5–1 to grant The Colbert Report a limited media exemption. The exemption allows unlimited donations of airtime and show resources to promote the Colbert Super PAC without requiring disclosure to the FEC, but only for ads appearing on The Colbert Report . Following the hearing, Colbert formally filed paperwork for the creation of his Super PAC with the FEC secretary. [103]
After the 2012 New Hampshire primary, a poll for the subsequent South Carolina primary taken by Public Policy Polling (of 1,112 likely GOP voters, Jan 5–7, 2012) was reported to place Colbert at 5%, one point ahead of Jon Huntsman polling at 4%, in spite of the fact that Colbert was not on the ballot. This poll showed Colbert to be closely behind Rick Perry's 7% and Ron Paul's 8% (with Romney at 27%, Gingrich 23% and Santorum at 18%). On the January 11 episode of The Colbert Report , Colbert asked his audience if he should run for President in South Carolina, to which he received strong applause. He then stated that he would be making a "Major Announcement" during the next day's show. On January 12, Colbert started his show by discussing his role in the Presidential campaign, then addressed the law preventing him from being a Presidential candidate while running his Super PAC. With the help of his lawyer Trevor Potter, he then signed over control of his Super PAC to Jon Stewart, with the organization title then being referred to as "The Definitely Not Coordinating With Stephen Colbert Super PAC". [104] Immediately after this legal block was out of the way, Colbert announced, "I am forming an exploratory committee to lay the groundwork for my possible candidacy for the President of the United States of South Carolina. I'm doin' it!" He reiterated in the interview portion of that show that "I'm still in the exploratory phase" of his Presidential campaign.
On the January 16, 2012, episode, Colbert encouraged his viewers to vote for Herman Cain in the South Carolina primary. As Cain was still on the ballot, despite having recently dropped out of the race, Colbert announced that he would consider any votes cast for Cain to be in direct support of his own possible candidacy.

Other work
Colbert is co-author of the satirical text-and-picture novel Wigfield: The Can Do Town That Just May Not , which was published in 2003 by Hyperion Books . The novel was a collaboration between Colbert, Amy Sedaris , and Paul Dinello , and tells the story of a small town threatened by the impending destruction of a massive dam. The narrative is presented as a series of fictional interviews with the town's residents, accompanied by photos. The three authors toured performing an adaptation of Wigfield on stage the same year the book was released. [105]
Colbert appeared in a small supporting role in the 2005 film adaptation of Bewitched . He has made guest appearances on the television series Curb Your Enthusiasm , Spin City , and Law & Order: Criminal Intent , [106] and on the first season of the US improvisational comedy show Whose Line Is It Anyway? . He voiced the characters of Reducto and Phil Ken Sebben in the Adult Swim 's Harvey Birdman, Attorney at Law , but left the show in 2005 to work on The Colbert Report . His characters were both killed, though he returned to voice Phil for the series finale. Colbert also has provided voices for Cartoon Network's The Venture Bros. , Comedy Central's Crank Yankers , and American Dad! , and for Canadian animated comedy series The Wrong Coast . He appeared as Homer Simpson 's life coach, Colby Krause, in The Simpsons episode " He Loves to Fly and He D'ohs ". [107] [108]
Colbert filled in for Sam Seder on the second episode of The Majority Report on Air America Radio , and has also done reports for The Al Franken Show . He appeared on a track on Wig in a Box , a tribute album for Hedwig and the Angry Inch . Colbert read the part of Leopold Bloom in Bloomsday on Broadway XXIV: Love Literature Language Lust: Leopold's Women Bloom on June 16, 2005, at Symphony Space in New York City. [14] He appeared in a series of TV commercials for General Motors , as a not-too-bright investigator searching for the elusive (and non-existent in real life) " Mr. Goodwrench ". He also portrayed the letter Z in Sesame Street : All-Star Alphabet , a 2005 video release.
Colbert is a producer of The 1 Second Film , the world's largest nonprofit collaborative art film. His video request that IMDb list his credit for The 1 Second Film ("it is as valid as most of my credits") enabled thousands of the film's producers to be listed in the massive movie database until they were removed in early 2007. [109]
Colbert has released one book associated with The Colbert Report , I Am America (And So Can You!) . It was released on October 7, 2007, by Grand Central Publishing . Grand Central Publishing is the successor to Warner Books, which published America (The Book) , written by The Daily Show staff. The book contains similar political satire, but was written primarily by Colbert himself rather than as a collaboration with his Colbert Report writing staff. [110]
On November 23, 2008, his Christmas special, A Colbert Christmas: The Greatest Gift of All! , aired on Comedy Central . It was released on DVD in November 2008. [111]
In January 2010, Colbert was named the assistant sports psychologist for the US Olympic speed skating team at the 2010 Winter Olympics . [112] He was also invited to be part of NBC 's 2010 Winter Olympics coverage team by Dick Ebersol , chairman of NBC Universal Sports. [113] In April 2011, Colbert performed as Harry in the concert-style revival of Stephen Sondheim 's musical Company , presented by the New York Philharmonic at the Lincoln Center . [114] The show, featuring Neil Patrick Harris in the starring role, ran for four nights and was filmed for later showings in movie theaters, which began June 15. [114] In May 2011, Colbert joined the Charleston to Bermuda Race yachting race, as captain of the ship "the Spirit of Juno". [115] He finished second, five miles behind leaders "Tucana". [116]
After the resignation of South Carolina Senator Jim DeMint to run Heritage Foundation , Colbert was named a possible candidate for appointment to the seat being vacated by DeMint, which would have triggered a special election in 2014 to finish out DeMint's term. Although Governor Nikki Haley announced promptly that she had no intention to nominate Colbert to the Senate, a poll showed Colbert as a favorite among South Carolina voters. [117] [118]
Colbert guest-hosted Only in Monroe , a public access television show in Monroe, Michigan , for an episode that aired July 1, 2015. He interviewed the program's regular hosts, and also the rapper Eminem (whom he pretended never to have heard of), and put a humorous slant on the local news and community calendar. [119] [120]
On July 17, 2016, Colbert hijacked the 2016 Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Ohio , while dressed as Caesar Flickerman from the The Hunger Games series. [121] [122] After he was taken down from the stage, he commented, "Look, I know I am not supposed to be up here but let's be honest, neither is Donald Trump ." [123] Colbert also dressed as Flickerman on his show, prior to the stunt, to announce the candidates who had ended their runs in the 2016 election . [124]

Influences
Colbert has said his comedy influences include: Don Novello , Maurice Sendak , Bill Cosby , [29] George Carlin , [125] Dean Martin , [24] Jon Stewart , [2] Steve Martin , [126] and David Letterman . [127]
Among comedians who say they were influenced by Colbert are Rob Corddry , [43] Ed Helms , [43] Aasif Mandvi , [44] and James Corden . [128]

Personal life
Although, by his own account, he was not particularly political before joining the cast of The Daily Show , Colbert has described himself as a Democrat according to a 2004 interview. [129] [130] In an interview at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard Institute of Politics , he stated that he has "no problems with Republicans, just Republican policies." [131] Colbert is a practicing Roman Catholic and a Sunday school teacher and an ordained minister with the Universal Life Church Monastery . [14] [132] [133] [134] [135]
Colbert lives in Montclair, New Jersey , [136] with his wife, Evelyn McGee-Colbert, who appeared with him in an episode of Strangers with Candy as his mother. She also had an uncredited cameo as a nurse in the series pilot and a credited one (as his wife, Clair) in the film . McGee-Colbert actually met Jon Stewart, later a good friend of Colbert, before she met her husband in 1990 (at the world premiere of Hydrogen Jukebox [137] [138] ).
She is the daughter of prominent Charleston civil litigator Joseph McGee, of the firm Buist Moore Smythe McGee. The couple has three children: Madeleine, Peter, and John. [139] Colbert preferred that his children not watch his show The Colbert Report , saying that "kids can't understand irony or sarcasm, and I don't want them to perceive me as insincere." [16] Colbert took the Myers Briggs personality test during a segment of his The Late Show which resulted in him being an INFP . [140]
Colbert's mother died at the age of 92 on June 12, 2013, after a period of ill health. [141]

Awards and honors
In 2000, Colbert and the other Daily Show writers were the recipients of three Emmy Awards as writers for The Daily Show and again in 2005 and 2006. In 2005 he was nominated for a Satellite Award for his performance on The Colbert Report and again in 2006. [47] He was also nominated for three Emmys for The Colbert Report in 2006, including Best Performance in a Variety, Musical Program or Special, which he lost to Barry Manilow . [142] Manilow and Colbert would go on to jokingly sign and notarize a revolving biannual custody agreement for the Emmy on The Colbert Report episode aired on October 30, 2006. He lost the same category to Tony Bennett in 2007 and Don Rickles in 2008.
In January 2006, the American Dialect Society named truthiness , which Colbert coined on the premiere episode of The Colbert Report , as its 2005 Word of the Year . Colbert devoted time on five successive episodes to bemoaning the failure of the Associated Press to mention his role in popularizing the word truthiness in its news coverage of the Word of the Year. [143] [144] On December 9, 2006, Merriam-Webster also announced that it selected truthiness as its Word of the Year for 2006. Votes were accepted on their website, and according to poll results, "truthiness" won by a five-to-one margin. [145]
In June 2006, after speaking at the school's commencement ceremony, Colbert received an honorary Doctorate of Fine Arts degree from Knox College . [146] Time named Stephen Colbert as one of the 100 most influential people in 2006 and 2012 [6] [7] and in May 2006, New York magazine listed Colbert (and Jon Stewart ) as one of its top dozen influential persons in media. [147] Colbert was named Person of the Year by the U.S. Comedy Arts Festival in Aspen , Colorado on March 3, 2007 [148] and was also given the Speaker of the Year Award by The Cross Examination Debate Association (CEDA) on March 24, 2007 for his "drive to expose the rhetorical shortcomings of contemporary political discourse". [149]
Colbert was named the 2nd Sexiest TV News Anchor in September 2006 by Maxim Online , next to Mélissa Theuriau of France and was the only man featured on the list. [150] In November 2006, he was named a "sexy surprise" by People in the Sexiest Man Alive honors [151] and in the December 2006 issue of GQ he was named one of GQ's "Men of the Year". [152] In 2012, he was listed as No. 69 on Maxim Magazine 's Hot 100, becoming the first man to be included on the list. [153]
Colbert has been nominated for five TCA Awards for The Colbert Report by the Television Critics Association . He has also received two Peabody Awards .
After the Saginaw Spirit defeated the Oshawa Generals in Ontario Junior League Hockey , Oshawa Mayor John Gray declared March 20, 2007 (the mayor's own birthday), Stephen Colbert Day , honoring a previous bet with Stephen. At the event, Mayor Gray referred to the publicity the bet brought the city, remarking, "This is the way to lose a bet". [154]
Colbert was honored for the Gutsiest Move on the Spike TV Guys' Choice Awards on June 13, 2007, for his performance at the 2006 White House Correspondents' Association Dinner. [155] In August 2007, Virgin America named an airplane. "Air Colbert", in his honor. [156] On October 28, 2007, Colbert received the key to the city of Columbia, South Carolina from Mayor Bob Coble . [157]
On December 20, 2007, Colbert was named Celebrity of the Year by The Associated Press . [158] On April 2, 2008, he received a Peabody Award for The Colbert Report , saying in response, "I proudly accept this award and begrudgingly forgive the Peabody Committee for taking three years to recognize greatness". [159]
In 2008, Colbert won the Emmy Award for writing again, this time as a writer for The Colbert Report . Colbert delivered the Class Day address to the graduating class of Princeton University on June 2, 2008, and accepted the Class of 2008 Understandable Vanity Award , consisting of a sketch of Colbert and a mirror. [160] He also has been announced as the Person of the Year for the 12th annual Webby Awards . [161]
In January 2010, Colbert received the Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album for his album A Colbert Christmas: The Greatest Gift of All! . He also announced the nominees for Song of the Year while toting a pre-released Apple iPad . [162] Colbert was the 2011 commencement speaker for Northwestern University , and received an honorary degree. [163] In 2013, Colbert again won the Emmy award for writing for The Colbert Report . [164] [165] [166] In 2014, Colbert won the 2014 Best Spoken Word Album for his audiobook America Again: Re-becoming The Greatness We Never Weren't . [167] [168]
In December 2014, Paste named his Twitter one of the "The 75 Best Twitter Accounts of 2014" ranking it at #7. [169] Colbert received an honorary degree from Wake Forest University as the 2015 commencement speaker. [170]
In 2015, Colbert was awarded the third highest honor within the Department of the Army Civilian Awards, the Outstanding Civilian Service Award, for substantial contributions to the U.S. Army community.

Ben & Jerry's Stephen Colbert's AmeriCone Dream ice cream
In February 2007, Ben & Jerry's unveiled a new ice cream flavor in honor of Colbert, named Stephen Colbert's AmeriCone Dream . Colbert waited until Easter to sample the ice cream because he "gave up sweets for Lent ". [171] Colbert will donate all proceeds to charity through the new Stephen Colbert AmeriCone Dream Fund, which will distribute the money to various causes. [172] [173]

Species named in honor
At least five species have been given scientific names honoring Colbert. In 2008 a species of California trapdoor spider was named Aptostichus stephencolberti . [174] [175] [176] The spider was named for Colbert after he reported on his television series that Jason Bond , a professor of biology at East Carolina University , had named a different species of spider Myrmekiaphila neilyoungi after the Canadian rock star Neil Young , and began to appeal for a species of animal to be named after him. [177] On a later edition of The Colbert Report , Colbert revealed that Bond would name a spider after him, with Colbert claiming, "And all I had to do was shamelessly beg on national television." [178] Other species named for Colbert include a species of Venezuelan diving beetle named Agaporomorphus colberti and a Chilean stonefly named Diamphipnoa colberti , both formally described in 2008. [179] [180] On his 45th birthday, Colbert was sent a framed print of his eponymous beetle by the biologists who named it. [181] In 2014, a species of parasitic wasp from Ecuador, Aleiodes colberti , was named for Colbert, along with newly described species named for celebrities Jon Stewart, Jimmy Fallon , Ellen DeGeneres , and Shakira , [182] [183] and in 2016 a rove beetle , Sonoma colberti , was named after Colbert's on-screen persona. [184]

COLBERT Treadmill
In 2009, NASA engineered a new treadmill for the International Space Station . It was brought to the ISS by the Space Shuttle Discovery during the STS-128 mission in August 2009. The complex machine is now used eight hours daily by astronauts and cosmonauts aboard the space station in order to maintain their muscle mass and bone density while spending long periods of time in a zero-gravity environment. While engineers at NASA were constructing this treadmill, it was simply called T-2 for more than two years. However, on April 14, 2009, NASA renamed it the "Combined Operational Load-Bearing External Resistance Treadmill", or COLBERT. [185] NASA named the treadmill after Colbert, [186] who took an interest during the Node 3 naming census for the ISS module, Tranquility .
Colbert urged his followers to post the name "Colbert", which upon completion of the census received the most entries totaling 230,539, some 40,000 votes more than the second-place choice, Serenity. [187] The COLBERT is expected to last the life of the ISS and will have seen about 38,000 miles of running when the Space Station is retired in 2020 but was also built with 150,000-mile lifespan if needed till 2028 or longer. Colbert realized he was the recipient of an extremely rare honor when astronaut Suni Williams came on The Colbert Report to announce that NASA had named the treadmill after him. Despite being a backronym , the COLBERT is the only piece of NASA-engineered equipment in space that is named after a living human being. [188]

Filmography

Published works
WebPage index: 00052
Email
Electronic mail , or email , is a method of exchanging digital messages between people using digital devices such as computers, mobile phones and other electronics. Email first entered substantial use in the 1960s and by the mid-1970s had taken the form now recognized as email. Email operates across computer networks , which today is primarily the Internet . Some early email systems required the author and the recipient to both be online at the same time, in common with instant messaging . Today's email systems are based on a store-and-forward model. Email servers accept, forward, deliver, and store messages. Neither the users nor their computers are required to be online simultaneously; they need to connect only briefly, typically to a mail server or a webmail interface, for as long as it takes to send or receive messages.
Originally an ASCII text-only communications medium, Internet email was extended by Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) to carry text in other character sets and multimedia content attachments. International email , with internationalized email addresses using UTF-8 , has been standardized, but as of 2017 it has not been widely adopted. [2]
The history of modern Internet email services reaches back to the early ARPANET , with standards for encoding email messages published as early as 1973 ( RFC 561 ). An email message sent in the early 1970s looks very similar to a basic email sent today. Email had an important role in creating the Internet, [3] and the conversion from ARPANET to the Internet in the early 1980s produced the core of the current services.

Terminology
Historically, the term electronic mail was used generically for any electronic document transmission. For example, several writers in the early 1970s used the term to describe fax document transmission. [4] [5] As a result, it is difficult to find the first citation for the use of the term with the more specific meaning it has today.
Electronic mail has been most commonly called email or e-mail since around 1993, [6] but variations of the spelling have been used:
An Internet e-mail consists [24] of an envelope and content; the content in turn consists [25] of a header and a body.

 Origin
Computer -based mail and messaging became possible with the advent of time-sharing computers in the early 1960s, and informal methods of using shared files to pass messages were soon expanded into the first mail systems. Most developers of early mainframes and minicomputers developed similar, but generally incompatible, mail applications. Over time, a complex web of gateways and routing systems linked many of them. Many US universities were part of the ARPANET , which aimed at software portability between its systems. That portability helped make the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) increasingly influential.
For a time in the late 1980s and early 1990s, it seemed likely that either a proprietary commercial system or the X.400 email system, part of the Government Open Systems Interconnection Profile (GOSIP), would predominate. However, once the final restrictions on carrying commercial traffic over the Internet ended in 1995, [26] [27] a combination of factors made the current Internet suite of SMTP, POP3 and IMAP email protocols the standard.

Operation
The diagram to the right shows a typical sequence of events [28] that takes place when sender Alice transmits a message using a mail user agent (MUA) addressed to the email address of the recipient.
In addition to this example, alternatives and complications exist in the email system:
Many MTAs used to accept messages for any recipient on the Internet and do their best to deliver them. Such MTAs are called open mail relays . This was very important in the early days of the Internet when network connections were unreliable. [ citation needed ] However, this mechanism proved to be exploitable by originators of unsolicited bulk email and as a consequence open mail relays have become rare, [30] and many MTAs do not accept messages from open mail relays.

Message format 
The Internet email message format is now defined by RFC 5322 , with encoding of non-ASCII data and multimedia content attachments being defined in RFC 2045 through RFC 2049 , collectively called Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions or MIME . RFC 5322 replaced the earlier RFC 2822 in 2008, and in turn RFC 2822 in 2001 replaced RFC 822 – which had been the standard for Internet email for nearly 20 years. Published in 1982, RFC 822 was based on the earlier RFC 733 for the ARPANET . [31]
Internet email messages consist of two major sections, the message header and the message body, collectively known as content. The header is structured into fields such as From, To, CC, Subject, Date, and other information about the email. In the process of transporting email messages between systems, SMTP communicates delivery parameters and information using message header fields. The body contains the message, as unstructured text, sometimes containing a signature block at the end. The header is separated from the body by a blank line.

Message header
Each message has exactly one header , which is structured into fields . Each field has a name and a value. RFC 5322 specifies the precise syntax.
Informally, each line of text in the header that begins with a printable character begins a separate field. The field name starts in the first character of the line and ends before the separator character ":". The separator is then followed by the field value (the "body" of the field). The value is continued onto subsequent lines if those lines have a space or tab as their first character. Field names and values are restricted to 7-bit ASCII characters. Some non-ASCII values may be represented using MIME encoded words .

Header fields
Email header fields can be multi-line, and each line should be at most 78 characters long and in no event more than 998 characters long. [32] Header fields defined by RFC 5322 can only contain US-ASCII characters; for encoding characters in other sets, a syntax specified in RFC 2047 can be used. [33] Recently the IETF EAI working group has defined some standards track extensions, [34] [35] replacing previous experimental extensions, to allow UTF-8 encoded Unicode characters to be used within the header. In particular, this allows email addresses to use non-ASCII characters. Such addresses are supported by Google and Microsoft products, and promoted by some governments. [36]
The message header must include at least the following fields: [37] [38]
RFC 3864 describes registration procedures for message header fields at the IANA ; it provides for permanent and provisional field names, including also fields defined for MIME, netnews, and HTTP, and referencing relevant RFCs. Common header fields for email include: [39]
Note that the To: field is not necessarily related to the addresses to which the message is delivered. The actual delivery list is supplied separately to the transport protocol, SMTP , which may or may not originally have been extracted from the header content. The "To:" field is similar to the addressing at the top of a conventional letter which is delivered according to the address on the outer envelope. In the same way, the "From:" field does not have to be the real sender of the email message. Some mail servers apply email authentication systems to messages being relayed. Data pertaining to server's activity is also part of the header, as defined below.
SMTP defines the trace information of a message, which is also saved in the header using the following two fields: [41]
Other fields that are added on top of the header by the receiving server may be called trace fields , in a broader sense. [42]

Message body

Content encoding
Internet email was originally designed for 7-bit ASCII . [47] Most email software is 8-bit clean but must assume it will communicate with 7-bit servers and mail readers. The MIME standard introduced character set specifiers and two content transfer encodings to enable transmission of non-ASCII data: quoted printable for mostly 7-bit content with a few characters outside that range and base64 for arbitrary binary data. The 8BITMIME and BINARY extensions were introduced to allow transmission of mail without the need for these encodings, but many mail transport agents still do not support them fully. In some countries, several encoding schemes coexist; as the result, by default, the message in a non-Latin alphabet language appears in non-readable form (the only exception is coincidence, when the sender and receiver use the same encoding scheme). Therefore, for international character sets , Unicode is growing in popularity. [ citation needed ]

Plain text and HTML
Most modern graphic email clients allow the use of either plain text or HTML for the message body at the option of the user. HTML email messages often include an automatically generated plain text copy as well, for compatibility reasons. Advantages of HTML include the ability to include in-line links and images, set apart previous messages in block quotes , wrap naturally on any display, use emphasis such as underlines and italics , and change font styles. Disadvantages include the increased size of the email, privacy concerns about web bugs , abuse of HTML email as a vector for phishing attacks and the spread of malicious software . [48]
Some web-based mailing lists recommend that all posts be made in plain-text, with 72 or 80 characters per line [49] [50] for all the above reasons, but also because they have a significant number of readers using text-based email clients such as Mutt . Some Microsoft email clients allow rich formatting using their proprietary Rich Text Format (RTF), but this should be avoided unless the recipient is guaranteed to have a compatible email client . [51]

Servers and client applications
Messages are exchanged between hosts using the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol with software programs called mail transfer agents (MTAs); and delivered to a mail store by programs called mail delivery agents (MDAs, also sometimes called local delivery agents, LDAs). Accepting a message obliges an MTA to deliver it, [52] and when a message cannot be delivered, that MTA must send a bounce message back to the sender, indicating the problem.
Users can retrieve their messages from servers using standard protocols such as POP or IMAP , or, as is more likely in a large corporate environment, with a proprietary protocol specific to Novell Groupwise , Lotus Notes or Microsoft Exchange Servers . Programs used by users for retrieving, reading, and managing email are called mail user agents (MUAs).
Mail can be stored on the client , on the server side, or in both places. Standard formats for mailboxes include Maildir and mbox . Several prominent email clients use their own proprietary format and require conversion software to transfer email between them. Server-side storage is often in a proprietary format but since access is through a standard protocol such as IMAP , moving email from one server to another can be done with any MUA supporting the protocol.
Many current email users do not run MTA, MDA or MUA programs themselves, but use a web-based email platform, such as Gmail, Hotmail, or Yahoo! Mail, that performs the same tasks. [53] Such webmail interfaces allow users to access their mail with any standard web browser , from any computer, rather than relying on an email client.

Filename extensions
Upon reception of email messages, email client applications save messages in operating system files in the file system. Some clients save individual messages as separate files, while others use various database formats, often proprietary, for collective storage. A historical standard of storage is the mbox format. The specific format used is often indicated by special filename extensions :
Some applications (like Apple Mail ) leave attachments encoded in messages for searching while also saving separate copies of the attachments. Others separate attachments from messages and save them in a specific directory.

URI scheme mailto
The URI scheme , as registered with the IANA , defines the mailto: scheme for SMTP email addresses. Though its use is not strictly defined, URLs of this form are intended to be used to open the new message window of the user's mail client when the URL is activated, with the address as defined by the URL in the To: field. [54]

Types

Web-based email
Many email providers have a web-based email client (e.g. AOL Mail , Gmail , Outlook.com , Hotmail and Yahoo! Mail ). This allows users to log into the email account by using any compatible web browser to send and receive their email. Mail is typically not downloaded to the client, so can't be read without a current Internet connection.

POP3 email services
The Post Office Protocol 3 (POP3) is a mail access protocol used by a client application to read messages from the mail server. Received messages are often deleted from the server . POP supports simple download-and-delete requirements for access to remote mailboxes (termed maildrop in the POP RFC's). [55]

IMAP email servers
The Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP) provides features to manage a mailbox from multiple devices. Small portable devices like smartphones are increasingly used to check email while travelling, and to make brief replies, larger devices with better keyboard access being used to reply at greater length. IMAP shows the headers of messages, the sender and the subject and the device needs to request to download specific messages. Usually mail is left in folders in the mail server.

MAPI email servers
Messaging Application Programming Interface (MAPI) is used by Microsoft Outlook to communicate to Microsoft Exchange Server - and to a range of other email server products such as Axigen Mail Server , Kerio Connect , Scalix , Zimbra , HP OpenMail , IBM Lotus Notes , Zarafa , and Bynari where vendors have added MAPI support to allow their products to be accessed directly via Outlook.

Uses

Business and organizational use
Email has been widely accepted by business, governments and non-governmental organizations in the developed world, and it is one of the key parts of an 'e-revolution' in workplace communication (with the other key plank being widespread adoption of highspeed Internet ). A sponsored 2010 study on workplace communication found 83% of U.S. knowledge workers felt email was critical to their success and productivity at work. [56]
It has some key benefits to business and other organizations, including:

Email marketing
Email marketing via " opt-in " is often successfully used to send special sales offerings and new product information. [57] Depending on the recipient's culture, [58] email sent without permission—such as an "opt-in"—is likely to be viewed as unwelcome " email spam ".

Personal use

Personal computer
Many users access their personal email from friends and family members using a personal computer in their house or apartment.

Mobile
Email has become widely used on smartphones and Wi-Fi -enabled laptops and tablet computers . Mobile "apps" for email increase accessibility to the medium for users who are out of their home. While in the earliest years of email, users could only access email on desktop computers, in the 2010s, it is possible for users to check their email when they are away from home, whether they are across town or across the world. Alerts can also be sent to the smartphone or other device to notify them immediately of new messages. This has given email the ability to be used for more frequent communication between users and allowed them to check their email and write messages throughout the day. Today, there are an estimated 1.4 billion email users worldwide and 50 billion non-spam emails that are sent daily.
Individuals often check email on smartphones for both personal and work-related messages. It was found that US adults check their email more than they browse the web or check their Facebook accounts, making email the most popular activity for users to do on their smartphones. 78% of the respondents in the study revealed that they check their email on their phone. [59] It was also found that 30% of consumers use only their smartphone to check their email, and 91% were likely to check their email at least once per day on their smartphone. However, the percentage of consumers using email on smartphone ranges and differs dramatically across different countries. For example, in comparison to 75% of those consumers in the US who used it, only 17% in India did. [60]

Issues

Attachment size limitation
Email messages may have one or more attachments, which are additional files that are appended to the email. Typical attachments include Microsoft Word documents, pdf documents and scanned images of paper documents. In principle there is no technical restriction on the size or number of attachments, but in practice email clients, servers and Internet service providers implement various limitations on the size of files, or complete email - typically to 25MB or less. [61] [62] [63] Furthermore, due to technical reasons, attachment sizes as seen by these transport systems can differ to what the user sees, [64] which can be confusing to senders when trying to assess whether they can safely send a file by email. Where larger files need to be shared, file hosting services of various sorts are available; and generally suggested. [65] [66] Some large files, such as digital photos, color presentations and video or music files are too large for some email systems.

Information overload
The ubiquity of email for knowledge workers and "white collar" employees has led to concerns that recipients face an " information overload " in dealing with increasing volumes of email. [67] [68] This can lead to increased stress, decreased satisfaction with work, and some observers even argue it could have a significant negative economic effect, [69] as efforts to read the many emails could reduce productivity .

Spam
Email "spam" is the term used to describe unsolicited bulk email. The low cost of sending such email meant that by 2003 up to 30% of total email traffic was already spam. [70] [71] [72] and was threatening the usefulness of email as a practical tool. The US CAN-SPAM Act of 2003 and similar laws elsewhere [73] had some impact, and a number of effective anti-spam techniques now largely mitigate the impact of spam by filtering or rejecting it for most users, [74] but the volume sent is still very high—and increasingly consists not of advertisements for products, but malicious content or links. [75]

Malware
A range of malicious email types exist. These range from various types of email scams , including "social engineering" scams such as advance-fee scam "Nigerian letters", to phishing , email bombardment and email worms .

Email spoofing
Email spoofing occurs when the email message header is designed to make the message appear to come from a known or trusted source. Email spam and phishing methods typically use spoofing to mislead the recipient about the true message origin. Email spoofing may be done as a prank, or as part of a criminal effort to defraud an individual or organization. An example of a potentially fraudulent email spoofing is if an individual creates an email which appears to be an invoice from a major company, and then sends it to one or more recipients. In some cases, these fraudulent emails incorporate the logo of the purported organization and even the email address may appear legitimate.

Email bombing
Email bombing is the intentional sending of large volumes of messages to a target address. The overloading of the target email address can render it unusable and can even cause the mail server to crash.

Privacy concerns
Today it can be important to distinguish between Internet and internal email systems. Internet email may travel and be stored on networks and computers without the sender's or the recipient's control. During the transit time it is possible that third parties read or even modify the content. Internal mail systems, in which the information never leaves the organizational network, may be more secure, although information technology personnel and others whose function may involve monitoring or managing may be accessing the email of other employees.
Email privacy, without some security precautions, can be compromised because:
There are cryptography applications that can serve as a remedy to one or more of the above. For example, Virtual Private Networks or the Tor anonymity network can be used to encrypt traffic from the user machine to a safer network while GPG , PGP , SMEmail, [76] or S/MIME can be used for end-to-end message encryption, and SMTP STARTTLS or SMTP over Transport Layer Security /Secure Sockets Layer can be used to encrypt communications for a single mail hop between the SMTP client and the SMTP server.
Additionally, many mail user agents do not protect logins and passwords, making them easy to intercept by an attacker. Encrypted authentication schemes such as SASL prevent this. Finally, attached files share many of the same hazards as those found in peer-to-peer filesharing . Attached files may contain trojans or viruses .

Flaming
Flaming occurs when a person sends a message (or many messages) with angry or antagonistic content. The term is derived from the use of the word "incendiary" to describe particularly heated email discussions. The ease and impersonality of email communications mean that the social norms that encourage civility in person or via telephone do not exist and civility may be forgotten. [77]

Email bankruptcy
Also known as "email fatigue", email bankruptcy is when a user ignores a large number of email messages after falling behind in reading and answering them. The reason for falling behind is often due to information overload and a general sense there is so much information that it is not possible to read it all. As a solution, people occasionally send a "boilerplate" message explaining that their email inbox is full, and that they are in the process of clearing out all the messages. Harvard University law professor Lawrence Lessig is credited with coining this term, but he may only have popularized it. [78]

Internationalization
Originally Internet email was completely ASCII text-based. MIME now allows body content text and some header content text in international character sets, but other headers and email addresses using UTF-8, while standardized [79] have yet to be widely adopted. [2] [80]

Tracking of sent mail
The original SMTP mail service provides limited mechanisms for tracking a transmitted message, and none for verifying that it has been delivered or read. It requires that each mail server must either deliver it onward or return a failure notice (bounce message), but both software bugs and system failures can cause messages to be lost. To remedy this, the IETF introduced Delivery Status Notifications (delivery receipts) and Message Disposition Notifications (return receipts); however, these are not universally deployed in production. (A complete Message Tracking mechanism was also defined, but it never gained traction; see RFCs 3885 [81] through 3888. [82] )
Many ISPs now deliberately disable non-delivery reports (NDRs) and delivery receipts due to the activities of spammers:
In the absence of standard methods, a range of system based around the use of web bugs have been developed. However, these are often seen as underhand or raising privacy concerns, [83] [84] [85] and only work with email clients that support rendering of HTML. Many mail clients now default to not showing "web content". [86] Webmail providers can also disrupt web bugs by pre-caching images. [87]

U.S. government
The U.S. state and federal governments have been involved in electronic messaging and the development of email in several different ways. Starting in 1977, the U.S. Postal Service (USPS) recognized that electronic messaging and electronic transactions posed a significant threat to First Class mail volumes and revenue. The USPS explored an electronic messaging initiative in 1977 and later disbanded it. Twenty years later, in 1997, when email volume overtook postal mail volume, the USPS was again urged to embrace email, and the USPS declined to provide email as a service. [88] [89] [90] The USPS initiated an experimental email service known as E-COM . E-COM provided a method for the simple exchange of text messages. In 2011, shortly after the USPS reported its state of financial bankruptcy, the USPS Office of Inspector General (OIG) began exploring the possibilities of generating revenue through email servicing. [91] [92] [93] Electronic messages were transmitted to a post office, printed out, and delivered as hard copy. To take advantage of the service, an individual had to transmit at least 200 messages. The delivery time of the messages was the same as First Class mail and cost 26 cents. Both the Postal Regulatory Commission and the Federal Communications Commission opposed E-COM. The FCC concluded that E-COM constituted common carriage under its jurisdiction and the USPS would have to file a tariff . [94] Three years after initiating the service, USPS canceled E-COM and attempted to sell it off. [95] [96] [97] [98] [99]
The early ARPANET dealt with multiple email clients that had various, and at times incompatible, formats. For example, in the Multics , the "@" sign meant "kill line" and anything before the "@" sign was ignored, so Multics users had to use a command-line option to specify the destination system. [100] The Department of Defense DARPA desired to have uniformity and interoperability for email and therefore funded efforts to drive towards unified inter-operable standards. This led to David Crocker, John Vittal, Kenneth Pogran, and Austin Henderson publishing RFC 733 , "Standard for the Format of ARPA Network Text Message" (November 21, 1977), a subset of which provided a stable base for common use on the ARPANET, but which was not fully effective, and in 1979, a meeting was held at BBN to resolve incompatibility issues. Jon Postel recounted the meeting in RFC 808 , "Summary of Computer Mail Services Meeting Held at BBN on 10 January 1979" (March 1, 1982), which includes an appendix listing the varying email systems at the time. This, in turn, led to the release of David Crocker's RFC 822 , "Standard for the Format of ARPA Internet Text Messages" (August 13, 1982). [101] RFC 822 is a small adaptation of RFC 733 's details, notably enhancing the host portion, to use Domain Names , that were being developed at the same time.
The National Science Foundation took over operations of the ARPANET and Internet from the Department of Defense, and initiated NSFNet , a new backbone for the network. A part of the NSFNet AUP forbade commercial traffic. [102] In 1988, Vint Cerf arranged for an interconnection of MCI Mail with NSFNET on an experimental basis. The following year Compuserve email interconnected with NSFNET. Within a few years the commercial traffic restriction was removed from NSFNETs AUP, and NSFNET was privatised. In the late 1990s, the Federal Trade Commission grew concerned with fraud transpiring in email, and initiated a series of procedures on spam, fraud, and phishing. [103] In 2004, FTC jurisdiction over spam was codified into law in the form of the CAN SPAM Act. [104] Several other U.S. federal agencies have also exercised jurisdiction including the Department of Justice and the Secret Service . NASA has provided email capabilities to astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle and International Space Station since 1991 when a Macintosh Portable was used aboard Space Shuttle mission STS-43 to send the first email via AppleLink . [105] [106] [107] Today astronauts aboard the International Space Station have email capabilities via the wireless networking throughout the station and are connected to the ground at 10 Mbit/s Earth to station and 3 Mbit/s station to Earth, comparable to home DSL connection speeds. [108]

See also
WebPage index: 00053
Michael Gorman (librarian)
Michael Gorman (born 6 March 1941, Witney , Oxfordshire ) [1] is a British-born librarian , library scholar and editor/writer on library issues noted for his traditional views. During his tenure as president of the American Library Association (ALA), he was vocal in his opinions on a range of subjects, notably technology and education. He currently lives in the Chicago area with his wife, Anne Reuland, an academic administrator at Loyola University .
Gorman's principles of librarianship derive from core liberal , democratic and humanist values. [2] A key influence is S.R. Ranganathan , whom he regarded as "the greatest figure of librarianship in the 20th century." [3] He maintains that it is through focusing on core professional values that librarians will facilitate personal growth and enhance the success of their institutions. [4]

Life and career
Gorman grew up in London , England and became interested in libraries in part through his experiences at Hendon library and particularly its Children's Library run by a pioneer in the field Eileen Colwell . [5] He attended Ealing Technical College (now Thames Valley University ) in London from 1964-1966.
He has also taught at library schools in Britain and in the United States , most recently at the UCLA Graduate School of Education and Information Studies .

Gorman's ideas
Gorman bases his principles of librarianship on core liberal, democratic and humanistic values. [2] Underlying Gorman’s fervent defense of his values of librarianship is a strong apprehension regarding the future of the profession. [8]

Eight central values of librarianship
In Our Enduring Values , [9] Gorman identified eight central values of librarianship :
These Eight Values have been heavily influenced by the Buddhist Noble Eightfold path .

Critique of his values
Gorman’s selection and defence of his eight central values has attracted some criticism: for example, his championing of ‘stewardship’ as a central ethical tenet unique to librarianship, which cannot be shared by other information professionals, has been attacked as “too narrow and exclusive”. [16] His impassioned defence of intellectual freedom has also been dismissed in some quarters as “empty rhetoric” and “hyperbole”. [16] Gorman’s views have also been dismissed as contradictory: on the one hand he praises Ranganathan as the inventor of library science; [17] on the other he claims library science is a “bogus discipline”. [18]

Five New Laws of Librarianship
Gorman has expanded and added a more contemporary focus to Ranganathan’s Five Laws of Library Science . [19] The re-working of the classic five laws is an attempt “to meet the challenges of fast paced social and cultural changes affecting library users and the rapid proliferation of technology in library operations”. [19] :455 The five laws are:

Educating the librarian
As part of his platform when running for ALA President in 2006, Gorman pledged to address what he called the education crisis. [20]
The article Whither Library Education? [21] set out his views on the current state of LIS education. He concluded that LIS education had become technocentric, male-dominated and out of touch with the needs of practitioners. This view was critiqued by Dillon and Norris, [22] while both papers were critiqued by Pawley [23] for their treatment of the issue of gender in librarianship.
Library and Information Science academics also responded in the professional press, questioning whether there was a crisis to address. [24]
During his year in office, Gorman introduced an initiative intended to discuss the issue of education. Sessions were held with practitioners and academics. However, Gorman’s traditional views may have led to younger librarians turning away from the idea and their views not being represented:
Despite the initiative, accreditation and curricula remained unchanged at the end of Gorman’s tenure.

Perspectives
Gorman's views on the Internet , digitisation of books , Google , citizen journalism , and information science are widely discussed. Two publications in particular caused heated debate, particularly within the librarian blogging community:

Digitisation
In 2004 Google announced its plan to digitize the collections of five major research libraries. This would allow both Google and the libraries in question, The University of Michigan , Oxford, New York Public, Harvard and Stanford, to have access to digitized copies of millions of texts. Michael Gorman, then ALA president, responded to this announcement with an article in the Los Angeles Times 'Google and God's Mind' where he made clear his disapproval of the digitisation project. This disapproval was based on what he sees as a clear distinction between information and real knowledge . Gorman defines information as facts, data, images and quotations that can be used out of context, while real knowledge denotes literary and scholarly texts. This distinction informs Gorman’s observations about online information retrieval which he characterises as being more focused on quick and easy access to facts. [28]
In his later article, Gorman argues that to "Google boosters", speed is of the greatest import: "...just as it is to consumers of fast “food”, but, as with fast food, rubbish is rubbish, no matter how speedily it is delivered". [27] However, he suggests that real knowledge is acquired through a traditional scholarly approach to books. [28]
Gorman later gave this opinion on digitising books:
Digital Initiatives Technology Librarian Peter Binkley discussed this view on his blog and also noted that a digitisation project does not necessarily involve shredding the books once they are scanned. He even suggests that Gorman himself highlights how digitised databases like Google’s make it possible for users to find books and order them by inter-library loan. He also refutes Gorman’s "for the first time in history" claim mentioning two previous "transformations" of information delivery over the last couple of millennia: the move from papyrus to vellum codex and the move from manuscript to the printed book. Overall, Binkley felt that, as ALA president-elect, Gorman should accept that digitisation of books is inevitable and that he should "make himself useful by working to ensure that this reformatting goes well". [29]
In 2006, during his term as head of the ALA, Gorman attended the Online Information Conference in London, where he criticised the library profession for being "too interested in technology". [30]
Gorman, however, is not opposed to digitising books per se, but feels that particular types of information, such as inter alia dictionaries, encyclopaedias and gazetteers are suitable candidates for digitisation, while other forms of real knowledge such as whole books(especially scholarly books) and large databases are not suitable for digitisation. [ citation needed ]

Blogging
Many of the responses to Gorman's article [31] were voiced in the digital domain, with many library and information themed blogs criticising Gorman's opinions, although some bloggers agreed with some of Gorman's stance on digitisation. Gorman credits these responses as making him aware of blogging and leading to him writing Revenge of the Blog People!, [27] in which he criticises the blogging medium and the opinions of his critics. This led to further heated discussion, firstly on blogs then in the professional press. Karen Schneider, an ALA member who writes the Free Range Librarian blog, dubbed the controversy "Gormangate" and shared her concerns about how his words portrayed the library profession, which was subsequently picked up by the professional press. [32] Library Journal, which published Gorman's piece, commented on the decision to publish the piece, noting that the discussion had been beneficial and that:
The journal went on to announce that they would be carrying a technology blog on their website.
One blogger, Michael Stephens, who wrote an open letter to Gorman, which he published on his blog, [34] was so inspired by the subject that he chose to write his doctoral thesis on blogging in librarianship. [35]
Michael Gorman went on to create blog entries of his own for the Encyclopædia Britannica Blog. In the entry “ Web 2.0 : The Sleep of Reason,” he notes how the rise of Web 2.0 has contributed to “an increase in credulity and an associated flight from expertise.” In “Siren Song of the Internet,” he writes that, although the Internet has shaped our lives in many ways for the better, “we must exercise judgment, use digital resources intelligently, and import into the digital world the values that have pervaded scholarship in Western societies for many centuries.” In “Jabberwiki: The Educational Response,” he states that discussed how the Web offers texts that are of “doubtful or unestablishable authenticity” how using the Web for research can lead to incomplete research, and the dubious nature of Web-based learning. Finally, in “Challenging the Technophiles,” Gorman argues in favor of “sustained reading of complex texts” but notes that Google and the Internet are not help in that endeavor. [36]

Personal opinions and spokesmanship
Despite holding such an influential position in the American Library Association, Gorman has made it clear that many of his criticisms are personal and not representative of the ALA. For example, on technology and the Google digitisation, Gorman says:
While Gorman maintains that he is voicing his own opinion, it was commented that when he is identified as the president of the largest professional library organisation in North America:
In regards to Wikipedia, Gorman once stated that “a professor who encourages the use of Wikipedia is the intellectual equivalent of a dietician who recommends a steady diet of Big Macs with everything.” [38] This is yet another personal opinion that can be widely influential coming from such a prominent man.
Other commentators have also noted that irrespective of his protestations, the perception on the wider world and the media is that Gorman represents the profession and this can be detrimental to public perception of librarians. [32]

Educating people
Gorman noted with alarm the results of an adult literacy assessment, which showed that reading proficiency of college graduates has declined in the past decade. He said he has been shocked by how few new freshmen understand how to use basic library systems, or enjoy reading for pleasure. "There is a failure in the core values of education," he said. "They're told to go to college in order to get a better job -- and that's okay. But the real task is to produce educated people." [39]
Gorman has spoken extensively on the problems facing library education, particularly in the USA. He proposes the need to restructure library education in the 21st century, focusing on changes in curricula, faculty, and diversity in library education. [40] Gorman believes that students are too focused on learning without goals in mind and that educators are too inclined to change everything just because the internet and all its resources has arrived and that instead, it should be used as an accompaniment to existing educational methods. [41]

The importance of the book
Since his first book (with Walt Crawford), Gorman has stressed the importance of the book in the place of the library and Gorman has suggested that only books can bestow true knowledge on the reader. [42] He emphasises the importance of the book throughout his works. He has expressed concern at the way research has become simply typing a few works in a search engine and says that serious research is impossible to carry out using this method without the additional reading of books. [43]

Spirituality in librarianship

Christianity
Michael Gorman presented ‘’Our Enduring Values’’ to the Association of Christian Libraries (ACL) and further reviews of his book have suggested that the eight proposed values which librarians should follow are more closely related to biblical theism than the humanistic beliefs Gorman believes. [44] Further work by the ACL has developed ideas relating to the formulation of a Christian approach to library values.

Ethical beliefs
In Gorman's publications, he focuses on the importance on the preserving of information and knowledge and the importance of the librarian in helping to achieve this. In Gorman's eight values, he stresses the importance of a librarian having strong values and an ethical stance because these will help the librarian in their job. Failure is bearable because the decisions that caused that failure are based on a person's own beliefs and a person secure in their values is more likely to have higher self-esteem. [45] The importance of librarians reflecting on their own decisions and responsibilities can be seen in Our Singular Strengths and Our Own Selves which feature meditations for librarians, which librarians can use to reaffirm their own profession. [46]

Publications
Gorman has written extensively about librarianship and issues in library science in the professional and academic press, as well as editing and authoring several books, including:
Since 2008, Gorman has written articles on English for the now defunct Vocabula Review and essays on Dickens, paratext, P.G.Wodehouse, and James Joyce for The Caxtonian, the magazine of the Caxton Club.

Awards

Memberships
WebPage index: 00054
Carnegie Mellon University
Coordinates : 40°26′36″N 79°56′37″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.443322°N 79.943583°W ﻿ / 40.443322; -79.943583
Carnegie Mellon University ( Carnegie Mellon or CMU ; / ˈ k ɑːr n ᵻ ɡ i ˈ m ɛ l ə n / or / k ɑːr ˈ n eɪ ɡ i ˈ m ɛ l ə n / ) is a private research university in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania .
Founded in 1900 by Andrew Carnegie as the Carnegie Technical Schools, the university became the Carnegie Institute of Technology in 1912 and began granting four-year degrees. In 1967, the Carnegie Institute of Technology merged with the Mellon Institute of Industrial Research to form Carnegie Mellon University.
The university's 140-acre (57 ha) main campus is 3 miles (4.8 km) from Downtown Pittsburgh . Carnegie Mellon has seven colleges and independent schools: the College of Engineering , College of Fine Arts , Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences , Mellon College of Science , Tepper School of Business , H. John Heinz III College of Information Systems and Public Policy , and the School of Computer Science . The university also has campuses in Qatar and Silicon Valley , with degree-granting programs in six continents.
Carnegie Mellon is ranked 24th in the United States by U.S. News & World Report rankings. [8] It is home to the world’s first degree-granting Robotics and Drama programs, [9] as well as one of the first Computer Science departments. [10] The university was ranked 89th for R&D in 2015 having spent $242 million. [11]
Carnegie Mellon counts 13,650 students from 114 countries, over 100,000 living alumni, and over 5,000 faculty and staff. Past and present faculty and alumni include 19 Nobel Prize Laureates, 19 Members of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences, [12] 72 Members of the National Academies , 114 Emmy Award Winners, 43 Tony Award laureates, 7 Academy Award Winners, 12 Turing Award winners , 4 Rhodes Scholars, and one Schwarzman Scholar . [13]

Institutional formation
The Carnegie Technical Schools were founded in 1900 in Pittsburgh [14] by the Scottish American industrialist and philanthropist Andrew Carnegie , who wrote the time-honored words "My heart is in the work", when he donated the funds to create the institution. Carnegie's vision was to open a vocational training school for the sons and daughters of working-class Pittsburghers (many of whom worked in his mills). Carnegie was inspired for the design of his school by the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, New York founded by industrialist Charles Pratt in 1887. [15] In 1912 the institution changed its name to Carnegie Institute of Technology (CIT) and began offering four-year degrees. During this time, CIT consisted of four constituent schools: the School of Fine and Applied Arts, the School of Apprentices and Journeymen, the School of Science and Technology, and the Margaret Morrison Carnegie School for Women .
The Mellon Institute of Industrial Research was founded in 1913 by banker and industrialist brothers Andrew (who went on to become Treasury Secretary ) and Richard B. Mellon in honor of their father, Thomas Mellon , the patriarch of the Mellon family . The Institute began as a research organization which performed work for government and industry on contract and was initially established as a department within the University of Pittsburgh. In 1927, the Mellon Institute incorporated as an independent nonprofit. In 1938, the Mellon Institute's iconic building was completed and it moved to its new, and current, location on Fifth Avenue.
In 1967, with support from Paul Mellon , Carnegie Tech merged with the Mellon Institute of Industrial Research to become Carnegie Mellon University. Carnegie Mellon's coordinate women's college , the Margaret Morrison Carnegie College closed in 1973 and merged its academic programs with the rest of the university. [16]
The industrial research mission of the Mellon Institute survived the merger as the Carnegie Mellon Research Institute (CMRI) and continued doing work on contract to industry and government. CMRI closed in 2001 and its programs were subsumed by other parts of the university or spun off into independent entities. [17]

Campus
Carnegie Mellon's 140-acre (57 ha) [5] main campus is three miles (4.8 km) from downtown Pittsburgh , between Schenley Park and the Squirrel Hill , Shadyside , and Oakland neighborhoods. Carnegie Mellon is bordered to the west by the campus of the University of Pittsburgh . Carnegie Mellon owns 81 buildings in the Oakland and Squirrel Hill neighborhoods of Pittsburgh.
For decades the center of student life on campus was " Skibo Hall ", the University's student union. Built in the 1950s, Skibo Hall's design was typical of Mid-Century Modern architecture, but was poorly equipped to deal with advances in computer and internet connectivity. The original Skibo was razed in the summer of 1994 and replaced by a new student union that is fully wi-fi enabled. Known as University Center , the building was dedicated in 1996. In 2014, Carnegie Mellon re-dedicated the University Center as the Cohon University Center in recognition of the eighth president of the university, Jared Cohon. [18]
A large grassy area known as "the Cut" forms the backbone of the campus, with a separate grassy area known as "the Mall" running perpendicular. The Cut was formed by filling in a ravine (hence the name) with soil from a nearby hill that was leveled to build the College of Fine Arts building.
The northwestern part of the campus (home to Hamburg Hall, Newell-Simon Hall, Smith Hall, and Gates Hillman Complex) was acquired from the United States Bureau of Mines in the 1980s.
In 2006, Carnegie Mellon Trustee Jill Gansman Kraus donated the 80-foot (24 m)-tall sculpture Walking to the Sky , which was placed the lawn facing Forbes Ave between the Cohon University Center and Warner Hall. The sculpture was controversial for its placement, the general lack of input that the campus community had, and its aesthetic appeal. [19]
In April 2015, Carnegie Mellon University, in collaboration with Jones Lang LaSalle , announced the planning of a second office space structure, alongside the Robert Mehrabian Collaborative Innovation Center, an upscale and full-service hotel, and retail and dining development along Forbes Avenue. This complex will connect to the Tepper Quadrangle, the Heinz College, the Tata Consultancy Services Building, and the Gates-Hillman Center to create an innovation corridor on the university campus. The effort is intended to continue to attract major corporate partnerships to create opportunities in research, teaching, and employment with students and faculty. [20]

Campus architecture and design
The campus began to take shape in the Beaux-Arts architecture style of Henry Hornbostel , winner of the 1904 competition to design the original institution and later the founder of what is now the Carnegie Mellon School of Architecture . A college rumor holds that Hamerschlag Hall was designed so that in the event the college was not successful it could be turned into a factory.
There was little change to the campus between the first and second World War . A 1938 master plan by Githens and Keally suggested acquisition of new land along Forbes Avenue , but the plan was not fully implemented. The period starting with the construction of the Graduate School of Industrial Administration building (1952) and ending with Wean Hall (1971) saw the institutional change from Carnegie Institute of Technology to Carnegie Mellon University. New facilities were needed to respond to the University's growing national reputation in artificial intelligence , business, robotics and the arts. In addition, an expanding student population resulted in a need for improved facilities for student life, athletics and libraries. The campus finally expanded to Forbes Avenue from its original land along Schenley Park . A ravine long known as "The Cut" was gradually filled in to campus level, joining "the Mall" as a major campus open space.
The buildings of this era reflect current attitudes toward architectural style. The International Style , with its rejection of historical tradition and its emphases on functionalism and expression of structure, had been in vogue in urban settings since the 1930s. It came late to the Carnegie campus because of the hiatus in building activity and a general reluctance among all institutions of higher education to abandon historical styles. By the 1960s, it was seen as a way to accomplish the needed expansion and at the same time give the campus a new image. Each building was a unique architectural statement that may have acknowledged the existing campus in its placement, but not in its form or materials.
During the 1970s and 1980s, the tenure of University President Richard Cyert (1972–1990) witnessed a period of growth and development. The research budget grew from roughly US$12 million annually in the early 1970s to more than US$110 million in the late 1980s. The work of researchers in new fields like robotics and software engineering helped the university build on its reputation. One example of this approach was the introduction of the university's " Andrew " computing network in the mid-1980s. This pioneering project, which linked all computers and workstations on campus, set the standard for educational computing and established Carnegie Mellon as a leader in the use of technology in education and research. On April 24, 1984, cmu.edu , Carnegie Mellon's Internet domain became one of the first six .edu domain names.

Present
In the 1990s and into the 2000s, Carnegie Mellon solidified its status among American universities, consistently ranking in the top 25 in the national U.S. News & World Report rankings, and in the top 60 (ranking 55th in 2013) amongst universities worldwide. [22] [23] Carnegie Mellon is distinct in its interdisciplinary approach to research and education. Through the establishment of programs and centers that are outside the limitations of departments or colleges, the university has established leadership in fields such as computational finance , information systems , cognitive sciences , management, arts management, product design, behavioral economics , energy science and economics, human-computer interaction , entertainment technology , and decision science . Within the past two decades, the university has built a new university center (Cohon University Center), theater and drama building (Purnell Center), business school building (Posner Hall), student union and several dormitories. Baker Hall was renovated in the early 2000s (decade), and new chemistry labs were established in Doherty Hall soon after. Several computer science buildings, such as Newell Simon Hall , also were established, renovated or renamed in the early 2000s (decade). The university has most recently completed building the Gates Hillman Complex and continues renovating historic academic and residence halls.
The Gates Hillman Complex, opened for occupancy on August 11, 2009, sits on a 5.6-acre (2.3 ha) site on the university's West Campus, surrounded by Cyert Hall, the Purnell Center for the Arts, Doherty Hall, Newell-Simon Hall, Smith Hall, Hamburg Hall and the Robert Mehrabian Collaborative Innovation Center. It contains 318 offices as well as labs, computer clusters , lecture halls, classrooms and a 255-seat auditorium. The Gates Hillman Complex was made possible by a $20 million lead gift from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and an additional $10 million grant from the Henry L. Hillman Foundation . The Gates Hillman Complex and the Purnell Center for the Arts are connected by the Randy Pausch Memorial Footbridge. [24]
On April 15, 1997, Jared L. Cohon , former dean of the Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Studies , was elected president by Carnegie Mellon's Board of Trustees. During Cohon's presidency, Carnegie Mellon continued its trajectory of innovation and growth. His strategic plan aimed to leverage the University's strengths to benefit society in the areas of biotechnology and life sciences , information and security technology, environmental science and practices, the fine arts and humanities , and business and public policy . In 2006, following negotiations between President Cohon and South Australian Premier Mike Rann , CMU opened a campus of the Heinz College in the historic Torrens Building in Adelaide , Australia. President Cohon's term ended on June 30, 2013, after which he returned to the faculty at Carnegie Mellon.
On July 1, 2003, Carnegie Mellon launched "Insp!re Innovation", a $1 billion comprehensive fundraising campaign. Half of the campaign goal is intended for the endowment to provide long-lasting support for faculty, students and breakthrough innovations. The campaign brought in a total of $1.19 billion, with $578.5 million going toward Carnegie Mellon's endowment. It also enabled the university to establish 31 endowed professorships, 97 endowed fellowships and 250 endowed scholarships. [25] On September 7, 2011, William S. Dietrich II , the former chairman of Dietrich Industries, Inc., a subsidiary of Worthington Industries, Inc. , pledged a gift of $265 million, effective on October 6, 2011, upon his death. In response to this gift, Carnegie Mellon renamed the College of Humanities of Social Sciences as the Marianna Brown Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences after William Dietrich's mother. [26]
New York's Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg , and New York University 's President John Sexton on April 23, 2012, announced a historic agreement between New York City, New York's MTA, and a consortium of world-class academic institutions, and private technology companies, that will lead to the creation in New York of a Center for Urban Science and Progress (CUSP). The Center for Urban Science and Progress (CUSP) is an applied science research institute which will be a partnership of top institutions from around the globe, led by New York University with a consortium of world-class universities including: The University of Warwick , Carnegie Mellon University, the City University of New York , the Indian Institute of Technology Bombay , and the University of Toronto .
In September 2012, Carnegie Mellon announced the construction of the Sherman and Joyce Bowie Scott Hall on the Pittsburgh campus. The new building will be situated between Hamerschlag Hall, Roberts Hall, and Wean Hall and will house the university-wide Wilton E. Scott Institute for Energy Innovation, a new nanotechnology research center, the Institute for Complex Engineered Systems, and the Biomedical Engineering Department. [27] Further, in November 2013, Carnegie Mellon announced a $67 million gift from David Tepper , who previously donated $56 million, to develop the Tepper Quadrangle on the north campus. The Tepper Quad will include a new Tepper School of Business facility across Forbes Avenue from a renovated and expanded Heinz College [28] as well as other university-wide buildings and a welcome center which will serve as a public gateway to the university. [29] Alongside the Tepper Quad and Hamburg Hall, Carnegie Mellon will construct an innovation center with a $35 million gift from Tata Consultancy Services which will partner with Carnegie Mellon to develop technology and business solutions. [30]
On February 5, 2013 Carnegie Mellon announced the selection of Subra Suresh , Director of the National Science Foundation and Dean of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology School of Engineering , as its ninth president effective July 1, 2013 [31]
Peer institutions of Carnegie Mellon's institutional research and analysis program include Caltech , Cornell , Duke , Emory , Georgia Tech , MIT , Northwestern , Princeton , Rice , RPI , Stanford , University of Pennsylvania and Washington University . [32]

Admissions and enrollment
For Fall 2016, Carnegie Mellon received 21,189 freshmen applications; 4,601 were admitted (21.7%) and 1,552 enrolled. [33] The acceptance rates of the individual colleges vary, ranging from the School of Drama, housed within the College of Fine Arts (3%), to the School of Computer Science (6%), to the Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences (23%). [34] The average high school grade point average ( GPA ) of the enrolled freshmen was 3.76, while the middle 50% range of SAT scores were 660-750 for critical reading, 720-800 for math, and 670-760 for writing. [33] The middle 50% range of the ACT Composite score was 31-34. [33]
The largest college, in terms of enrollment, is the College of Engineering with 406 students in the class of 2020, followed by the Dietrich College of Humanities & Social Sciences with 273, and the College of Fine Arts with 242. The smallest college in terms of total undergraduate enrollment is the Tepper School of Business, with 146. Carnegie Mellon enrolls students from all 50 states and the District of Columbia, and 15.6% of the students are citizens of countries other than the United States, representing more than 40 countries. Undergraduate tuition is $49,610 and room and board is $12,830 plus additional costs. [35] Carnegie Mellon graduates 62% of its undergraduate students in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics fields , the 13th highest percentage in the United States amongst national research universities. [36]

Rankings and reputation
Carnegie Mellon University is ranked 23rd in the world according to Times Higher Education , and 58th in the world by QS World University Rankings in their 2016–17 rankings.
Nationally, U.S. News & World Report ranks Carnegie Mellon tied for 24th among American research universities in 2017. [45] U.S. News also ranked Carnegie Mellon 1st for graduate studies in computer science, tied for 5th for graduate studies in engineering, 6th for graduate studies in fine arts, 13th for graduate studies in public affairs, 9th for graduate studies in statistics, 20th for graduate studies in economics, 19th for graduate studies in business, and 17th for graduate studies in psychology in 2016. [46]
The undergraduate business program is ranked 2nd for management information systems, 2nd for production/operations and quantitative analysis, 8th for supply chain management, and tied for 6th as an undergraduate business program overall. [45] The undergraduate engineering program at colleges that offer doctorates as the highest degree was ranked tied for 8th overall, 5th for computer engineering, 9th for environmental engineering, and 11th for mechanical, electrical, and civil engineering in 2017. [45]
Carnegie Mellon was named one of the "New Ivies " by Newsweek . [47] In 2010, the Wall Street Journal ranked Carnegie Mellon 1st in computer science, 4th in finance, 10th overall, and 21st in engineering according to job recruiters. [48] Carnegie Mellon University ranks thirteenth among "Best Colleges By Salary Potential (Bachelor's Only)" in the United States according to PayScale ' s 2016–17 study. [49] In 2016, the Carnegie Mellon's Tepper School of Business placed 15th in an annual ranking of U.S. business schools by Bloomberg Businessweek . [50]
In 2016, The Hollywood Reporter ranked the School of Drama number three in the world among undergraduate drama schools. [51] In 2015, the same publication ranked the MFA program at the School of Drama number five in the world. [52]
In 2015, Carnegie Mellon University has been ranked The Best Information Technology School in the United States. [53]
Carnegie Mellon is one of 62 elected members of the Association of American Universities and one of 25 members (one of 12 American members) of the World Economic Forum Global University Leaders Forum . [54]

International activities
In addition to its Pittsburgh campus, Carnegie Mellon has a branch campus in the Middle East, Carnegie Mellon University in Qatar , which offers a full undergraduate curriculum with degree programs in computer science, business administration, biology, computational biology, and information systems. The campus is located in Doha ’s Education City which is home to multiple other U.S. universities all of which are funded by the Qatar Foundation . The Qatari campus in particular has been the subject of criticism due to Qatar’s adherence to Sharia Law and lack of freedom of speech and intellectual freedoms . Questions have been raised about whether an American institution that values these ideas can provide an equal experience in a community that limits them. [55] Additionally, Carnegie Mellon and other U.S. Universities in Education City have been criticized for being essentially complicit in Qatar's funding of terrorist groups such as Al Qaeda , ISIS , and Hamas and their questionable human rights record by continuing to operate there despite these issues. [55] [56] [57] [58]
It also has graduate-level extension campuses in Mountain View, California in the heart of Silicon Valley (offering masters programs in Software Engineering and Software Management). The Tepper School of Business maintains a satellite center in downtown Manhattan and the Heinz College maintains one in Adelaide , Australia. The Heinz College , the Institute for Politics and Strategy, and the Department of Engineering and Public Policy host centers in Washington, DC as part of degree programs, research, and government affairs initiatives as well as being a part of the University of California, Washington Center . Carnegie Mellon also established the Integrative Media Program at Steiner Studios in Brooklyn, New York . Carnegie Mellon also maintains the Carnegie Mellon Los Angeles Center in North Hollywood, California where students in the Master of Entertainment Industry Management program are required to relocate to Los Angeles in their second year and attend classes at this facility.
Carnegie Mellon's Information Networking Institute offers graduate programs in Athens, Greece and Kobe, Japan , in collaboration with Athens Information Technology and the Hyogo Institute of Information Education Foundation, respectively. In the fall of 2007, the cities of Aveiro and Lisbon, Portugal were added to the Information Networking Institute 's remote locations. The Institute for Software Research International (ISRI) offers graduate programs in Coimbra , Portugal. The Entertainment Technology Center offers graduate programs in Portugal , Japan, and Singapore. The Human-Computer Interaction Institute offers a master's degree in conjunction with the University of Madeira , in Portugal . The College of Engineering has an international location in Kigali, Rwanda offering the Master of Science in Information Technology and the Master of Science in Electrical and Computer Engineering.

In popular culture
The Carnegie Mellon University campus in Pittsburgh has served as the locale for many motion pictures. Alumnus George A. Romero filmed Creepshow (1982) in and around Margaret Morrison Carnegie Hall. [59] Much of the on-campus scenes in the 2000 film Wonder Boys , starring Michael Douglas and Tobey Maguire , were filmed in Carnegie Mellon's campus. [60] Other movies filmed at Carnegie Mellon include The Mothman Prophecies , Dogma , Lorenzo's Oil , The Dark Knight Rises , and Flashdance . The university is also featured prominently in the films Smart People , Monkey Shines , and in the anime Summer Wars . It was also referenced on an episode of The Simpsons , Weeds , and in the television film Mean Girls 2 . Carnegie Mellon was identified as the university "Rat" went to in the science fiction film The Core , as well as the university that one of the astronauts attended in the film Deep Impact . [61]
The musical Pippin was originally conceived by Stephen Schwartz as a student musical performed by the Scotch'n'Soda student theatre troupe. [62] Schwartz also collaborated with drama student John-Michael Tebelak to expand his master's thesis project titled Godspell , created under the direction of Lawrence Carra , into a musical.
While enrolled at Carnegie Mellon, acting students Michael McKean and David Lander (class of 1969) created the characters " Lenny & Squiggy ". The pair continued performing the characters in live comedy routines before joining the cast of the TV series Laverne and Shirley .
In 2008, Carnegie Mellon professor Randy Pausch 's " Last Lecture " became a pop culture phenomenon. Based on a lecture he gave in September 2007 – shortly after he learned his cancer had metastasized – his book quickly rose to the top of bestseller lists around the country. Named in Time Magazine ' s " Time 100 " list of influential people, he died in July 2008 from pancreatic cancer. [63]
In 2003, Carnegie Mellon established the Robot Hall of Fame in partnership with the Carnegie Science Center .
The 68th Tony Awards in 2014 announced Carnegie Mellon University as its first educational partner in jointly awarding the "Tony Honor for Excellence in Theatre Education", which will "honor kindergarten through high school (K-12) theatre educators." [64]

Schools and divisions
Carnegie Mellon also runs the Integrative Design, Arts, and Technology (IDeATe) Network to provide university-wide arts and technology education to students from every college. IDeATe allows students to take minors or concentrations in Animation and Special Effects, Entrepreneurship for Creative Industries, Game Design, Intelligent Environments, Learning Media, Media Design, Physical Computing, and Sound Design. IDeAte will also offer graduate master's degrees in Emerging Media, Game Design, Integrative Innovation for Products and Services, Computational Data Science, Urban Design, and Production Technology and Management. IDeATe also manages the Entertainment Technology Center (ETC) in conjunction with the School of Computer Science and the College of Fine Arts. Each master's degree program has an option to study in the CMU Integrative Media Program (IMP) at Steiner Studios in New York City . IDeATe Network will be based on the Pittsburgh campus upon development of recently acquired property on Forbes Avenue west of Junction Hollow . [71]
In addition to research and academic institutions, the University hosts several other educationally driven programs. The Pennsylvania Governor's School for the Sciences , a state-funded summer program that aims to foster interest in science amongst gifted high school students is run on campus every summer. The University also runs Pre-College , a 6-week residential program for rising juniors and seniors in high school, with programs in Drama, Music, Art & Design, Architecture, Game Design & Development, Humanities & Sciences, Mathematics, and Computer Science. Additionally, the Carnegie Mellon Institute for Talented Elementary and Secondary Students program (C-MITES) is hosted on CMU campus. The Cyert Center for Early Education is a child care center for Carnegie Mellon faculty and staff, as well as an observational setting for students in child development courses. The Open Learning Initiative provides free courses online in a variety of fields to students globally.

Libraries
Carnegie Mellon University Libraries include Hunt Library, the Roger Sorrells Engineering & Science Library, the Mellon Institute Library, the Posner Center , and the Qatar Library. Additionally, the Libraries' Million Book Project (2001–) sparked development of the Universal Digital Library . The University Libraries host a number of full text special collections for public access, including the Andrew Carnegie Collection, Herbert A. Simon Collection, Allen Newell Collection, the H. John Heinz III Collection, the Pittsburgh Jewish Newspapers Project , and the Posner Memorial Collection . Carnegie Mellon students and faculty have access to the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh and some University of Pittsburgh libraries through consortial agreements with those institutions. The Hunt Institute for Botanical Documentation (HIBD), a research division of CMU, has a significant research library and art holdings on the 5th floor of Hunt Library. The university's Software Engineering Institute also houses a research library.
Carnegie Mellon also manages the Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps in Pittsburgh on which students throughout Pittsburgh's universities rely. Carnegie Mellon relies on the University of Pittsburgh to provide opportunities in Army Reserve Officers' Training Corps and Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps to its students.
Carnegie Mellon University is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education . [72]

Collaboration with the University of Pittsburgh
Carnegie Mellon University neighbors the campus of the University of Pittsburgh , and in some cases, buildings of the two universities are intermingled. This helps to facilitate myriad academic and research collaborations between the two schools, [73] including such projects as the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center , the Pittsburgh Life Sciences Greenhouse , the Immune Modeling Center, the Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute , as well as the National Science Foundation-supported Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center. [74] [75] Further, the universities also offer multiple dual and joint degree programs such as the Medical Scientist Training Program , the Molecular Biophysics and Structural Biology Graduate Program, the Joint CMU-Pitt Ph.D. Program in Computational Biology , the Center for Neural Basis of Cognition , and the Law and Business Administration program. Some professors hold joint professorships between the two schools, and students at each university may take classes at the other (with appropriate approvals). [76] CMU students and faculty also have access to the University of Pittsburgh library system, as well as the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh . The two universities also co-host academic conferences, such as the 2012 Second Language Research Forum. [77] In 2015, in conjunction with the University of Pittsburgh and UPMC , Carnegie Mellon became a partner of the Pittsburgh Health Data Alliance to leverage data analysis in health care. [78]

Discoveries and innovation
[85]

Research
For the 2006 fiscal year, the University spent $315 million on research. The primary recipients of this funding were the School of Computer Science ($100.3 million), the Software Engineering Institute ($71.7 million), the College of Engineering ($48.5 million), and the Mellon College of Science ($47.7 million). The research money comes largely from federal sources, with federal investment of $277.6 million. The federal agencies that invest the most money are the National Science Foundation and the Department of Defense , which contribute 26% and 23.4% of the total university research budget respectively. [35]
The recognition of Carnegie Mellon as one of the best research facilities in the nation has a long history, as early as the 1987 Federal budget CMU was ranked as third in the amount of research dollars with $41.5 million with only MIT and Johns Hopkins receiving more research funds from the Department of Defense. [86]
The Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center (PSC) is a joint effort between Carnegie Mellon University, University of Pittsburgh , and Westinghouse Electric Company . PSC was founded in 1986 by its two scientific directors, Dr. Ralph Roskies of the University of Pittsburgh and Dr. Michael Levine of Carnegie Mellon University. PSC is a leading partner in the TeraGrid , the National Science Foundation's cyberinfrastructure program. [87]
The Robotics Institute (RI) is a division of the School of Computer Science and considered to be one of the leading centers of robotics research in the world. The Field Robotics Center (FRC) has developed a number of significant robots, including Sandstorm and H1ghlander , which finished second and third in the DARPA Grand Challenge , and Boss, which won the DARPA Urban Challenge . The Robotics Institute has partnered with a spinoff company, Astrobotic Technology, to land a CMU robot on the moon by 2016 in pursuit of the Google Lunar XPrize. The robot, known as Andy, is designed to explore lunar pits, which might include entrances to caves. [88] The RI is primarily sited at Carnegie Mellon's main campus in Newell-Simon hall. [89]
The Software Engineering Institute (SEI) is a federally funded research and development center sponsored by the U.S. Department of Defense and operated by Carnegie Mellon University, with offices in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; Arlington, Virginia, and Frankfurt, Germany. The SEI publishes books on software engineering for industry, government and military applications and practices. The organization is known for its Capability Maturity Model [90] [91] (CMM) and Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI), which identify essential elements of effective system and software engineering processes and can be used to rate the level of an organization's capability for producing quality systems. The SEI is also the home of CERT/CC , the federally funded computer security organization. The CERT Program's primary goals are to ensure that appropriate technology and systems management practices are used to resist attacks on networked systems and to limit damage and ensure continuity of critical services subsequent to attacks, accidents, or failures. [92]
The Human-Computer Interaction Institute (HCII) is a division of the School of Computer Science and is considered one of the leading centers of human-computer interaction research, integrating computer science, design, social science, and learning science. [93] Such interdisciplinary collaboration is the hallmark of research done throughout the university.
The Language Technologies Institute (LTI) is another unit of the School of Computer Science and is famous for being one of the leading research centers in the area of language technologies . Primary research focus of the institute is on machine translation , speech recognition , speech synthesis , information retrieval , parsing and information extraction . [94] Until 1996, the institute existed as the Center for Machine Translation that was established in 1986. From 1996 onwards, it started awarding graduate degrees and the name was changed to Language Technologies Institute.
Carnegie Mellon is also home to the Carnegie School of management and economics. This intellectual school grew out of the Tepper School of Business in the 1950s and 1960s and focused on the intersection of behavioralism and management. Several management theories, most notably bounded rationality and the behavioral theory of the firm , were established by Carnegie School management scientists and economists.
Carnegie Mellon also develops cross-disciplinary and university-wide institutes and initiatives to take advantage of strengths in various colleges and departments and develop solutions in critical social and technical problems. To date, these have included the Cylab Security and Privacy Institute , the Wilton E. Scott Institute for Energy Innovation , the BrainHub , the Simon Initiative , and the Disruptive Healthcare Technology Institute .
Carnegie Mellon has made a concerted effort to attract corporate research labs, offices, and partnerships to the Pittsburgh campus. Apple Inc. , Intel , Google , Microsoft , Disney , IBM , General Motors , Bombardier Inc. , Yahoo! , Uber , Tata Consultancy Services , Ansys , Boeing , Robert Bosch GmbH , and the Rand Corporation have established a presence on or near campus. In collaboration with Intel, Carnegie Mellon has pioneered research into claytronics . [95]

Alumni and faculty
There are more than 100,000 Carnegie Mellon alumni worldwide with the graduating class of 2015. [96] Alumni and current/former faculty include 19 Nobel laureates , 14 Members of NAS, 50 Members of NAE, 114 Emmy Award Recipients, 7 Academy Award Recipients, 43 Tony Award Recipients, and 12 Turing Award Recipients. [97] Famous alumni include pop artists Andy Warhol and Burton Morris ; [98] Authors John-Michael Tebelak and Kurt Vonnegut ; Charles Geschke , Co-Founder and Chairman of Adobe Systems ; [99] Stephanie Kwolek , inventor of Kevlar ; James Gosling , creator of the Java programming language; Andy Bechtolsheim , co-founder of Sun Microsystems ; David Kelly , co-founder of IDEO ; George Pake , founder of Xerox PARC ; Marc Ewing , co-founder of Red Hat ; Jim Levy , founding CEO of Activision ; former General Motors CEO and Secretary of Defense , Charles Erwin Wilson ; billionaire hedge fund investor David Tepper ; mountaineer and author Aron Ralston ; Scott Fahlman , creator of the emoticon ; Chris Messina , creator of the hashtag ; and astronauts Edgar Mitchell (of Apollo 14 ) and Judith Resnik , who perished in the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster. [100]
Overall, Carnegie Mellon is affiliated with nineteen Nobel Laureates, [101] twelve Turing Awards winners, two winners of the Stockholm Prize in Criminology , eight Academy Award recipients, one hundred and one Emmy Award recipients (including ten time recipient Steven Bochco ), and forty-one Tony Awards recipients. John Forbes Nash , a 1948 graduate and winner of the 1994 Nobel Prize in Economics , was the subject of the book and subsequent film A Beautiful Mind . Alan Perlis , a 1943 graduate, was a pioneer in programming languages and recipient of the first ever Turing award .

Student life
Carnegie Mellon's student life includes over 225 student organizations, art galleries, and various unique traditions. Student organizations provide social, service, media, academic, spiritual, recreational, sport, religious, political, cultural, and governance opportunities. Carnegie Mellon's campus houses several galleries such as The Frame , a student-devoted gallery, and the Regina Gouger Miller Gallery , an art gallery that specializes in contemporary professional artists. The Carnegie Mellon School of Music , Carnegie Mellon School of Drama and the student-run theatrical organization Scotch'n'Soda provides campus with a variety of world-class performance arts events. The university has a strong Scottish motif inspired by Andrew Carnegie's Scottish heritage, as well as the Mellon family's Scots-Irish ancestry. Examples include Scotty, the Scottish Terrier mascot, The Tartan student newspaper, Skibo Gymnasium, The Thistle yearbook, and the Céilidh weekend every fall semester for homecoming.

Traditions

Housing
Carnegie Mellon offers conventional housing for its students through single-gender, coeducational, and special interest options. Students can choose from a variety of housing options. The three options for first-year students are standard, prime, and apartment-style living. Standard is a typical college dormitory setting, a long hallway with a series of double (two people to a room). Prime offers more privacy through suite-style rooms. Apartment-style living is available through the Residence on Fifth and Shirley apartments. Upperclassmen have additional options for housing which include town houses and a larger variety of one or two bedroom apartments. There are 20 residential buildings on campus and five off campus in the Oakland area of Pittsburgh. [103]
First-year students are assigned to the dedicated first-year residence halls on campus including: Morewood E-Tower, Residence on Fifth, Shirley Apartments, as well as Boss, Donner, Hamerschlag, McGill, Mudge, Scobell, and Stever houses. Approximately a third of upperclassmen choose to continue living on campus through university housing. Options for upperclassmen include: Morewood Gardens, West Wing, Doherty, Fairfax, Margaret Morrison, Neville, Shady Oak, Shirley, and Woodlawn Apartments as well as Henderson, Resnik, Roselawn, Spirit, Tech, Webster, and Welch houses. [103]

Fraternities and sororities
The Greek tradition at Carnegie Mellon University began over 100 years ago with the founding of the first fraternity on campus, Theta Xi , in 1912. The Panhellenic sorority community was founded in 1945, by Chi Omega , Delta Delta Delta , Delta Gamma , Kappa Alpha Theta , and Kappa Kappa Gamma . The Chi Omega chapter at Carnegie Mellon transformed into an independent sorority, Zeta Psi Sigma, and has since become Alpha Chi Omega . The Alpha Phi chapter was created in April 2013. There is one Asian American interest sorority – alpha Kappa Delta Phi (colony), and one Asian American interest fraternity – Lambda Phi Epsilon .
Currently, Carnegie Mellon University has thirteen active fraternities: Alpha Epsilon Pi , Alpha Phi Alpha , Alpha Tau Omega (colony), Alpha Sigma Phi , Delta Tau Delta , Kappa Sigma , Lambda Phi Epsilon , Phi Delta Theta , Pi Kappa Alpha , Sigma Alpha Epsilon , Sigma Chi , Sigma Nu , and Sigma Phi Epsilon .
In addition to participating in campus traditions such as Buggy and Booth, the fraternities and sororities hold an annual fundraiser called Greek Sing, one of the largest Greek events of the year. Each year, the organizations vote on a cause to support and raise money through ticket sales, ad sales, corporate sponsorships and donations. Each organization performs a 13-minute-long original show or a rendition of a popular show. In Spring 2010, Greek Sing raised over $42,000 for St. Jude Children's Research

Athletics
The Carnegie Mellon Tartans were a founding member of the University Athletic Association of NCAA Division III . Prior to World War II Carnegie Mellon (as Carnegie Tech) played with NCAA Division I teams. In 1936 the Carnegie Tech riflery team won the national intercollegiate championship. [104] Currently, varsity teams are fielded in basketball, track, cross country, football, golf, soccer, swimming & diving, volleyball, tennis, hockey, and rowing. In addition, club teams exist in ultimate frisbee , [105] rowing , [106] rugby , lacrosse, hockey, [107] baseball, [108] softball, skiing & snowboarding , [109] soccer, volleyball, water polo, [110] and cycling. [111] Carnegie Mellon Athletics runs a comprehensive and popular intramural system, maintains facilities (primarily Skibo Gymnasium, Cohon University Center, and Gesling Stadium), and offers courses to students in fitness and sports. Carnegie Mellon's primary athletic rivals are fellow UAA schools Case Western Reserve University and Washington University in St. Louis ; the Tartans have an especially intense rivalry with the latter's football team .

Football
On November 28, 1926, the 6–2 Carnegie Technical Insitute football team shut out the undefeated Notre Dame Fighting Irish 19–0 at Forbes Field . Knute Rockne, the coach of the Irish at the time, was so confident that the Irish would defeat "tiny Carnegie Tech" that he decided to skip the game and travel to Chicago to watch the Army-Navy football game for scouting purposes. It was only later that he found out by telegram that the Irish had suffered their first loss of the season. ESPN compared the upset to the Appalachian State victory over the University of Michigan in 2007 [112] The game was ranked the fourth-greatest upset in college football history by ESPN . [113]
Since 2014, the Tartans play in the Presidents' Athletic Conference at the NCAA Division III level.

Track and cross country
In recent years, the varsity track and cross country programs have seen outstanding success on the Division III national level. The men's cross country team has finished in the top 15 in the nation each of the last three years, and has boasted several individual All-Americans . The men's track team has also boasted several individual All-Americans spanning sprinting, distance, and field disciplines. Recent All-Americans from the track team are Tommy Vandenberg (2014–2015), Brian Harvey (2007–2009), Davey Quinn (2007), Nik Bonaddio (2004, 2005), Mark Davis (2004, 2005), Russel Verbofsky (2004, 2005) and Kiley Williams (2005).

Volleyball
With much of the team's support, Lauren Schmidt received the NCAA Pennsylvania Woman of the Year award (2003), was a two-time All-American (2001 and 2002), a four-time All-University Athletic Association selection (1999–2002), and the conference's Player of the Year (2001). [114]

Cricket
The Carnegie Mellon Cricket Club represents Carnegie Mellon in inter-collegiate competitions. CMU cricket club are regular participants in American College Cricket national championships. CMU were joint-runners up in the first-ever American College Cricket Tournament held in Florida in Spring 2009. [115]

See also

Notes and references

External links
WebPage index: 00055
William Quantrill
William Clarke Quantrill (July 31, 1837 – June 6, 1865) was a Confederate leader during the American Civil War .
After a knockabout youth, he joined a group of bandits who roamed Missouri and Kansas, kidnapping escaped slaves in exchange for reward money. This apparently confirmed his pro-slavery views, and his group became Confederate ' bushwhackers ', feared for their terror tactics, which used effective Native American field skills. They included Jesse James and his brother. In August 1863, the bandits murdered nearly 200 civilians in Lawrence, Kansas , a stronghold of anti-slavery sentiment. In May 1865, Quantrill was mortally wounded by Union troops in Western Kentucky, in one of the last engagements of the Civil War.

Early life
Quantrill was the oldest of twelve children, four of whom died in infancy. [1] He was born at Canal Dover (now just Dover), Ohio, on July 31, 1837. His father was Thomas Henry Quantrill, formerly of Hagerstown, Maryland . His mother, Caroline Cornelia Clark, was a native of Chambersburg, Pennsylvania . They were married on October 11, 1836 and moved to Canal Dover the following December.
Quantrill was well-educated and followed in his father's footsteps, becoming a schoolteacher at the age of sixteen. In 1854, his abusive father died of tuberculosis , leaving the family with a huge financial debt. Quantrill's mother had to turn her home into a boarding house in order to survive. Quantrill helped support the family by working as a schoolteacher but left home a year later and headed to Mendota, Illinois . [2] Here, Quantrill took up a job in the lumberyards, unloading timber from rail cars.
One night while working the late shift, he shot a man dead. Authorities briefly arrested Quantrill, who claimed self-defense. Since there were no eyewitnesses and the victim was a stranger who knew no one in town, William was set free. But police strongly urged him to leave Mendota. Quantrill continued his career as a teacher, moving to Fort Wayne, Indiana in February 1856. And although the district was impressed with Quantrill's teaching abilities, the wages remained meager. Quantrill journeyed back home to Canal Dover that fall, with no more money in his pockets than when he had left. [3]
Quantrill spent the winter in his family's dumpy shack in the impoverished town, growing restless. It was around this time that many Ohioans began to migrate to Kansas Territory in search of cheap land and opportunity. This included Henry Torrey and Harmon Beeson, two local men hoping to build a large farm for their families out west. Although they didn't trust the 19-year-old William, Bill's mother's pleadings persuaded them to let her son accompany them to Kansas in an effort to get him to turn his life around.
The party of three departed in late February 1857. Torrey and Beeson agreed to pay for Quantrill's land in exchange for a couple of months' worth of work. They settled at Marais des Cygnes, but things did not go as well as planned. After about two months, Quantrill began to slack off when it came to working the land, and he spent most days wandering aimlessly about the wilderness with a rifle. A dispute arose over the claim, and he went to court with Torrey and Beeson. The court awarded the men what was owed to them, but Quantrill only paid half of what the court had mandated. His relationship with Beeson was never the same, but he remained friends with Torrey.
Shortly afterwards, Quantrill accompanied a large group of hometown friends in their quest to start a settlement on Tuscarora Lake. But soon neighbors began to notice Bill stealing goods out of other people's cabins, so they banished him from the community in January 1858.
He signed on as a teamster with the U.S. Army expedition heading to Salt Lake City, Utah in the spring of 1858. Little is known of Quantrill's journey out west, except that he excelled at the game of poker. He racked up piles of winnings by playing the game against his comrades at Fort Bridger but flushed it all on one hand the next day, leaving him dead broke.
Quantrill then joined a group of Missouri ruffians and became somewhat of a drifter. The group helped protect Missouri farmers from the Jayhawkers for pay and slept wherever they could find lodging. Quantrill traveled back to Utah and then to Colorado, but returned in less than a year to Lawrence, Kansas , in 1859. It was at this time that his political views started to take shape, and his attitude towards the slavery issue began to form. [4]
Before 1860, Quantrill's political view appeared to support the anti-slavery side. He wrote to his good friend W.W. Scott in January 1858 that the Lecompton Constitution was a "swindle" and that James H. Lane , a Northern sympathizer, was "as good a man as we have here." He also called the Democrats "the worst men we have for they are all rascals, for no one can be a democrat here without being one." [5]
One year later, in 1859, he was back in Lawrence, Kansas where he taught school until it closed in 1860. He then took up with brigands and turned to cattle rustling and anything else that could earn him a dollar. He also learned the profitability of capturing runaway slaves and devised plans to use free black men as bait for runaway slaves, whom he subsequently captured and returned to their masters in exchange for reward money.
His new lifestyle may have been the reason for his change of political views. In February 1860, Quantrill wrote a letter to his mother expressing his views on the anti-slavery supporters. He told her the pro-slavery movement was right and that he now detested Jim Lane. He said that the hanging of John Brown had been too good for him and that, "the devil has got unlimited sway over this territory, and will hold it until we have a better set of man and society generally." [6]

Guerrilla leader
In 1861, Quantrill went to Texas with a slaveholder named Marcus Gill. There he met Joel B. Mayes and joined the Cherokee Nations. Mayes was a half Scots-Irish, half Cherokee Indian Confederate sympathizer and a war chief of the Cherokee Nations in Texas. He had moved from Georgia to the old Indian Territory in 1838. Mayes enlisted and served as a private in Company A of the 1st Cherokee Regiment in the Confederate army. It was Mayes who taught Quantrill guerrilla warfare tactics. He would learn the ambush fighting tactics used by the Native Americans as well as sneak attacks and camouflage. Quantrill, in the company of Mayes and the Cherokee Nations, joined with General Sterling Price and fought at the Battle of Wilson's Creek and Lexington in August and September 1861. [7]
Quantrill deserted General Price's army and went to Blue Springs, Missouri to form his own "Army" of loyal men who had great belief in him and the Confederate cause. By Christmas of 1861, he had ten men who would follow him full-time into his pro-Confederate guerrilla organization. [8] These men were: William Haller, George Todd, Joseph Gilcrist, Perry Hoy, John Little, James Little, Joseph Baughan, William H. Gregg, James A. Hendricks, and John W. Koger. Later in 1862, John Jarrett, John Brown, Cole Younger , as well as William T. "Bloody Bill" Anderson and the James brothers would join Quantrill's army. [9]

Lawrence Massacre
The most significant event in Quantrill's guerrilla career took place on August 21, 1863. Lawrence had been seen for years as the stronghold of the anti-slavery forces in Kansas and as a base of operation for incursions into Missouri by Jayhawkers and pro-Union forces. It was also the home of James H. Lane , a senator known in Missouri for his staunch anti-slavery views and also a leader of the Jayhawkers (outlaws masquerading as Union soldiers).
During the weeks immediately preceding the raid, Union General Thomas Ewing, Jr. , had ordered the detention of any civilians giving aid to Quantrill's Raiders . Several female relatives of the guerrillas had been imprisoned in a makeshift jail in Kansas City, Missouri . On August 14, the building collapsed, killing four young women and seriously injuring others. Among the dead was Josephine Anderson, sister of one of Quantrill's key guerrilla allies, "Bloody Bill" Anderson . Another of Anderson's sisters, Mary, was permanently crippled in the collapse. Quantrill's men believed the collapse was deliberate, and the event fanned them into a fury.
Some historians have suggested that Quantrill had actually planned to raid Lawrence in advance of the building's collapse, in retaliation for earlier Jayhawker attacks [10] as well as the burning of Osceola, Missouri .
Early on the morning of August 21, Quantrill descended from Mount Oread and attacked Lawrence at the head of a combined force of as many as 450 guerrilla fighters. Senator Lane, a prime target of the raid, managed to escape through a cornfield in his nightshirt, but the guerrillas, on Quantrill's orders, killed around 150 men and boys that were able to carry a rifle. [11] When Quantrill's men rode out at 9 a.m., most of Lawrence's buildings were burning, including all but two businesses.
On August 25, in retaliation for the raid, General Ewing authorized General Order No. 11 (not to be confused with General Ulysses S. Grant 's order of the same name). The edict ordered the depopulation of three and a half Missouri counties along the Kansas border (with the exception of a few designated towns), forcing tens of thousands of civilians to abandon their homes. Union troops marched through behind them, burning buildings, torching planted fields and shooting down livestock to deprive the guerrillas of food, fodder and support. The area was so thoroughly devastated that it became known thereafter as the "Burnt District". Quantrill and his men rode south to Texas , where they passed the winter with the Confederate forces. On May 18, 1864 Quantrill's forces lynched Texas Sheriff James L. Read in Collin County, Texas [12]

Last years
While in Texas, Quantrill and his 400 men quarreled. His once-large band broke up into several smaller guerrilla companies. One was led by his lieutenant, "Bloody Bill" Anderson, Quantrill joined them briefly in the fall of 1864 during fighting north of the Missouri River .
In the spring of 1865, now leading only a few dozen men, Quantrill staged a series of raids in western Kentucky . Confederate General Robert E. Lee surrendered to Ulysses Grant on April 9, and General Johnston surrendered most of the rest of the Confederate Army to General Sherman on April 26. On May 10, Quantrill and his band were caught in a Union ambush at Wakefield Farm . Unable to escape on account of a skittish horse, he was shot in the back and paralyzed from the chest down. He was brought by wagon to Louisville, Kentucky and taken to the military prison hospital, located on the north side of Broadway at 10th Street. He died from his wounds on June 6, 1865, at the age of 27. [13]

Burial
Quantrill was buried in an unmarked grave (it was later marked) in what later became known as St. John's Cemetery in Louisville. A boyhood friend of Quantrill's, newspaper reporter William W. Scott, claimed to have dug up the Louisville grave in 1887 and brought Quantrill's remains back to Dover at the request of Quantrill's mother. These remains were supposedly buried in Dover in 1889. However, Scott attempted unsuccessfully to sell what he said were Quantrill's bones, so it is not known whether the remains he returned to Dover or buried in Dover were genuine. In the early 1990s the Missouri division of the Sons of Confederate Veterans convinced the Kansas State Historical Society to negotiate with authorities in Dover, which led to three arm bones, two leg bones, and some hair, all allegedly Quantrill's, being buried in 1992 at the Old Confederate Veteran's Home Cemetery in Higginsville, Missouri . As a result of these events, there are grave markers for Quantrill in Louisville, Dover, and Higginsville. [14]

Claim of post-1865 survival
In August 1907, news articles appeared in Canada and the U.S. claiming that J.E. Duffy, a member of a Michigan cavalry troop that dealt with Quantrill's raiders during the Civil War, had met Quantrill at Quatsino Sound , on northern Vancouver Island while investigating timber rights in the area. Duffy claimed to recognize the man, living under the name of John Sharp, as Quantrill. Duffy said that Sharp admitted he was Quantrill and discussed in detail raids in Kansas and elsewhere. Sharp claimed that he had survived the ambush in Kentucky, though receiving a bayonet and bullet wound, making his way to South America where he lived some years in Chile . He returned to the U.S., working as a cattleman in Fort Worth, Texas . He then moved to Oregon, acting as a cowpuncher and drover, before reaching British Columbia in the 1890s, where he worked in logging, trapping and finally as a mine caretaker at Coal Harbour at Quatsino.
Within some weeks after the news stories were published, two men came to British Columbia, travelling to Quatsino from Victoria, leaving Quatsino on a return voyage of a coastal steamer the next day. On that day, Sharp was found severely beaten, dying several hours later without giving information about his attackers. The police were unable to solve the murder. [15]

Marriage
During the war, Quantrill met thirteen-year old Sarah Katherine King at her parents' farm in Blue Springs, Missouri . They married and she lived in camp with Quantrill and his men. At the time of his death, she was seventeen. [16]

Reputation and legacy
Quantrill's actions remain controversial to this day. Some historians view him as an opportunistic, bloodthirsty outlaw; James M. McPherson , one of America's most prominent experts on the Civil War today, calls him and Anderson "pathological killers" who "murdered and burned out Missouri Unionists." [17] Some of Quantrill's celebrity later rubbed off on other ex-Raiders – John Jarrett, George and Oliver Shepard, Jesse and Frank James , and Cole Younger who went on after the war to apply Quantrill's hit-and-run tactics to bank and train robbery. [18]
The William Clarke Quantrill Society [19] continues to celebrate Quantrill's life and deeds.

In fiction

Comics

Film

Literature

Plays

Television

Notes
WebPage index: 00056
Deletionism and inclusionism in Wikipedia
Deletionism and inclusionism are opposing philosophies that largely developed and came to public notice within the context of the community of editors of the online encyclopedia Wikipedia . The terms are connected to views on the appropriate scope of the encyclopedia, and the appropriate point for a topic to be allowed to "include" an encyclopedia article (i.e., "inclusion") or "delete" the article (i.e., "deletion"). [1] Inclusionism and deletionism are broad terms falling within a spectrum of views. The concepts are closely related to Wikipedia's concept of notability , with deletionists and inclusionists taking a strong or relaxed stance on "notability" respectively. Many users do not identify strongly with either position.
"Deletionists" are proponents of selective coverage and removal of articles seen as unnecessary or highly substandard. Deletionist viewpoints are commonly motivated by a desire that Wikipedia be focused on and cover significant topics – along with the desire to place a firm cap upon proliferation of promotional use (seen as abuse of the website), trivia , and articles which are, in their opinion, of no general interest, lack suitable source material for high quality coverage, or are too short or otherwise unacceptably poor in quality. [2] [3] [4]
"Inclusionists" are proponents of broad retention, including retention of "harmless" articles and articles otherwise deemed substandard to allow for future improvement. Inclusionist viewpoints are commonly motivated by a desire to keep Wikipedia broad in coverage with a much lower entry barrier for topics covered – along with the belief that it is impossible to tell what knowledge might be "useful" or productive, that content often starts poor and is improved if time is allowed, that there is effectively no incremental cost of coverage, that arbitrary lines in the sand are unhelpful and may prove divisive, and that goodwill requires avoiding arbitrary deletion of others' work. Some extend this to include allowing a wider range of sources such as notable blogs and other websites. [3] [5]
To the extent that an official stance exists at 2010, it is that "There is no practical limit to the number of topics it can cover" but "there is an important distinction between what can be done, and what should be done", [6] the latter being the subject of the policy " What Wikipedia is not ". [6] The policy concludes "Consequently, this policy is not a free pass for inclusion". [6]

Background
Due to concerns about vandalism and appropriateness of content, most wikis require policies regarding inclusion. [7] Wikipedia has developed spaces for policy and conflict resolution regarding the disputes for individual articles. [8] These debates, which can be initiated by anyone, [9] [10] take place on an "Articles for deletion" page [11] (often referred to by editors as an AfD). Much discussion concerns not only the content of each article in question, but also "differing perspectives on how to edit an ideal encyclopedia." [12]
At the end of each debate, an administrator judges the community consensus. Articles that do not require debate can be flagged and deleted without debate by administrators. [13] If the administrator's decision is disputed, then the discussion can be taken to "deletion review," where the community discusses the administrator's decision. In controversial cases, the debates can spread to other places on the Internet . [14] [15]
A 2006 estimate was that pages about Wikipedia governance and policy entries were one of the fastest-growing areas of Wikipedia and contained about one quarter of its content. [16]

Positions
The "Association of Inclusionist Wikipedians" and the "Association of Deletionist Wikipedians" were founded by administrators. [2] Each has a Wikimedia page listing their respective members, charters and principles. While written in humorous tones, they reveal the perceived importance of Wikipedia held by the members. [17]
Inclusionists may argue that the interest of a few is a sufficient condition for the existence of an article, since such articles are harmless and there is no restriction on space in Wikipedia. [3] [5] Favoring the idiosyncratic and subjective, [12] an inclusionist slogan is "Wikipedia is not paper." [9] [16]
On the other hand, deletionists favor objectivity and conformity, [12] holding that "Wikipedia is not Google ," [2] a "junkyard," [9] or "a dumping ground for facts." [18] They argue that the interest of enough people is a necessary condition for article quality, [14] and articles about trivial subjects damage the credibility and future success of Wikipedia. [16] They advocate the establishment and enforcement of specific standards and policies [2] as a form of jurisprudence . [17]
According to veteran contributor Geoff Burling, newer members are less likely to have helped delete articles that should have been kept on hindsight, and so exercise less caution. [18] Journalism professor K.G. Schneider has identified the mentality of deletionism as having manifested once the emphasis of the encyclopaedia shifted from quantity to quality. [19]

Responses
A "Wikimorgue", in which all deleted articles and their edit histories would be retained, has been suggested as a means to provide greater transparency in the deletion process . [10] [19] A website, Deletionpedia , in fact now has a file of representative deleted pages from February to September 2008.
In an effort to promote a middle ground between the two philosophies, the "Association of Mergist Wikipedians" was created in November 2004, [20] emphasizing the possibility of merging articles together as an alternative to both outright deletion of content and the retention of separate articles for less important subjects. A merge from one article to another is executed by moving the relevant content from the former to the latter, and redirecting the former to the latter. [17]

Criticism
Documentarian Jason Scott has noted the large amount of wasted effort that goes into deletion debates. [21] Deletion debates may contribute to community disintegration, [3] restriction of information, [14] or a decrease in the rate of article creation that suggests a decrease in passion and motivation amongst editors. [22] Being explicitly called an inclusionist or deletionist can sidetrack the issue from the actual debate. [20] Nevertheless, some have observed that the interaction between the two groups may actually result in an enhancement of overall quality of content. [23]
Startup accelerator and angel investor Y Combinator co-founder Paul Graham has written on a page listing "Startup Ideas We'd Like to Fund" that deletionists rule Wikipedia:
Novelist Nicholson Baker recounted how an article on the beat poet Richard Denner was deleted as "nonnotable", and criticised the behaviour of vigilante editors on Wikipedia in New York Review of Books . [10] [25] The article has since been restored.
Such debates have sparked the creation of websites critical of Wikipedia such as Wikitruth, which watches for articles in risk of deletion. [19] Wikinews editor Brian McNeil has been quoted as saying that every encyclopedia experiences internal battles, the difference being that those of Wikipedia are public. [14]
In 2009, Wikipedia began to see a reduction in the number of edits to the site , which some called a result of user frustration due to excessive deletionism. [26]

Notable debates
Specific cases of disputes between deletionists and inclusionists have attracted media coverage.
The article on South African restaurant Mzoli's was nominated for deletion after being created by Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales , [3] who said that supporters of deletion displayed "shockingly bad faith behavior." The article was kept after a multitude of editors helped work on it. [18] The consequence is that while inclusionists can say the deleting administrator crossed the line, deletionists can say that the process works as notability was established. [23]
In February 2007, the nomination of the Terry Shannon article for deletion [27] was ridiculed by The Inquirer . [28]
The deletion of the biography of television anchor Susan Peters , the article for the Pownce website [3] and Ruby programmer Why the lucky stiff also sparked controversy. [29]
Comic book and science fiction / fantasy novel writer Peter David , who helped cast actor Kristian Ayre in the Nickelodeon TV series he co-created, Space Cases , criticized the November 2009 deletion of Ayre's Wikipedia biography, [30] and what he perceived as deletionism on the part of some of the project's editors, in his "But I Digress ..." column in Comics Buyer's Guide #1663 (March 2010), remarking that "Wikipedia, which has raised the trivial to the level of art form, actually has cut-off lines for what's deemed important enough to warrant inclusion." In attacking the practice in general, David focused on the process by which the merits of Ayre's biography were discussed prior to its deletion, and what he described as inaccurate arguments that led to that result. Referring to the processes by which articles were judged suitable for inclusion as "nonsensical, inaccurate and flawed", David provided information about Ayre with the expressed purpose that it would lead to the article's recreation. [31] The article was recreated on January 20, 2010. [32]

Notable advocates and analysts
Wikipedia co-founder Larry Sanger identified himself as an inclusionist, excepting on topics pertaining to sexuality , for his Citizendium project. [33] Wikimedia Foundation executive director Katherine Maher also identifies as inclusionist. [34]
Andrew Lih, a deletionist-turned inclusionist, observes a cultural shift from Wikipedia's initial expansion in that it has become more cautious. He changed his position when an article he created about the social networking website Pownce was speedily deleted by another administrator as advertising. [14]

Subjects of deleted articles
In July 2006, The Inquirer was offended by claims made by certain Wikipedia editors that it conspired with Everywhere Girl to create her phenomenon. They observed an apparent campaign to remove all references to Everywhere Girl on Wikipedia. [35] Later, they found it contrary to common sense that what became included on Wikipedia was their series of reports on the deletions of the Wikipedia article. [36]
In December 2006, writer and composer Matthew Dallman found that Wikipedia's biography of him was under debate, and became drawn to the vote counts. He was deciding to not participate on his own behalf due to Wikipedia's apparent dislike of self-promotion, saying that "It's like I'm on trial and I can't testify," though he would not be able to resist the urge. [11]
Andrew Klein was disappointed that the article on his webcomic Cake Pony was deleted, despite his claims that the "article contains valuable and factual information about a popular internet meme." He conceded that "it's their site and you've got to play by their rules." [11] Many other webcomic-related articles were deleted in fall 2006 to criticism by their artists. [10]
Slate.com and The Wall Street Journal writer Timothy Noah documented his "career as an encyclopedia entry," and questioned the need for rules on notability in addition to rules on verifiability. [5] [37]

Scholarly research
At the 2005 Digital Arts and Culture Conference, the two groups were discussed as examples among "Eventualism" and "Immediatism" in a successful large-scale architecture of participation. [12]
The Institut national de recherche pédagogique (National Institute for Educational Research) in France, in case studies of Wikipedia, reported that while it was difficult to measure the influence of the groups as of April 2006, their existence is indicative of Wikipedia's internal dynamics consisting of multiple identities, [17] and may play progressively increasing roles. [38]
Deletion debates over an article on Enterprise 2.0 sparked a study by the Harvard Business School . [9]
In the journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , a study of Wikipedia social dynamics, called inclusionism and deletionism the two most prominent associations within Wikipedia. They observe that users in the same role (administrator, etc.) may hold different perspectives, and that "the diversity of member [information quality] preferences and the low cost of forming or switching associations may encourage schism in an existing association or evolution of new groups." At the same time, the associations may help to better critique existing policies and to find and achieve points of convergence. [2]

Other language Wikipedias
Since each language Wikipedia sets its own notability standards, these have in some cases diverged substantially. The German Wikipedia is said by one journalist to be dominated by "exclusionists" whereas the English Wikipedia is "inclusionist"; [39] although it is pointed out that the English Wikipedia has for several years required users to create accounts to create articles, which German Wikipedia does not. [40] A debate in late 2009 over inclusion of several articles led to criticism in the German blogosphere of such vehemence and volume that the German Wikimedia held a meeting with several bloggers and German Wikipedia administrators regarding the German Wikipedia's notability criteria, and issued a press statement. [39]

External initiatives to salvage the deletions

See also
WebPage index: 00057
Pakistan
Coordinates : 30°N 70°E ﻿ / ﻿ 30°N 70°E ﻿ / 30; 70
Pakistan ( i / ˈ p æ k ᵻ s t æ n / or i / p ɑː k ᵻ ˈ s t ɑː n / ; Urdu : پاکستان ‎), officially the Islamic Republic of Pakistan ( Urdu : اسلامی جمہوریہ پاکستان ‎), is a federal parliamentary republic in South Asia on the crossroads of Central and Western Asia . It is the sixth-most populous country with a population exceeding 201 million people . [24] In terms of area, it is the 33rd-largest country spanning 881,913 square kilometres (340,509 square miles). Pakistan has a 1,046-kilometre (650-mile) coastline along the Arabian Sea and its Gulf of Oman in the south and is bordered by India to the east, Afghanistan to the west, Iran to the southwest, and China in the far northeast, respectively. It is separated from Tajikistan by Afghanistan's narrow Wakhan Corridor in the north, and also shares a maritime border with Oman .
The territory that now constitutes Pakistan is considered a cradle of civilisation [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] that was previously home to several ancient cultures , including the Mehrgarh of the Neolithic and the Bronze Age Indus Valley Civilisation , and later home to kingdoms ruled by people of different faiths and cultures, including Hindus , Indo-Greeks , Muslims , Turco-Mongols , Afghans , and Sikhs . The area has been ruled by numerous empires and dynasties, including the Persian Achaemenid Empire , Alexander of Macedonia , the Indian Mauryan Empire , the Arab Umayyad Caliphate , the Delhi Sultanate , the Mongol Empire , the Mughal Empire , the Durrani Empire , the Sikh Empire , and most recently, the British Empire .
Pakistan is unique among Muslim countries in that it is the only country to have been created in the name of Islam. [30] [31] As a result of the Pakistan Movement led by Muhammad Ali Jinnah and the subcontinent 's struggle for independence, Pakistan was created in 1947 as an independent homeland for South Asian Muslims. [32] It is an ethnically and linguistically diverse country, with a similarly diverse geography and wildlife . Initially a dominion , Pakistan adopted a constitution in 1956, becoming an Islamic republic. An ethnic civil war in 1971 resulted in the secession of East Pakistan as the new country of Bangladesh . In 1973 Pakistan adopted a new constitution establishing, alongside its pre-existing parliamentary republic status, a federal government based in Islamabad consisting of four provinces and four federal territories . The new constitution also stipulated that all laws were to conform to the injunctions of Islam as laid down in the Quran and Sunnah . [33]
A regional [34] [35] [36] and middle power , [37] [38] [39] Pakistan has the sixth-largest standing armed forces in the world and is also a nuclear power as well as a declared nuclear-weapons state, being the second in South Asia and the only nation in the Muslim world to have that status. Pakistan has a semi-industrialised economy with a well-integrated agriculture sector , and a growing services sector. [40] [41] The Pakistani economy is the 24th-largest in the world in terms of purchasing power and the 41st-largest in terms of nominal GDP (World Bank). It is ranked among the emerging and growth-leading economies of the world, [42] [43] and is backed by one of the world's largest and fastest-growing middle classes . [44] [45]
The post-independence history of Pakistan has been characterised by periods of military rule, and since 2008 a transition to democracy , amid conflicts with neighbouring India . The country continues to face challenging problems such as illiteracy , healthcare , and corruption , but has substantially reduced poverty [46] and terrorism [47] and expanded per capita income . [48] Pakistan is a member of the United Nations , the Non-Aligned Movement , the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation , the Commonwealth of Nations , the ECO , the SAARC , the Developing Eight , and the G20 developing nations , Group of 24 , Group of 77 , and ECOSOC . It is also an associate member of CERN . Pakistan is a signatory to the Kyoto Protocol , the Paris Agreement , and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .

Etymology
The name Pakistan literally means "land of the pure" in Urdu and Persian . It is a play on the word pāk meaning pure in Persian and Pashto ; [49] the suffix -stān is a Persian word meaning place of , cognate with the Sanskrit word sthāna ( Devanagari : स्थान [st̪ʰaːnə] ). [50]
The name of the country was coined in 1933 as Pakstan by Choudhry Rahmat Ali , a Pakistan Movement activist, who published it in his pamphlet Now or Never , [51] using it as an acronym ("thirty million Muslim brethren who live in PAKSTAN") referring to the names of the five northern regions of the British Raj : P unjab , A fghania , K ashmir , S indh , and Baluchis tan . [52] [53] [54] The letter i was incorporated to ease pronunciation and form the linguistically correct and meaningful name. [55]

History

Early and medieval age
Some of the earliest ancient human civilisations in South Asia originated from areas encompassing present-day Pakistan. [56] The earliest known inhabitants in the region were Soanian during the Lower Paleolithic , of whom stone tools have been found in the Soan Valley of Punjab . [57] The Indus region , which covers most of present day Pakistan, was the site of several successive ancient cultures including the Neolithic Mehrgarh [58] and the Bronze Age Indus Valley Civilisation (2,800–1,800 BC) at Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro . [59] [60]
The Vedic Civilisation (1500–500 BC), characterised by Indo-Aryan culture, laid the foundations of Hinduism , which later became well established in the region. [61] [62] Multan was an important Hindu pilgrimage centre. [63] The Vedic civilisation flourished in the ancient Gandhāran city of Takṣaśilā, now Taxila in the Punjab. [58] Successive ancient empires and kingdoms ruled the region: the Persian Achaemenid Empire (around 519 BC), Alexander the Great 's empire in 326 BC [64] and the Maurya Empire , founded by Chandragupta Maurya and extended by Ashoka the Great , until 185 BC. [58] The Indo-Greek Kingdom founded by Demetrius of Bactria (180–165 BC) included Gandhara and Punjab and reached its greatest extent under Menander (165–150 BC), prospering the Greco-Buddhist culture in the region. [58] [65] Taxila had one of the earliest universities and centres of higher education in the world. [66] [67] [68] [69]
At its zenith, the Rai Dynasty (489–632 AD) of Sindh ruled this region and the surrounding territories. [70] The Pala Dynasty was the last Buddhist empire, which, under Dharmapala and Devapala , stretched across South Asia from what is now Bangladesh through Northern India to Pakistan.
The Arab conqueror Muhammad bin Qasim conquered the Indus valley from Sindh to Multan in southern Punjab in 711 AD. [71] [72] [73] [74] [75] The Pakistan government's official chronology identifies this as the time when the foundation of Pakistan was laid. [71] [76] [77] The Early Medieval period (642–1219 AD) witnessed the spread of Islam in the region. During this period, Sufi missionaries played a pivotal role in converting a majority of the regional Buddhist and Hindu population to Islam. [78] These developments set the stage for the rule of several successive Muslim empires in the region, including the Ghaznavid Empire (975–1187 AD), the Ghorid Kingdom, and the Delhi Sultanate (1206–1526 AD). The Lodi dynasty , the last of the Delhi Sultanate, was replaced by the Mughal Empire (1526–1857 AD). The Mughals introduced Persian literature and high culture, establishing the roots of Indo-Persian culture in the region. [79] From the region of modern-day Pakistan, key cities during the Mughal rule were Lahore and Thatta , [80] both of which were chosen as the site of impressive Mughal buildings . [81] In the early 16th century, the region remained under the Mughal Empire ruled by Muslim emperors . [82] By the early 18th century, increasing European influence contributed to the slow disintegration of the empire as the lines between commercial and political dominance became increasingly blurred. [82]
During this time, the English East India Company had established coastal outposts. [82] Control over the seas, greater resources, technology, and British military protection led the Company to increasingly flex its military muscle, allowing the Company to gain control over the subcontinent by 1765 and sideline European competitors. [83] Expanding access beyond Bengal and the subsequent increased strength and size of its army enabled it to annex or subdue most of region by the 1820s. [82] Many historians see this as the start of the region's colonial period. [82] By this time, with its economic power severely curtailed by the British parliament and itself effectively made an arm of British administration, the Company began more deliberately to enter non-economic arenas such as education, social reform, and culture. [82] Such reforms included the enforcement of the English Education Act in 1835 and the introduction of the Indian Civil Service (ICS). [84] Traditional madrasahs — primary institutions of higher learning for Muslims in the subcontinent — were no longer supported by the English Crown , and nearly all of the madrasahs lost their financial endowment. [85]

Colonial period
The gradual decline of the Mughal Empire in the early 18th century enabled the Sikh Empire to control larger areas until the British East India Company gained ascendancy over the Indian subcontinent . [86] A rebellion in 1857 called the Sepoy mutiny was the region's major armed struggle against the British Empire and Queen Victoria . [87] Divergence in the relationship between Hinduism and Islam created a major rift in British India that led to racially motivated religious violence in India . [88] The language controversy further escalated the tensions between Hindus and Muslims. [89] The Hindu renaissance witnessed an awakening of intellectualism in traditional Hinduism and saw the emergence of more assertive influence in the social and political spheres in British India. [90] [91] An intellectual movement to counter the Hindu renaissance was led by Sir Syed Ahmad Khan , who helped found the All-India Muslim League in 1901 and envisioned, as well as advocated for, the two-nation theory . [86] In contrast to the Indian Congress 's anti-British efforts, the Muslim League was a pro-British movement whose political program inherited the British values that would shape Pakistan's future civil society . [92] [93] In events during World War I , British Intelligence foiled an anti-English conspiracy involving the nexus of Congress and the German Empire . [94] The largely non-violent independence struggle led by the Indian Congress engaged millions of protesters in mass campaigns of civil disobedience in the 1920s and 1930s against the British Empire . [95] [96] [97]
The Muslim League slowly rose to mass popularity in the 1930s amid fears of under-representation and neglect of Muslims in politics . In his presidential address of 29 December 1930, Allama Iqbal called for "the amalgamation of North-West Muslim-majority Indian states" consisting of Punjab, North-West Frontier Province , Sindh , and Balochistan . [99] Muhammad Ali Jinnah , the founder of Pakistan, greatly espoused the two-nation theory and led the Muslim League to adopt the Lahore Resolution of 1940, popularly known as the Pakistan Resolution. [86] In World War II , Jinnah and British-educated founding fathers in the Muslim League supported the United Kingdom 's war efforts , countering opposition against it whilst working towards Sir Syed 's vision . [100]
The 1946 elections resulted in the Muslim League winning 90 percent of the seats reserved for Muslims. Thus, the 1946 election was effectively a plebiscite in which the Indian Muslims were to vote on the creation of Pakistan, a plebiscite won by the Muslim League. [101] This victory was assisted by the support given to the Muslim League by the rural peasantry of Bengal as well as the support of the landowners of Sindh and Punjab. The Congress , which initially denied the Muslim League's claim of being the sole representative of Indian Muslims, was now forced to recognise the fact. [101] The British had no alternative except to take Jinnah's views into account as he had emerged as the sole spokesperson of India's Muslims. However, the British did not want India to be partitioned, and in one last effort to prevent it they devised the Cabinet Mission plan . [102]
As the cabinet mission failed, the British government announced its intention to end the British Raj in India in 1946–47. [103] Nationalists in British India — including Jawaharlal Nehru and Abul Kalam Azad of Congress, Jinnah of the All-India Muslim League , and Master Tara Singh representing the Sikhs — agreed to the proposed terms of transfer of power and independence in June 1947 with the Viceroy of India , Lord Mountbatten of Burma . [104] As the United Kingdom agreed to the partitioning of India in 1947, the modern state of Pakistan was established on 14 August 1947 (27th of Ramadan in 1366 of the Islamic Calendar ) , amalgamating the Muslim-majority eastern and northwestern regions of British India . [97] It comprised the provinces of Balochistan , East Bengal , the North-West Frontier Province , West Punjab , and Sindh. [86] [104]
In the riots that accompanied the partition in Punjab Province, it is believed that between 200,000 and 2,000,000 [105] [106] [107] [108] [109] [110] people were killed in what some have described as a retributive genocide between the religions [111] [112] while 50,000 Muslim women were abducted and raped by Hindu and Sikh men and 33,000 Hindu and Sikh women also experienced the same fate at the hands of Muslims. [113] [114] [115] [116] Around 6.5 million Muslims moved from India to West Pakistan and 4.7 million Hindus and Sikhs moved from West Pakistan to India. [117] It was the largest mass migration in human history. [118] [119] [120] Dispute over Jammu and Kashmir led to the First Kashmir War in 1948. [121] [122]

Independence and modern Pakistan
After independence in 1947, Jinnah, the President of the Muslim League, became the nation's first Governor-General as well as the first President-Speaker of the Parliament , [124] but he died of tuberculosis on 11 September 1948. [125] Meanwhile, Pakistan's founding fathers agreed to appoint Liaquat Ali Khan , the secretary-general of the party , the nation's first Prime Minister . With dominion status in the Commonwealth of Nations, independent Pakistan had two British monarchs before it became a republic. [124]
The creation of Pakistan was never fully accepted by many British leaders, among them Lord Mountbatten . [126] Mountbatten clearly expressed his lack of support and faith in the Muslim League's idea of Pakistan. [127] Jinnah refused Mountbatten's offer to serve as Governor-General of Pakistan. [128] When Mountbatten was asked by Collins and Lapierre if he would have sabotaged Pakistan had he known that Jinnah was dying of tuberculosis, he replied 'most probably'. [129]
Maulana Shabbir Ahmad Usmani , a respected Deobandi alim (scholar) who occupied the position of Shaykh al-Islam in Pakistan in 1949, and Maulana Mawdudi of Jamaat-i-Islami played a pivotal role in the demand for an Islamic constitution. Mawdudi demanded that the Constituent Assembly make an explicit declaration affirming the "supreme sovereignty of God" and the supremacy of the shariah in Pakistan. [130]
A significant result of the efforts of the Jamaat-i-Islami and the ulama was the passage of the Objectives Resolution in March 1949. The Objectives Resolution, which Liaquat Ali Khan called the second most important step in Pakistan's history, declared that "sovereignty over the entire universe belongs to God Almighty alone and the authority which He has delegated to the State of Pakistan through its people for being exercised within the limits prescribed by Him is a sacred trust". The Objectives Resolution has been incorporated as a preamble to the constitutions of 1956, 1962, and 1973. [131]
Democracy was stalled by the martial law that had been enforced by President Iskander Mirza , who was replaced by army chief , General Ayub Khan . After adopting a presidential system in 1962, the country experienced exceptional growth until a second war with India in 1965 that led to an economic downturn and wide-scale public disapproval in 1967. [132] [133] Consolidating control from Ayub Khan in 1969, President Yahya Khan had to deal with a devastating cyclone that caused 500,000 deaths in East Pakistan . [134]
In 1970 Pakistan held its first democratic elections since independence, meant to mark a transition from military rule to democracy, but after the East Pakistani Awami League won against the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP), Yahya Khan and the military establishment refused to hand over power. [135] [136] Operation Searchlight , a military crackdown on the Bengali nationalist movement, led to a declaration of independence and the waging of a war of liberation by the Bengali Mukti Bahini forces in East Pakistan, with support from India. [136] [137] However, in West Pakistan the conflict was described as a civil war as opposed to a war of liberation. [138]
Independent researchers estimate that between 300,000 and 500,000 civilians died during this period while the Bangladesh government puts the number of dead at three million, [139] a figure that is now nearly universally regarded as excessively inflated. [140] Some academics such as Rudolph Rummel and Rounaq Jahan say both sides [141] committed genocide; others such as Richard Sisson and Leo E. Rose believe there was no genocide. [142] In response to India's support for the insurgency in East Pakistan, preemptive strikes on India by Pakistan's air force , navy , and marines sparked a conventional war in 1971 that resulted in an Indian victory and East Pakistan gaining independence as Bangladesh. [136]
With Pakistan surrendering in the war, Yahya Khan was replaced by Zulfikar Ali Bhutto as president; the country worked towards promulgating its constitution and putting the country on the road to democracy. Democratic rule resumed from 1972 to 1977 — an era of self- consciousness , intellectual leftism , nationalism , and nationwide reconstruction. [143] In 1972 Pakistan embarked on an ambitious plan to develop its nuclear deterrence capability with the goal of preventing any foreign invasion ; the country's first nuclear power plant was inaugurated in that same year. [144] [145] Accelerated in response to India's first nuclear test in 1974, this crash program was completed in 1979. [145]
Democracy ended with a military coup in 1977 against the leftist PPP, which saw General Zia-ul-Haq become the president in 1978. From 1977 to 1988, President Zia's corporatisation and economic Islamisation initiatives led to Pakistan becoming one of the fastest-growing economies in South Asia. [146] While building up the country's nuclear program , increasing Islamisation , [147] and the rise of a homegrown conservative philosophy , Pakistan helped subsidise and distribute US resources to factions of the mujahideen against the USSR 's intervention in communist Afghanistan. [148] [149] Pakistan's North-West Frontier Province became a base for the anti-Soviet Afghan fighters, with the province's influential Deobandi ulama playing a significant role in encouraging and organising the 'jihad'. [150]
President Zia died in a plane crash in 1988, and Benazir Bhutto , daughter of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, was elected as the country's first female Prime Minister. The PPP was followed by conservative Pakistan Muslim League (N) , and over the next decade the leaders of the two parties fought for power, alternating in office while the country's situation worsened; economic indicators fell sharply, in contrast to the 1980s. This period is marked by prolonged stagflation , instability, corruption , nationalism , geopolitical rivalry with India , and the clash of left wing - right wing ideologies. [151] [152] As PML(N) secured a supermajority in elections in 1997, Sharif authorised nuclear testings (See: Chagai-I and Chagai-II ), as a retaliation to the second nuclear tests ordered by India, led by Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee in May 1998. [153]
Military tension between the two countries in the Kargil district led to the Kargil War of 1999, and turmoil in civic-military relations allowed General Pervez Musharraf to take over through a bloodless coup d'état . [154] [155] Musharraf governed Pakistan as chief executive from 1999 to 2001 and as President from 2001 to 2008 — a period of enlightenment , social liberalism , extensive economic reforms , [156] and direct involvement in the US-led war on terrorism . When the National Assembly historically completed its first full five-year term on 15 November 2007, the new elections were called by the Election Commission . [157]
After the assassination of Benazir Bhutto in 2007, the PPP secured the most votes in the elections of 2008, appointing party member Yousaf Raza Gillani as Prime Minister. [158] Threatened with impeachment , President Musharraf resigned on 18 August 2008, and was succeeded by Asif Ali Zardari . [159] [160] [161] Clashes with the judicature prompted Gillani 's disqualification from the Parliament and as the Prime Minister in June 2012. [162] By its own financial calculations, Pakistan's involvement in the war on terrorism has cost up to ~$118 billion, [163] sixty thousand casualties and more than 1.8 million displaced civilians. [164] The general election held in 2013 saw the PML(N) almost achieve a supermajority , following which Nawaz Sharif was elected as the Prime Minister, returning to the post for the third time in fourteen years, in a democratic transition. [165]

Geography, environment and climate
The geography and climate of Pakistan are extremely diverse, and the country is home to a wide variety of wildlife . [166] Pakistan covers an area of 881,913 km 2 (340,509 sq mi), approximately equal to the combined land areas of France and the United Kingdom. It is the 33rd-largest nation by total area , although this ranking varies depending on how the disputed territory of Kashmir is counted. Pakistan has a 1,046 km (650 mi) coastline along the Arabian Sea and the Gulf of Oman in the south [167] and land borders of 6,774 km (4,209 mi) in total: 2,430 km (1,510 mi) with Afghanistan, 523 km (325 mi) with China , 2,912 km (1,809 mi) with India and 909 km (565 mi) with Iran . [168] It shares a marine border with Oman, [169] and is separated from Tajikistan by the cold, narrow Wakhan Corridor . [170] Pakistan occupies a geopolitically important location at the crossroads of South Asia, the Middle East, and Central Asia . [12]
Geologically, Pakistan is located in the Indus–Tsangpo Suture Zone and overlaps the Indian tectonic plate in its Sindh and Punjab provinces; Balochistan and most of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa are within the Eurasian plate , mainly on the Iranian plateau . Gilgit–Baltistan and Azad Kashmir lie along the edge of the Indian plate and hence are prone to violent earthquakes . This region has the highest rates of seismicity and largest earthquakes in the Himalaya region. [171] Ranging from the coastal areas of the south to the glaciated mountains of the north, Pakistan's landscapes vary from plains to deserts, forests, hills, and plateaus. [172]
Pakistan is divided into three major geographic areas: the northern highlands, the Indus River plain, and the Balochistan Plateau. [173] The northern highlands contain the Karakoram , Hindu Kush , and Pamir mountain ranges (see mountains of Pakistan ), which contain some of the world's highest peaks, including five of the fourteen eight-thousanders (mountain peaks over 8,000 metres or 26,250 feet), which attract adventurers and mountaineers from all over the world, notably K2 (8,611 m or 28,251 ft) and Nanga Parbat (8,126 m or 26,660 ft). [174] The Balochistan Plateau lies in the west and the Thar Desert in the east. The 1,609 km (1,000 mi) Indus River and its tributaries flow through the country from the Kashmir region to the Arabian Sea. There is an expanse of alluvial plains along it in the Punjab and Sindh. [175]
The climate varies from tropical to temperate, with arid conditions in the coastal south. There is a monsoon season with frequent flooding due to heavy rainfall, and a dry season with significantly less rainfall or none at all. There are four distinct seasons: a cool, dry winter from December through February; a hot, dry spring from March through May; the summer rainy season, or southwest monsoon period, from June through September; and the retreating monsoon period of October and November. [86] Rainfall varies greatly from year to year, and patterns of alternate flooding and drought are common. [176]

Flora and fauna
The diversity of the landscape and climate in Pakistan allows a wide variety of trees and plants to flourish. The forests range from coniferous alpine and subalpine trees such as spruce , pine , and deodar cedar in the extreme northern mountains to deciduous trees in most of the country (for example, the mulberry-like shisham found in the Sulaiman Mountains ), to palms such as coconut and date in the southern Punjab, southern Balochistan, and all of Sindh. The western hills are home to juniper , tamarisk , coarse grasses, and scrub plants. Mangrove forests form much of the coastal wetlands along the coast in the south. [177]
Coniferous forests are found at altitudes ranging from 1,000 to 4,000 metres (3,300 to 13,100 feet) in most of the northern and northwestern highlands. In the xeric regions of Balochistan, date palm and Ephedra are common. In most of the Punjab and Sindh, the Indus plains support tropical and subtropical dry and moist broadleaf forest as well as tropical and xeric shrublands. These forests are mostly of mulberry , acacia , and eucalyptus . [178] About 2.2% or 1,687,000 hectares (16,870 km 2 ) of Pakistan was forested in 2010. [179]
The fauna of Pakistan also reflects the country's varied climate. Around 668 bird species are found there, [180] [181] including crows , sparrows , mynas , hawks , falcons , and eagles . Palas, Kohistan , has a significant population of western tragopan . [182] Many birds sighted in Pakistan are migratory, coming from Europe, Central Asia, and India. [183]
The southern plains are home to mongooses , civets , hares, the Asiatic jackal , the Indian pangolin , the jungle cat , and the desert cat . There are mugger crocodiles in the Indus, and wild boar , deer, porcupines , and small rodents in the surrounding areas. The sandy scrublands of central Pakistan are home to Asiatic jackals, striped hyenas , wildcats, and leopards . [184] [185] The lack of vegetative cover, the severe climate, and the impact of grazing on the deserts have left wild animals in a precarious position. The chinkara is the only animal that can still be found in significant numbers in Cholistan . A small number of nilgai are found along the Pakistan–India border and in some parts of Cholistan. [184] [186] A wide variety of animals live in the mountainous north, including the Marco Polo sheep , the urial (a subspecies of wild sheep), the markhor goat, the ibex goat, the Asian black bear , and the Himalayan brown bear . [184] [187] [188] Among the rare animals found in the area are the snow leopard [187] and the blind Indus river dolphin , of which there are believed to be about 1,100 remaining, protected at the Indus River Dolphin Reserve in Sindh. [187] [189] In total, 174 mammals, 177 reptiles, 22 amphibians, 198 freshwater fish species and 5,000 species of invertebrates (including insects) have been recorded in Pakistan. [180] [181]
The flora and fauna of Pakistan suffer from a number of problems. Pakistan has the second-highest rate of deforestation in the world, which, along with hunting and pollution, has had adverse effects on the ecosystem. The government has established a large number of protected areas, wildlife sanctuaries, and game reserves to address these issues. [180] [181]

National parks and wildlife sanctuaries
At present, there are around 157 protected areas in Pakistan that are recognised by the IUCN . According to the 'Modern Protected Areas' legislation, a national park is a protected area set aside by the government for the protection and conservation of its outstanding scenery and wildlife in a natural state. The oldest national park is Lal Suhanra in Bahawalpur District , established in 1972. [190] It is one of the only two biosphere reserves of Pakistan; the other is the Ziarat Juniper Forest , which is the largest contiguous natural juniper forest in Pakistan. It is also the second oldest, after the one in California. [191] Central Karakoram in Gilgit Baltistan is currently the largest national park in the country, encompassing a total approximate area of 7010139010000000000♠ 1,390,100 hectares (3,435,011.9 acres). The smallest national park is the Ayub , covering a total approximate area of 7006931000000000000♠ 931 hectares (2,300.6 acres).

Government and politics
Pakistan's political experience is essentially related to the struggle of Indian Muslims to regain the power they lost to British colonisation. [192] Pakistan is a democratic parliamentary federal republic , with Islam as the state religion . [14] The first constitution was adopted in 1956 but suspended by Ayub Khan in 1958, who replaced it with the second constitution in 1962. [97] A complete and comprehensive constitution was adopted in 1973 — it was suspended by Zia-ul-Haq in 1977 but reinstated in 1985 — is the country's most important document, laying the foundations of the current government. [168] The Pakistani military establishment has played an influential role in mainstream politics throughout Pakistan's political history . [97] The periods 1958–1971 , 1977–1988 , and 1999–2008 saw military coups that resulted in the imposition of martial law and military commanders who governed as de facto presidents. [193] Today Pakistan has a multi-party parliamentary system with clear division of powers and checks and balances among the branches of government. The first successful democratic transition occurred in May 2013. Politics in Pakistan is centred on, and dominated by, a homegrown social philosophy comprising a blend of ideas from socialism , conservatism , and the third way . As of the general elections held in 2013, the three main political parties in the country are: the centre-right conservative Pakistan Muslim League-N ; the centre-left socialist PPP; and the centrist and third-way Pakistan Movement for Justice (PTI).

Foreign relations
As the Muslim world 's second most populous nation-state (after Indonesia ) and its only nuclear power state, Pakistan has an important role in the international community. [194] [195] With a semi-agricultural and semi-industrialized economy, its foreign policy determines its standard of interactions for its organisations, corporations, and individual citizens. [196] [197] Its geostrategic intentions were explained by Jinnah in a broadcast message in 1947, which is featured in a prominent quotation on the homepage of Pakistan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs website: "The foundation of our foreign policy is friendship with all nations across the globe." [198]
After Independence, Pakistan vigorously pursued bilateral relations with other Muslim countries [199] and made an active bid for leadership of the Muslim world , or at least for leadership in efforts to achieve unity. [200] The Ali brothers had sought to project Pakistan as the natural leader of the Islamic world, in part due to its large manpower and military strength. [201] A top-ranking Muslim League leader, Khaliquzzaman , declared that Pakistan would bring together all Muslim countries into Islamistan — a pan-Islamic entity. [202]
Such developments (along with Pakistan's creation) did not get American approval, and British Prime Minister Clement Attlee voiced international opinion at the time by stating that he wished that India and Pakistan would re-unite. [203] Since most of the Arab world was undergoing a nationalist awakening at the time, there was little attraction to Pakistan's Pan-Islamic aspirations. [204] Some of the Arab countries saw the 'Islamistan' project as a Pakistani attempt to dominate other Muslim states. [205]
Pakistan vigorously championed the right of self-determination for Muslims around the world. Pakistan's efforts for the independence movements of Indonesia, Algeria, Tunisia, Morocco , and Eritrea were significant and initially led to close ties between these countries and Pakistan. [206] However, Pakistan also masterminded an attack on the Afghan city of Jalalabad during the Afghan Civil War to establish an Islamic government there. Pakistan had wished to foment an 'Islamic Revolution' that would transcend national borders, covering Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Central Asia. [207]
On the other hand, Pakistan's relations with Iran have been strained at times due to sectarian tensions. [208] Iran and Saudi Arabia used Pakistan as a battleground for their proxy sectarian war, and by the 1990s Pakistan's support for the Sunni Taliban organisation in Afghanistan became a problem for Shia Iran, which opposed a Taliban-controlled Afghanistan. [209] Tensions between Iran and Pakistan intensified in 1998 when Iran accused Pakistan of war crimes after Pakistani warplanes had bombarded Afghanistan's last Shia stronghold in support of the Taliban. [210] [211]
Since Independence, Pakistan has attempted to balance its relations with foreign nations. [212] [213] [214] Pakistan is an influential and founding member of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and is a major non-NATO ally of the United States in the war against terrorism — a status achieved in 2004. [215] Pakistan's foreign policy and geostrategy mainly focus on the economy and security against threats to its national identity and territorial integrity, and on the cultivation of close relations with other Muslim countries. [216] Maintaining cultural, political, social, and economic relations with the Arab world and other countries in the Muslim world is a vital factor in Pakistan's foreign policy. [217]
The Kashmir conflict remains the major point of contention between Pakistan and India; three of their four wars were fought over this territory. [218] Due partly to difficulties in relations with its geopolitical rival India, Pakistan maintains close political relations with Turkey and Iran, [219] and both countries have been a focal point in Pakistan's foreign policy. [219] Saudi Arabia also maintains a respected position in Pakistan's foreign policy.
A non-signatory party of the Treaty on Nuclear Non-Proliferation , Pakistan is an influential member of the IAEA . [220] In recent events, Pakistan has blocked an international treaty to limit fissile material , arguing that the "treaty would target Pakistan specifically". [221] In the 20th century, Pakistan's nuclear deterrence program focused on countering India's nuclear ambitions in the region , and nuclear tests by India eventually led Pakistan to reciprocate to maintain a geopolitical balance as becoming a nuclear power . [222] Currently, Pakistan maintains a policy of credible minimum deterrence , calling its program vital nuclear deterrence against foreign aggression. [223] [224]
Located in the strategic and geopolitical corridor of the world's major maritime oil supply lines and communication fibre optics, Pakistan has proximity to the natural resources of Central Asian countries. [225] Briefing on the country's foreign policy in 2004, a Pakistani senator [ clarification needed ] reportedly explained: "Pakistan highlights sovereign equality of states, bilateralism, mutuality of interests, and non-interference in each other's domestic affairs as the cardinal features of its foreign policy." [226] Pakistan is an active member of the United Nations and has a Permanent Representative to represent Pakistan's positions in international politics. [227] Pakistan has lobbied for the concept of " enlightened moderation " in the Muslim world. [228] [229] Pakistan is also a member of Commonwealth of Nations, [230] the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO), [231] [232] and the G20 developing nations . [233]
Pakistan does not have diplomatic relations with Israel ; [234] nonetheless, some Israeli citizens have visited the country on tourist visas. [235] However, an exchange took place between the two countries using Turkey as a communication conduit. [236] Despite Pakistan being the only country in the world that has not established diplomatic relations with Armenia , an Armenian community still resides in Pakistan. [237] Pakistan had warm relations with Bangladesh despite initial strains in their relationship, [238] but the relationship has soured recently.
Because of ideological differences, Pakistan opposed the Soviet Union in the 1950s, and during the Soviet-Afghan War in the 1980s, Pakistan was one of the closest allies of the United States. [226] [240] Relations between Pakistan and Russia have greatly improved since 1999, and co-operation in various sectors has increased. [241] Pakistan has had an "on-and-off" relationship with the United States. A close ally of the United States during the Cold war , Pakistan's relationship with the United States soured in the 1990s when the US imposed sanctions because of Pakistan's secretive nuclear development. [242] Since 9/11 , Pakistan has been a close ally of the United States on the issue of counter-terrorism in the regions of the Middle East and South Asia, with the US supporting Pakistan with aid money and weapons. [243] [244] Initially, the United States-led war on terrorism led to an improvement in the relationship, but it was strained by a divergence of interests and resulting mistrust during the war in Afghanistan and by issues related to terrorism. [245] [246] [247] [248]
Pakistan was the first country to have established diplomatic relations with China , and the relationship continues to be warm since China's war with India in 1962. [249] In the 1960s to 1980s, Pakistan greatly helped China in reaching out to the world's major countries and helped facilitate US President Nixon 's state visit to China. [249] Despite the change of governments in Pakistan and fluctuations in the regional and global situation, China policy in Pakistan continues to be a dominant factor at all times. [249] In return, China is Pakistan's largest trading partner, and economic co-operation has flourished, with substantial Chinese investment in Pakistan's infrastructural expansion such as the Pakistani deep-water port at Gwadar . Sino-Pakistani friendly relations touched new heights as both the countries signed 51 agreements and Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs) in 2015 for co-operation in different areas. [250] [251] [252] [253] Both countries signed a Free Trade Agreement in the 2000s, and Pakistan continues to serve as China's communication bridge to the Muslim world. [254] In 2016 China announced that it will set up an anti-terrorism alliance with Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Tajikistan. [255]

Administrative divisions
A federal parliamentary republic state, Pakistan is a federation that comprises four provinces : Punjab , Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Sindh, and Balochistan [256] and four territories : the Federally Administered Tribal Areas , Islamabad Capital Territory Gilgit–Baltistan , and Azad Kashmir . The Government of Pakistan exercises the de facto jurisdiction over the Frontier Regions and the western parts of the Kashmir Regions , which are organised into the separate political entities Azad Kashmir and Gilgit–Baltistan (formerly Northern Areas). In 2009, the constitutional assignment ( the Gilgit–Baltistan Empowerment and Self-Governance Order ) awarded the Gilgit–Baltistan a semi-provincial status , giving it self-government. [257] The population of Gilgit-Baltistan wants to be merged into Pakistan as a separate fifth province and opposes integration with Kashmir [258] [259] while the people of Azad Kashmir have also always wanted to be a part of Pakistan, despite Pakistan's having imposed its will on their region. [260] The populations of Azad Kashmir and Gilgit-Baltistan also wanted to join Pakistan during Independence. [261] [262]
Since 1948 there has been an ongoing, and at times fluctuating, violent conflict in the south-western province of Balochistan between various Baloch separatist groups, who seek greater political autonomy, and the central government of Pakistan. Most Balochs want autonomy but do not want independence from Pakistan. [263]
The local government system consists of a three-tier system of districts , tehsils , and union councils , with an elected body at each tier. [264] There are about 130 districts altogether, of which Azad Kashmir has ten [265] and Gilgit–Baltistan seven. [266] The Tribal Areas comprise seven tribal agencies and six small frontier regions detached from neighbouring districts. [267]
Law enforcement is carried out by a joint network of the intelligence community with jurisdiction limited to the relevant province or territory. The National Intelligence Directorate coordinates the information intelligence at both federal and provincial level; including the FIA , IB , Motorway Police , and paramilitary forces such as the Pakistan Rangers and the Frontier Corps . [268]
Pakistan's "premier" intelligence agency, the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), was formed just within a year after the Independence of Pakistan in 1947. [269] Pakistan's ISI was ranked as the top intelligence agency in the world in 2011 by the International Business Times UK . [270] ABC News Point in 2014 also reported that the ISI was ranked as the top intelligence agency in the world [271] while Zee News reported the ISI as ranking fifth among the world's most powerful intelligence agencies. [272]
The court system is organised as a hierarchy, with the Supreme Court at the apex, below which are High Courts , Federal Shariat Courts (one in each province and one in the federal capital), District Courts (one in each district), Judicial Magistrate Courts (in every town and city), Executive Magistrate Courts, and civil courts. The Penal code has limited jurisdiction in the Tribal Areas, where law is largely derived from tribal customs. [268] [273]

Kashmir conflict
The Kashmir — the most northwesterly region of South Asia — is a major territorial dispute that has hindered relations between India and Pakistan. The two nations have fought at least three large-scale conventional wars in successive years in 1947 , 1965 , and 1971 . The conflict in 1971 witnessed Pakistan's unconditional surrender and a treaty that subsequently led to the independence of Bangladesh. [274] Other serious military engagements and skirmishes have included the armed contacts in Siachen Glacier (1984) and Kargil (1999). [218] Approximately 45.1% of the Kashmir region is controlled by India, which also claims the entire state of Jammu and Kashmir, including most of Jammu, the Kashmir Valley , Ladakh , and the Siachen . [218] The claim is contested by Pakistan, which controls approximately 38.2% of the Kashmir region , an area known as the Azad Kashmir and Gilgit–Baltistan . [218] [275]
India claims the Kashmir on the basis of the Instrument of Accession — a legal agreement with Kashmir's leaders executed by Maharaja Hari Singh , who agreed to accede the area to India. [276] Pakistan claims Kashmir on the basis of a Muslim majority and of geography, the same principles that were applied for the creation of the two independent states. [277] [278] India referred the dispute to the United Nations on 1 January 1948. [279] In a resolution passed in 1948, the UN 's General Assembly asked Pakistan to remove most of its troops as a plebiscite would then be held. However, Pakistan failed to vacate the region and a ceasefire was reached in 1949 establishing a Line of Control (LoC) that divided Kashmir between the two nations . [280] India, fearful that the Muslim majority populace of Kashmir would secede from India, did not allow a plebiscite to take place in the region. This was confirmed in a statement by India's Defense Minister, Krishna Menon , who said: "Kashmir would vote to join Pakistan and no Indian Government responsible for agreeing to plebiscite would survive." [281]
Pakistan claims that its position is for the right of the people of Jammu and Kashmir to determine their future through impartial elections as mandated by the United Nations , [282] while India has stated that Kashmir is an integral part of India, referring to the Simla Agreement (1972) and to the fact that elections take place regularly. [283] In recent developments, certain Kashmiri independence groups believe that Kashmir should be independent of both India and Pakistan. [218]

Law enforcement
The law enforcement in Pakistan is carried out by joint network of several federal and provincial police agencies. The four provinces and the Islamabad Capital Territory (ICT) each have a civilian police force with jurisdiction extending only to the relevant province or territory. [168] At the federal level, there are a number of civilian intelligence agencies with nationwide jurisdictions including the Federal Investigation Agency (FIA), Intelligence Bureau (IB), and the Motorway Patrol , as well as several paramilitary forces such as the National Guards ( Northern Areas ), the Rangers (Punjab and Sindh), and the Frontier Corps (Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Balochistan).
The most senior officers of all the civilian police forces also form part of the Police Service , which is a component of the civil service of Pakistan. Namely, there are four provincial police service including the Punjab Police , Sindh Police , Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Police , and the Balochistan Police ; all headed by the appointed senior Inspector-Generals . The ICT has its own police component, the Capital Police , to maintain law and order in the capital. The CID bureaus are the crime investigation unit and forms a vital part in each provincial police service .
The law enforcement in Pakistan also has a Motorway Patrol which is responsible for enforcement of traffic and safety laws, security and recovery on Pakistan's inter-provincial motorway network . In each of provincial Police Service , it also maintains a respective Elite Police units led by the NACTA — a counter-terrorism police unit as well as providing VIP escorts. In the Punjab and Sindh, the Pakistan Rangers are an internal security force with the prime objective to provide and maintain security in war zones and areas of conflict as well as maintaining law and order which includes providing assistance to the police. [284] The Frontier Corps serves the similar purpose in Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa , and the Balochistan. [284]

Role of Islam in Pakistan
Pakistan was created in the name of Islam . [30] [31] The idea of Pakistan had received overwhelming popular support among Indian Muslims, especially those in the provinces of British India where Muslims were in a minority such as U.P . [285] The Muslim League leadership, ulama (Islamic clergy) and Jinnah had articulated their vision of Pakistan in terms of an Islamic state . [286] Jinnah had developed a close association with the ulama . [287] When Jinnah died, Islamic scholar Maulana Shabbir Ahmad Usmani described Jinnah as the greatest Muslim after the Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb and also compared Jinnah's death to the Prophet 's passing. [287] Usmani asked Pakistanis to remember Jinnah's message of Unity, Faith and Discipline and work to fulfil his dream: [288]
The first formal step taken to transform Pakistan into an ideological Islamic state was in March 1949 when the country's first Prime Minister, Liaquat Ali Khan, introduced the Objectives Resolution in the Constituent Assembly. [289] The Objectives Resolution declared that sovereignty over the entire universe belongs to God Almighty . [131] The president of the Muslim League, Chaudhry Khaliquzzaman , announced that Pakistan would bring together all Muslim countries into Islamistan-a pan-Islamic entity. [290] Khaliq believed that Pakistan was only a Muslim state and was not yet an Islamic state, but that it could certainly become an Islamic state after bringing all believers of Islam into a single political unit. [291] Keith Callard, one of the earliest scholars on Pakistani politics, observed that Pakistanis believed in the essential unity of purpose and outlook in the Muslim world: [292]
However, Pakistan's pan-Islamist sentiments were not shared by other Muslim governments at the time. Nationalism in other parts of the Muslim world was based on ethnicity, language and culture. [293] Although Muslim governments were unsympathetic with Pakistan's pan-Islamic aspirations, Islamists from all over the world were drawn to Pakistan. Figures such as the Grand Mufti of Palestine, Al-Haj Amin al-Husseini, and leaders of Islamist political movements, such as the Muslim Brotherhood , became frequent visitors to the country. Pakistan's desire for an international organization of Muslim countries was fulfilled in the 1970s when the Organization of Islamic Conference (OIC) was formed. [294]
The strongest opposition to the Islamist ideological paradigm being imposed on the state came from the Bengali Muslims of East Pakistan. [295] A survey in 1969 found that most educated East Pakistanis preferred a secular identity and placed more emphasis on ethnicity than religion. Most educated West Pakistanis were the reverse of this and preferred an Islamic identity and placed more emphasis on Islam than ethnicity. [296] The Islamist party Jamaat-e-Islami considered Pakistan to be an Islamic state and believed Bengali nationalism to be unacceptable. In the 1971 conflict over East Pakistan the Jamaat-e-Islami fought the Bengali nationalists on the Pakistan Army's side. [297]
After Pakistan's first ever general elections the 1973 Constitution was created by an elected Parliament. [298] The Constitution declared Pakistan an Islamic Republic and Islam as the state religion. It also stated that all laws would have to be brought into accordance with the injunctions of Islam as laid down in the Quran and Sunnah and that no law repugnant to such injunctions could be enacted. [33] The 1973 Constitution also created certain institutions such as the Shariat Court and the Council of Islamic Ideology to channel the interpretation and application of Islam. [299]
In the 1970s, leftist Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto faced vigorous opposition which coalesced into a movement united under the revivalist banner of Nizam-e-Mustafa ("Rule of the prophet "). [300] According to supporters of the movement, establishing an Islamic state based on sharia law would mean a return to the justice and success of the early days of Islam when the Islamic prophet Muhammad ruled the Muslims. [301] In an effort to stem the tide of street Islamisation Bhutto agreed to several demands and banned the drinking and selling of wine by Muslims, nightclubs and horse racing. [301] [302]
On 5 July 1977, General Zia-ul-Haq led a coup d'etat against Bhutto. [303] Zia-ul-Haq committed himself to establishing an Islamic state and enforcing sharia law. [301] Zia established separate Shariat judicial courts [304] and court benches [305] [306] to judge legal cases using Islamic doctrine. [307] New criminal offences (of adultery, fornication, and types of blasphemy), and new punishments (of whipping, amputation, and stoning to death), were added to Pakistani law. Interest payments for bank accounts were replaced by "profit and loss" payments. Zakat charitable donations became a 2.5% annual tax. School textbooks and libraries were overhauled to remove un-Islamic material. [308] Offices, schools, and factories were required to offer praying space. [309] Zia bolstered the influence of the ulama (Islamic clergy) and the Islamic parties, [307] whilst conservative scholars became fixtures on television. [309] 10,000s of activists from the Jamaat-e-Islami party were appointed to government posts to ensure the continuation of his agenda after his passing. [301] [307] [310] [311] Conservative ulama (Islamic scholars) were added to the Council of Islamic Ideology . [305] Separate electorates for Hindus and Christians were established in 1985 even though Christian and Hindu leaders complained that they felt excluded from the county's political process. [312]
Zia's state sponsored Islamization increased sectarian divisions in Pakistan between Sunnis and Shias (due to Zia's anti-Shia policies) [313] and also between Deobandis and Barelvis . [314] A solid majority of Barelvis had supported the creation of Pakistan, [315] and Barelvi ulama had also issued fatwas in support of the Pakistan Movement during the 1946 elections, [316] [317] but ironically Islamic state politics in Pakistan was mostly in favour of Deobandi (and later Ahl-e-Hadith/ Salafi ) institutions. [318] This was despite the fact that only a few (although influential) Deobandi clerics had supported the Pakistan Movement . [318] Zia-ul-Haq forged a strong alliance between the military and Deobandi institutions. [319]
Possible motivations for the Islamization programme included Zia's personal piety (most accounts agree that he came from a religious family), [320] desire to gain political allies, to "fulfill Pakistan's raison d'être " as a Muslim state, and/or the political need to legitimise what was seen by some Pakistanis as his "repressive, un-representative martial law regime". [321]
According to Shajeel Zaidi a million people attended Zia ul Haq's funeral because he had given them what they wanted: more religion. [322] A PEW opinion poll found that 84% of Pakistanis favoured making Sharia the official law of the land. [323] According to the 2013 Pew Research Center report, the majority of Pakistani Muslims also support the death penalty for those who leave Islam (62%). In contrast, support for the death penalty for those who leave Islam was only 36% in fellow South Asian Muslim country Bangladesh (which shared heritage with Pakistan). [324] A 2010 opinion poll by PEW Research Centre also found that 87% of Pakistanis considered themselves 'Muslims first' rather than a member of their nationality. This was the highest figure amongst all Muslim populations surveyed. In contrast only 67% in Jordan , 59% in Egypt , 51% in Turkey , 36% in Indonesia and 71% in Nigeria considered themselves as 'Muslim first' rather than a member of their own nationality. [325]

Military
The armed forces of Pakistan are the eighth largest in the world in terms of numbers in full-time service, with about 617,000 personnel on active duty and 513,000 reservists, as of tentative estimates in 2010. [326] They came into existence after independence in 1947, and the military establishment has frequently influenced in the national politics ever since. [193] Chain of command of the military is kept under the control of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee ; all of the branches joint works, co-ordination, military logistics, and joint missions are under the Joint Staff HQ . [327] The Joint Staff HQ is composed of the Air HQ , Navy HQ , and Army GHQ in the vicinity of the Rawalpindi Military District . [328]
The Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee is the highest principle staff officer in the armed forces, and the chief military adviser to the civilian government though the chairman has no authority over the three branches of armed forces. [327] The Chairman joint chiefs controls the military from the JS HQ and maintains strategic communications between the military and the civilian government. [327] As of 2017, the CJCSC is General Zubair Hayat alongside chief of army staff General Qamar Javed Bajwa , [329] chief of naval staff Admiral Muhammad Zaka , [330] and chief of air staff Air Chief Marshal Suhail Aman . [331] The main branches are the Army – Air Force – Navy – Marines , which are supported by the number of paramilitary forces in the country. [332] Control over the strategic arsenals , deployment, employment, development, military computers and command and control is a responsibility vested under the National Command Authority which oversaw the work on the nuclear policy as part of the credible minimum deterrence . [153]
The United States, Turkey, and China maintain close military relations and regularly export military equipment and technology transfer to Pakistan. [333] Joint logistics and major war games are occasionally carried out by the militaries of China and Turkey. [332] [334] [335] Philosophical basis for the military draft is introduced by the Constitution in times of emergency, but it has never been imposed. [336] Since 1947 Pakistan has been involved in four conventional wars , the first war occurred in Kashmir with Pakistan gaining control of Western Kashmir , ( Azad Kashmir and Gilgit–Baltistan ), and India capturing Eastern Kashmir (Jammu and Kashmir). Territorial problems eventually led to another conventional war in 1965; over the issue of Bengali refugees that led to another war in 1971 which resulted in Pakistan's unconditional surrender of East Pakistan . [337] Tensions in Kargil brought the two countries at the brink of war . [154] Since 1947 the unresolved territorial problems with Afghanistan saw border skirmishes which was kept mostly at the mountainous border . In 1961, the military and intelligence community repelled the Afghan incursion in the Bajaur Agency near the Durand Line border. [338] [339]
Rising tensions with neighbouring USSR in their involvement in Afghanistan , Pakistani intelligence community , mostly the ISI , systematically coordinated the US resources to the Afghan mujahideen and foreign fighters against the Soviet Union's presence in the region. Military reports indicated that the PAF was in engagement with the Soviet Air Force , supported by the Afghan Air Force during the course of the conflict ; [340] one of which belonged to Alexander Rutskoy . [340] Apart from its own conflicts, Pakistan has been an active participant in United Nations peacekeeping missions . It played a major role in rescuing trapped American soldiers from Mogadishu , Somalia, in 1993 in Operation Gothic Serpent . [341] [342] [343] According to UN reports, the Pakistani military are the third largest troop contributors to UN peacekeeping missions after Ethiopia and India . [344] [345]
Pakistan sent UN Peacekeeping forces to the former Yugoslavia during the Yugoslav wars. During the war, Pakistan supported Bosnia while providing technical and military support. [346] [347] The Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) allegedly ran an active military intelligence program during the Bosnian War which started in 1992 lasting until 1995 under General Javed Nasir . The ISI Bosnian contingent was organised with financial assistance provided by Saudi Arabia , according to the British historian Mark Curtis . [348] Despite the UN arms embargo on Bosnia , Nasir later confessed that the ISI airlifted anti-tank weapons and missiles to Bosnian mujahideen which turned the tide in favour of Bosnian Muslims and forced the Serbs to lift the siege. [349] [350] [351] [352] Under Nasir 's leadership the ISI was also involved in supporting Chinese Muslims in Xinjiang Province, rebel Muslim groups in the Philippines , and some religious groups in Central Asia. [350]
Pakistan has deployed its military in some Arab countries , providing defence, training, and playing advisory roles. [353] [354] The PAF and Navy 's fighter pilots have voluntarily served in Arab nations ' militaries against Israel in the Six-Day War (1967) and in the Yom Kippur War (1973). Pakistan's fighter pilots shot down ten Israeli planes in the Six-Day War. [341] In the 1973 war one of the PAF pilots, Flt. Lt. Sattar Alvi (flying a MiG-21), shot down an Israeli Air Force Mirage and was honoured by the Syrian government. [355] [356] [357] Requested by the Saudi monarchy in 1979, Pakistan's special forces units, operatives, and commandos were rushed to assist Saudi forces in Mecca to lead the operation of the Grand Mosque . For almost two weeks Saudi Special Forces and Pakistani commandos fought the insurgents who had occupied the Grand Mosque 's compound. [358] [359] [360] In 1991 Pakistan got involved with the Gulf War and sent 5,000 troops as part of a US-led coalition, specifically for the defence of Saudi Arabia . [361]
Since 2004 the military has been engaged in a war in North-West Pakistan , mainly against the homegrown Taliban factions . [362] [363] Major operations undertaken by the army include Operation Black Thunderstorm , Operation Rah-e-Nijat and Operation Zarb-e-Azb . [364] [365]

Economy

Overview
Economists estimate that Pakistan was part of the wealthiest region of the world throughout the first millennium CE, with the largest economy by GDP. This advantage was lost in the 18th century as other regions such as China and Western Europe edged forward. [371] Pakistan is considered a developing country [372] [373] and is one of the Next Eleven , a group of eleven countries that, along with the BRICs , have a high potential to become the world's largest economies in the 21st century. [374]
In recent years, after decades of social instability, as of 2013 [update] , serious deficiencies in macromanagement and unbalanced macroeconomics in basic services such as rail transportation and electrical energy generation have developed. [375] The economy is considered to be semi-industrialized, with centres of growth along the Indus River . [376] [377] [378] The diversified economies of Karachi and Punjab's urban centres coexist with less-developed areas in other parts of the country, particularly in Balochistan. [377] According to the Economic complexity index , Pakistan is the 67th-largest export economy in the world and the 106th most complex economy. [379] During the fiscal year 2015–16, Pakistan's exports stood at US$20.81 billion and imports at US$44.76 billion, resulting in a negative trade balance of US$23.96 billion. [380]
As of 2016 Pakistan's estimated nominal GDP is US$271 billion. [19] The GDP by PPP is US$ 946,667 million. [382] The estimated nominal per capita GDP is US$ 1,561, [383] the GDP (PPP)/capita is US$ 5,010 ( international dollars ), [384] and the debt-to-GDP ratio is 66.50%. [385] According to the World Bank , Pakistan has important strategic endowments and development potential. The increasing proportion of Pakistan's youth provides the country with both a potential demographic dividend and a challenge to provide adequate services and employment. [386] 21.04% of the population live below the international poverty line of US$1.25 a day. The unemployment rate among the aged 15 and over population is 5.5%. [387] Pakistan has an estimated 40 million middle class citizens, projected to increase to 100 million by 2050. [388] A 2015 report published by the World Bank ranked Pakistan's economy at 24th-largest [389] in the world by purchasing power and 41st-largest [390] in absolute terms. It is South Asia's second-largest economy, representing about 15.0% of regional GDP . [391] [392]
Pakistan's economic growth since its inception has been varied. It has been slow during periods of democratic transition, but robust during the three periods of martial law , although the foundation for sustainable and equitable growth was not formed. [133] The early to middle 2000s was a period of rapid economic reforms ; the government raised development spending, which reduced poverty levels by 10% and increased GDP by 3%. [168] [401] The economy cooled again from 2007. [168] Inflation reached 25.0% in 2008, [402] and Pakistan had to depend on a fiscal policy backed by the International Monetary Fund to avoid possible bankruptcy. [403] [404] A year later, the Asian Development Bank reported that Pakistan's economic crisis was easing. [405] The inflation rate for the fiscal year 2010–11 was 14.1%. [406] Since 2013, as part of an International Monetary Fund program, Pakistan's economic growth has picked up. In 2014 Goldman Sachs predicted that Pakistan's economy would grow 15 times in the next 35 years to become the 18th-largest economy in the world by 2050. [407] In his 2016 book, The Rise and Fall of Nations, Ruchir Sharma termed Pakistan's economy as at a 'take-off' stage and the future outlook until 2020 has been termed 'Very Good'. Sharma termed it possible to transform Pakistan from a "low-income to a middle-income country during the next five years". [408]
Pakistan is one of the largest producers of natural commodities, and its labour market is the 10th-largest in the world. The 7-million–strong Pakistani diaspora contributed US$19.9 billion to the economy in 2015–16. [409] [410] The major source countries of remittances to Pakistan are: the UAE ; the United States; Saudi Arabia; the Gulf states (Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, and Oman); Australia; Canada; Japan; the United Kingdom; Norway; and Switzerland. [411] [412] According to the World Trade Organization , Pakistan's share of overall world exports is declining; it contributed only 0.128% in 2007. [413]

Agriculture and primary sector
The structure of the Pakistani economy has changed from a mainly agricultural to a strong service base. Agriculture as of 2015 [update] accounts for only 20.9% of the GDP. [366] Even so, according to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization , Pakistan produced 21,591,400 metric tons of wheat in 2005, more than all of Africa (20,304,585 metric tons) and nearly as much as all of South America (24,557,784 metric tons). [415] Majority of the population, directly or indirectly, is dependent on this sector. It accounts for 43.5% of employed labour force and is the largest source of foreign exchange earnings. [366] [416]
A large portion of the country's manufactured exports are dependent on raw materials such as cotton and hides that are part of the agriculture sector, while supply shortages and market disruptions in farm products do push up inflationary pressures. The country is also the fifth-largest producer of cotton, with cotton production of 14 million bales from a modest beginning of 1.7 million bales in the early 1950s; is self sufficient in sugarcane; and is the fourth-largest producer in the world of milk. Land and water resources have not risen proportionately, but the increases have taken place mainly due to gains in labour and agriculture productivity. The major breakthrough in crop production took place in the late 1960s and 1970s due to the Green Revolution that made a significant contribution to land and yield increases of wheat and rice. Private tube wells led to a 50 percent increase in the cropping intensity which was augmented by tractor cultivation. While the tube wells raised crop yields by 50 percent, the High Yielding Varieties (HYVs) of wheat and rice led to a 50–60 percent higher yield. [417] Meat industry accounts for 1.4 percent of overall GDP. [418]

Industry
Industry is the third-largest sector of the economy, accounting for 20.3% of gross domestic product ( GDP ), and 13 percent of total employment. Large-scale manufacturing (LSM), at 12.2% of GDP, dominates the overall sector, accounting for 66% of the sectoral share, followed by small-scale manufacturing, which accounts for 4.9% of total GDP. Pakistan's cement industry is also fast growing mainly because of demand from Afghanistan and from the domestic real estate sector. In 2013 Pakistan exported 7,708,557 metric tons of cement. [420] Pakistan has an installed capacity of 44,768,250 metric tons of cement and 42,636,428 metric tons of clinker. In 2012 and 2013, the cement industry in Pakistan became the most profitable sector of the economy. [421]
The textile industry has a pivotal position in the manufacturing sector of Pakistan. In Asia, Pakistan is the eighth-largest exporter of textile products, contributing 9.5% to the GDP and providing employment to around 15 million people (some 30% of the 49 million people in the workforce). Pakistan is the fourth-largest producer of cotton with the third-largest spinning capacity in Asia after China and India, contributing 5% to the global spinning capacity. [422] China is the second largest buyer of Pakistani textiles, importing US$1.527 billion of textiles last fiscal. Unlike the US, where mostly value-added textiles are imported, China buys only cotton yarn and cotton fabric from Pakistan. In 2012, Pakistani textile products accounted for 3.3% or US$1.07bn of all UK textile imports, 12.4% or $4.61bn of total Chinese textile imports, 2.98% or $2.98b of all US textile imports, 1.6% or $0.88bn of total German textile imports and 0.7% or $0.888bn of total Indian textile imports. [423]

Services
Services sector has 58.8% share in GDP [366] and has emerged as the main driver of economic growth. [424] Pakistani society like other developing countries is a consumption oriented society, having a high marginal propensity to consume. The growth rate of services sector is higher than the growth rate of agriculture and industrial sector. Services sector accounts for 54 percent of GDP in 2014 and little over one-third of total employment. Services sector has strong linkages with other sectors of economy; it provides essential inputs to agriculture sector and manufacturing sector. [425] Pakistan's I.T sector is regarded as among the fastest growing sector's in Pakistan. The World Economic Forum , assessing the development of Information and Communication Technology in the country ranked Pakistan 110th among 139 countries on the 'Networked Readiness Index 2016'. [426]
As of 2016 [update] , Pakistan has over 35 million Internet users and is ranked as one of the top countries that have registered a high growth rate in Internet penetration. [427] Overall, it has the 20th-largest population of Internet users in the world. The current growth rate and employment trend indicate that Pakistan's Information Communication Technology (ICT) industry will exceed the $10-billion mark by 2020. [428] The sector employees 12,000 and count's among top five freelancing nations. [429] [430] The country has also improved its export performance in telecom, computer and information services, as the share of their exports surged from 8.2pc in 2005–06 to 12.6pc in 2012–13. This growth is much better than that of China, whose share in services exports was 3pc and 7.7pc for the same period respectively. [431]

Infrastructure

Nuclear power and energy
By the end of 2016, nuclear power was provided by four licensed commercial nuclear power plants . [433] The Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission (PAEC) is solely responsible for operating these power plants, while the Pakistan Nuclear Regulatory Authority regulates safe usage of the nuclear energy. [434] The electricity generated by commercial nuclear power plants constitutes roughly 5.8% of Pakistan's electrical energy, compared to 64.2% from fossil fuels ( crude oil and natural gas ), 29.9% from hydroelectric power , and 0.1% from coal . [435] [436] [437] Pakistan is one of the four nuclear armed states (along with India , Israel , and North Korea ) that is not a party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty , but it is a member in good standing of the International Atomic Energy Agency . [438] [439] [440]
The KANUPP-I , a Candu-type nuclear reactor, was supplied by Canada in 1971 — the country's first commercial nuclear power plant . The Sino-Pakistani nuclear cooperation began in the early 1980's. After a Sino-Pakistani nuclear cooperation agreement in 1986, [441] China provided Pakistan with a nuclear reactor dubbed CHASNUPP-I for energy and industrial growth of the country. In 2005 both countries proposed working on a joint energy security plan, calling for a huge increase in generation capacity to more than 160,000 MWe by 2030. Under its Nuclear Energy Vision 2050, the Pakistani government plans to increase nuclear power generation capacity to 40,000 MWe , [442] 8,900 MWe of it by 2030. [443] [444]
In June 2008 the nuclear commercial complex was expanded with the ground work of installing and operationalising the Chashma-III and Chashma–IV reactors at Chashma , Punjab Province , each with 325–340 MWe and costing ₨ 129 billion,; from which the ₨ 80 billion came from international sources, principally China. A further agreement for China's help with the project was signed in October 2008, and given prominence as a counter to the US–India agreement that shortly preceded it. The cost quoted then was US$1.7 billion, with a foreign loan component of US$1.07 billion. In 2013 Pakistan established a second commercial nuclear complex in Karachi with plans of additional reactors, similar to the one in Chashma . [446] The electrical energy is generated by various energy corporations and evenly distributed by the National Electric Power Regulatory Authority (NEPRA) among the four provinces . However, the Karachi -based K-Electric and the Water and Power Development Authority (WAPDA) generates much of the electrical energy used in Pakistan in addition to gathering revenue nationwide. [447] As of 2014 Pakistan has an installed electricity generation capacity of ~22,797 MWt . [435]

Tourism
With its diverse cultures, people, and landscapes, Pakistan attracted around 1 million foreign tourists in 2014, contributing PKR 94.8 billion to the country's economy, [448] which represented a significant decline since the 1970s when the country received unprecedented numbers of foreign tourists due to the popular Hippie trail . The trail attracted thousands of Europeans and Americans in the 1960s and 1970s who travelled via land through Turkey and Iran into India through Pakistan. [449] The main destinations of choice for these tourists were the Khyber Pass , Peshawar , Karachi , Lahore , Swat and Rawalpindi . [450] The numbers following the trail declined after the Iranian Revolution and the Soviet–Afghan War . [451]
The country continues to attract an estimated 500,000 foreign tourists annually. [452] Pakistan's tourist attractions range from the mangroves in the south to the Himalayan hill stations in the north-east. The country's tourist destinations range from the Buddhist ruins of Takht-i-Bahi and Taxila , to the 5,000-year-old cities of the Indus Valley Civilization such as Mohenjo-daro and Harappa . [453] Pakistan is home to several mountain peaks over 7,000 metres (23,000 feet). [454] The northern part of Pakistan has many old fortresses, examples of ancient architecture, and the Hunza and Chitral valleys, home to the small pre-Islamic animist Kalasha community claiming descent from Alexander the Great. Pakistan's cultural capital, Lahore, contains many examples of Mughal architecture such as the Badshahi Masjid , the Shalimar Gardens , the Tomb of Jahangir , and the Lahore Fort .
In October 2006, just one year after the 2005 Kashmir earthquake , The Guardian released what it described as "The top five tourist sites in Pakistan" in order to help the country's tourism industry. [455] The five sites included Taxila , Lahore , the Karakoram Highway , Karimabad , and Lake Saiful Muluk . To promote Pakistan's unique cultural heritage, the government organizes various festivals throughout the year. [456] In 2015 the World Economic Forum 's Travel & Tourism Competitiveness Report ranked Pakistan 125 out of 141 countries. [457]

Transport
The transport industry accounts for ~10.5% of the nation's GDP . [458] Pakistan's motorway infrastructure is better than those of India , Bangladesh , and Indonesia, but the train system lags behind those of India and China, and aviation infrastructure also needs improvement. [459] There is scarcely any inland water transportation system , and coastal shipping only meets minor local requirements. [460]
Highways form the backbone of Pakistan's transport system; a total road length of 263,942 kilometres (164,006 miles ) accounts for 92% of passenger and 96% of inland freight traffic. [366] Road transport services are largely in the hands of the private sector . The National Highway Authority is responsible for the maintenance of national highways and motorways. The highway and motorway system depends mainly on north–south links connecting the southern ports to the populous provinces of Punjab and Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa . Although this network only accounts for 4.59% of total road length, [366] it carries 85% of the country's traffic. [461] [462]
The Pakistan Railways , under the Ministry of Railways (MoR), operates the railroad system. From 1947 until the 1970s the train system was the primary means of transport until the nationwide constructions of the national highways and the economic boom of the automotive industry . Beginning in the 1990s there was a marked shift in traffic from rail to highways; dependence grew on roads after the introduction of vehicles in the country. Now the railway's share of inland traffic is below 8% for passengers and 4% for freight traffic. [366] As personal transportation began to be dominated by the automobile, total rail track decreased from 8,775 kilometres (5,453 miles) in 1990–91 to 7,791 kilometres (4,841 miles) in 2011. [461] [463] Pakistan expects to use the rail service to boost foreign trade with China, Iran, and Turkey. [464] [465]
There are an estimated 139 airports and airfields in Pakistan — including both the military and the mostly publicly owned civilian airports. Though Jinnah International Airport is the principal international gateway to Pakistan, the international airports in Lahore , Islamabad , Peshawar , Quetta , Faisalabad , Sialkot , and Multan also handle significant amounts of traffic. The civil aviation industry is mixed with public and private sectors, which was deregulated in 1993. While the state-owned Pakistan International Airlines (PIA) is the major and dominant air carrier that carries about 73% of domestic passengers and all domestic freight, the private airlines such as airBlue , Shaheen Air International , and Air Indus , also provide similar services at a low cost . Major seaports are in Karachi , Sindh (the Karachi port , and Port Qasim ). [461] [463] Since the 1990s some seaport operations have been moved to Balochistan with the construction of Gwadar Port and Gadani Port . [461] [463] According to the WEF's Global Competiveness Report, quality ratings of Pakistan's port infrastructure increased from 3.7 to 4.1 between 2007 and 2016. [466]

Science and technology
Developments in science and technology have played an important role in Pakistan's infrastructure and helped the country connect to the rest of the world. [467] Every year, scientists from around the world are invited by the Pakistan Academy of Sciences and the Pakistan Government to participate in the International Nathiagali Summer College on Physics . [468] Pakistan hosted an international seminar on "Physics in Developing Countries" for the International Year of Physics 2005. [469] Pakistani theoretical physicist Abdus Salam won a Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on the electroweak interaction . [470] Influential publications and critical scientific work in the advancement of mathematics , biology , economics , computer science , and genetics have been produced by Pakistani scientists at both the domestic and international levels. [471]
In chemistry , Salimuzzaman Siddiqui was the first Pakistani scientist to bring the therapeutic constituents of the neem tree to the attention of natural products chemists. [472] [473] [474] Pakistani neurosurgeon Ayub Ommaya invented the Ommaya reservoir , a system for treatment of brain tumours and other brain conditions. [475] Scientific research and development plays a pivotal role in Pakistani universities , government- sponsored national laboratories, science parks , and the industry . [476] Abdul Qadeer Khan , regarded as the founder of the HEU -based gas-centrifuge uranium enrichment program for Pakistan's integrated atomic bomb project . [477] He founded and established the Kahuta Research Laboratories (KRL) in 1976, serving as both its senior scientist and the Director-General until his retirement in 2001, and he was an early and vital figure in other science projects . Apart from participating in Pakistan's atomic bomb project, he made major contributions in molecular morphology , physical martensite , and its integrated applications in condensed and material physics . [478] [479]
In 2010 Pakistan was ranked 43rd in the world in terms of published scientific papers. [480] The Pakistan Academy of Sciences , a strong scientific community, plays an influential and vital role in formulating recommendations regarding science policies for the government. [481]
The 1960s saw the emergence of an active space program led by SUPARCO that produced advances in domestic rocketry , electronics , and aeronomy . [482] The space program recorded a few notable feats and achievements. The successful launch of its first rocket into space made Pakistan the first South Asian country to have achieved such a task. [482] Successfully producing and launching the nation's first space satellite in 1990, Pakistan became the first Muslim country and second South Asian country to put a satellite into space. [483] [484]
As an aftermath of the 1971 war with India , the clandestine crash program developed atomic weapons partly motivated by fear and to prevent any foreign intervention , while ushering in the atomic age in the post cold war era. [223] Competition with India and tensions eventually led to Pakistan's decision to conduct underground nuclear tests in 1998, thus becoming the seventh country in the world to successfully develop nuclear weapons . [486]
Pakistan is the first and only Muslim country that maintains an active research presence in Antarctica. [487] [488] [489] [490] [491] Since 1991 Pakistan has maintained two summer research stations and one weather observatory on the continent and plans to open another full-fledged permanent base in Antarctica. [492]
Energy consumption by computers and usage has grown since the 1990s when PCs were introduced; Pakistan has about 30 million Internet users and is ranked as one of the top countries that have registered a high growth rate in Internet penetration as of 2013 [update] . [493] Key publications have been produced by Pakistan, and domestic software development has gained considerable international praise. [494]
Overall, it has the 20th-largest population of Internet users in the world. Since the 2000s Pakistan has made a significant amount of progress in supercomputing , and various institutions offer research opportunities in parallel computing . The Pakistan government reportedly spends ₨ 4.6 billion on information technology projects, with emphasis on e-government , human resources, and infrastructure development. [495]

Education
The constitution of Pakistan requires the state to provide free primary and secondary education. [497] [498]
At the time of the establishment of Pakistan as a state, the country had only one university, Punjab University in Lahore . [499] Very soon the Pakistan government established public universities in each of the four provinces , including Sindh University (1949), Peshawar University (1950), Karachi University (1953), and Balochistan University (1970). Pakistan has a large network of both public and private universities, which includes collaboration between the universities aimed at providing research and higher education opportunities in the country, although there is concern about the low quality of teaching in many of the newer schools. [500] It is estimated that there are 3,193 technical and vocational institutions in Pakistan, [501] and there are also madrassahs that provide free Islamic education and offer free board and lodging to students, who come mainly from the poorer strata of society. [502] Strong public pressure and popular criticism over extremists ' usage of madrassahs for recruitment, the Pakistan government has made repeated efforts to regulate and monitor the quality of education in the madrassah s. [503] [504]
Education in Pakistan is divided into six main levels: nursery (preparatory classes); primary (grades one through five); middle (grades six through eight); matriculation (grades nine and ten, leading to the secondary certificate ); intermediate (grades eleven and twelve, leading to a higher secondary certificate ); and university programmes leading to graduate and postgraduate degrees. [501] There is a network of private schools that constitutes a parallel secondary education system based on a curriculum set and administered by the Cambridge International Examinations of the United Kingdom . Some students choose to take the O-level and A level exams conducted by the British Council . [505] According to the International Schools Consultancy, Pakistan has 439 international schools. [506]
As a result of initiatives taken in 2007, the English medium education has been made compulsory in all schools across the country. [507] [508] Additional reforms enacted in 2013 required all educational institutions in Sindh to begin offering Chinese language courses, reflecting China's growing role as a superpower and its increasing influence in Pakistan. [509] The literacy rate of the population is ~58 %. The rate of male literacy is ~70.2% while the rate of female literacy is 46.3%. [406] Literacy rates vary by region and particularly by sex; as one example, female literacy in tribal areas is 3.0%. [510] With the advent of computer literacy in 1995, the government launched a nationwide initiative in 1998 with the aim of eradicating illiteracy and providing a basic education to all children. [511] Through various educational reforms, by 2015 the Ministry of Education expected to attain 100.00% enrolment levels among children of primary school age and a literacy rate of ~86% among people aged over 10. [512] Pakistan is currently spending 2.2 percent of its GDP on education; [513] which according to the Institute of Social and Policy Sciences is one of the lowest in South Asia. [514]
After earning their HSC , students may study in a professional college or university in the bachelorate program such as those in science and engineering ( BEng , BS / BSc , BTech ) surgery and medicine ( MBBS , MD ), dentistry ( BDS ), veterinary medicine ( DVM ), criminal justice and law ( LLB , LLM , JD ), architecture ( BArch ), pharmacy , ( Pharm D. ) and nursing ( BNurs ). Students can also attend a university for a bachelor's degree in business administration , literature , and management including the BA , BCom , BBA , and a master's degree in the MBA program. Higher education is mainly supervised by the Higher Education Commission (HEC), which sets the policies and issues rankings of the country's universities. In October 2014 education activist Malala Yousafzai became by far the youngest person ever in the world to receive the Nobel peace prize . [515]

Water supply and sanitation
Despite high population growth, the country has increased the share of the population with access to an improved water source from 85% in 1990 to 92% in 2010, although this does not necessarily mean that the water from these sources is safe to drink. The share with access to improved sanitation increased from 27% to 48% during the same period, according to the Joint Monitoring Program for Water Supply and Sanitation . [516] There has also been considerable innovation at the grassroots level, in particular concerning sanitation. The Orangi Pilot Project in Karachi [517] and community-led total sanitation in rural areas are two examples of such innovation.
Water and sanitation services still face major challenges. The quality of the services is poor, as evidenced by an intermittent water supply in urban areas and limited wastewater treatment . Poor drinking water quality and sanitation have led to major outbreaks of waterborne diseases [518] such as those that swept the cities of Faisalabad , Karachi , Lahore , and Peshawar in 2006. [518] Estimates indicate that each year more than three million Pakistanis become infected with waterborne diseases. [519] In addition, many service providers do not even cover the costs of and maintenance due to low tariffs and poor efficiency. [ clarification needed ] [520] Consequently, the service providers strongly depend on government subsidies and external funding. [521] National sanitation and drinking water initiatives were approved in 2006 and 2009, respectively, with the objective of improving sanitation services and access to clean water, [522] [523] but the level of annual investment (US$4 per }capita) still remains much below what would be necessary to achieve a significant improvement.

Demographics
According to an estimate by the United States Census Bureau , Pakistan's population is around 199,085,847 (199.1 million) as of 2015 [update] , [524] which is equivalent to 2.57% of the world population . [525] Noted as the sixth most populated country in the world, its growth rate in 2016 was reported to be 1.45%, which is the highest of the SAARC nations , though this growth rate has been decreasing in recent years. [526] The population is projected to reach 210.13 million by 2020.
At the time of the partition in 1947, Pakistan had a population of 32.5 million; [412] [527] the population increased by ~57.2% between the years 1990 and 2009 . [528] By 2030 Pakistan is expected to surpass Indonesia as the largest Muslim-majority country in the world. [529] [530] Pakistan is classified as a "young nation", with a median age of 23.4 in 2016; [526] about 104 million people were under the age of 30 in 2010. In 2016 Pakistan's fertility rate was estimated to be 2.68, [526] higher than its neighbour India (2.45). [531] Around 35% of the people are under 15. [412] The vast majority of those residing in southern Pakistan live along the Indus River , with Karachi being the most populous commercial city in the south. [532] In eastern, western , and northern Pakistan , most of the population lives in an arc formed by the cities of Lahore , Faisalabad , Rawalpindi , Sargodha , Islamabad, Gujranwala , Sialkot , Gujrat , Jhelum , Sheikhupura , Nowshera , Mardan , and Peshawar . [168] During 1990–2008 , city dwellers made up 36% of Pakistan's population, making it the most urbanised nation in South Asia, which increased to 38% by 2013. [168] [412] [533] Furthermore, 50% of Pakistanis live in towns of 5,000 people or more. [534]
Expenditure on healthcare was ~2.8% of GDP in 2013. Life expectancy at birth was 67 years for females and 65 years for males in 2013. [533] The private sector accounts for about 80% of outpatient visits. Approximately 19% of the population and 30% of children under five are malnourished. [378] Mortality of the under-fives was 86 per 1,000 live births in 2012. [533]

Languages
More than sixty languages are spoken in Pakistan, including a number of provincial languages . Urdu — the lingua franca and a symbol of Muslim identity and national unity — is the national language understood by over 75% of Pakistanis. It is the main medium of communication in the country but the primary language of only 8% of Pakistan's population. [12] [11] [536] Urdu and English are the official languages of Pakistan, with English primarily used in official business and government, and in legal contracts; [168] the local variety is known as Pakistani English . The Punjabi language , the most common in Pakistan and the first language of 44.15% of Pakistan's population, [537] is mostly spoken in the Punjab. Saraiki , mainly spoken in South Punjab and Hindko , is predominant in the Hazara region of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. Pashto is the provincial language of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and is well understood in Sindh and Balochistan. [10] The Sindhi language is commonly spoken in Sindh while the Balochi language is dominant in Balochistan. Brahui , a Dravidian language, is spoken by the Brahui people who live in Balochistan. [10] [86] [538] [539] Gujarati community leaders in Pakistan claim that there are 3 million Gujarati speakers in Karachi. [540] Marwari , a Rajasthani language, is also spoken in parts of Sindh. Various languages such as Shina , Balti , and Burushaski are spoken in Gilgit-Baltistan , whilst languages such as Pahari , Gojri , and Kashmiri are spoken by many in Azad Kashmir .

Immigration
Even after partition in 1947, Indian Muslims continued to migrate to Pakistan throughout the 1950s and 1960s, and these migrants settled mainly in Karachi and other towns of Sindh province. [542] The wars in neighboring Afghanistan during the 1980s and 90s also forced millions of Afghan refugees into Pakistan. The Pakistan Census excludes the 1.41 million registered refugees from Afghanistan , [543] who are found mainly in the Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa and tribal belt , with small numbers residing in Karachi and Quetta . Pakistan is home to one of the world's largest refugee populations. [544] In addition to Afghans, around 2 million Bangladeshis and half a million other undocumented people live in Pakistan. They are claimed to be from other areas such as Myanmar , Iran, Iraq, and Africa. [545]
Experts say that the migration of both Bengalis and Burmese ( Rohingya ) to Pakistan started in the 1980s and continued until 1998. Shaikh Muhammad Feroze, the chairman of the Pakistani Bengali Action Committee, claims that there are 200 settlements of Bengali-speaking people in Pakistan, of which 132 are in Karachi. They are also found in various other areas of Pakistan such as Thatta, Badin, Hyderabad, Tando Adam, and Lahore. [546] Large-scale Rohingya migration to Karachi made that city one of the largest population centres of Rohingyas in the world after Myanmar. [547] The Burmese community of Karachi is spread out over 60 of the city's slums such as the Burmi Colony in Korangi, Arakanabad, Machchar colony, Bilal colony, Ziaul Haq Colony, and Godhra Camp. [548]
Thousands of Uyghur Muslims have also migrated to the Gilgit-Baltistan region of Pakistan, fleeing religious and cultural persecution in Xinjiang, China. [549] Since 1989 thousands of Kashmiri Muslim refugees have sought refuge in Pakistan, complaining that many of the refugee women had been raped by Indian soldiers and that they were forced out of their homes by the soldiers. [550]

Social groups
The population is dominated by four main ethnic groups : Punjabis , Pashtuns (Pathans), Sindhis , and Balochs . [551] Rough accounts from 2009 indicate that the Punjabis dominate with 78.7 million (~45%) while the Pashtuns are the second-largest group with ~29.3 million (15.42%). [551] The number of Sindhis is estimated at 24.8 million (14.1%), with the number of Seraikis (a sub-group of Punjabis) estimated at 14.8 million (8.4%). [551] The number of Urdu-speaking Muhajirs (the Indian emigrants ) stands at ~13.3 million (7.57%) while the number of Balochs is estimated at 6.3 million (3.57%) — the smallest group in terms of population. [551] [552] The remaining 11.1 million (4.66%) consist of various ethnic minorities such as the Brahuis , [538] the Hindkowans , the various peoples of Gilgit-Baltistan, the Kashmiris , the Sheedis (who are of African descent), [553] and the Hazaras . [551] There is also a large Pakistani diaspora worldwide, numbering over seven million, [552] which has been recorded as the sixth largest diaspora in the world. [554]

Urbanisation
Since achieving independence as a result of the partition of India, the urbanisation has increased exponentially, with several different causes. [532] The majority of the population in the south resides along the Indus River , with Karachi the most populous commercial city. [532] In the east, west, and north, most of the population lives in an arc formed by the cities of Lahore , Faisalabad , Rawalpindi , Islamabad, Sargodha , Gujranwala , Sialkot , Gujrat , Jhelum , Sheikhupura , Nowshera , Mardan , and Peshawar . During the period 1990–2008, city dwellers made up 36.0% of Pakistan's population, making it the most urbanised nation in South Asia. Furthermore, more than 50% of Pakistanis live in towns of 5,000 people or more. [534] Immigration , from both within and outside the country, is regarded as one of the main factors contributing to urbanisation in Pakistan. One analysis of the 1998 national census highlighted the significance of the partition of India in the 1940s as it relates to urban change in Pakistan. [555]
During and after the independence period, Muslim Muhajirs from India migrated in large numbers to Pakistan, especially to the port city of Karachi , which is today the largest metropolis in Pakistan. [555] Migration from other countries , mainly from those nearby, has further accelerated the process of urbanisation in Pakistani cities. Inevitably, the rapid urbanisation caused by these large population movements has also created new political and socio-economic challenges. [555] In addition to immigration, economic trends such as the green revolution and political developments, among a host of other factors, are also important causes of urbanisation. [555]

Religion

Islam
About 97.0% of Pakistanis are Muslim. Pakistan has the second-largest number of Muslims in the world after Indonesia. [562] [563] The majority of them are Sunni (estimated between 75 and 95%) [564] [565] [566] [567] [568] while Shias represent between 5–20%. [564] [565] [569] [570] Pakistan, like India, is said to have at least 16 million Shias. [570] [566] [571] A PEW survey in 2012 found that only 6% of Pakistani Muslims were Shia. [569]
Pakistan's founder, Jinnah , had been born in a Shia family but some sources maintain that Jinnah became a firm Sunni Muslim later in life. [572] [573] [574] Shias have alleged discrimination by the Pakistani government since 1948, claiming that Sunnis are given preference in business, official positions, and administration of justice. [575] Attacks on Shias increased during the presidency of Zia-ul-Haq , [575] with the first major sectarian riots in Pakistan breaking out in 1983 in Karachi and later spreading to Lahore and Balochistan . [576] Sectarian violence became a recurring feature of the Muharram month every year, with sectarian violence between Sunnis and Shias taking place in 1986 in Parachinar . [576] In one notable incident, the 1988 Gilgit Massacre , Osama bin Laden -led Sunni tribal members assaulted, massacred, and raped Shia civilians in Gilgit after being inducted by the Pakistan Army to quell a Shia uprising in Gilgit . [577] [578] [579] [580] [581] After the 9/11 attacks in the United States , sectarian violence among Muslim denominations had increased with systematic targeted killings of both sects, Sunnis and Shias. [582] [583] In 2013 there were country-wide protests by both Shias and Sunnis calling for an end to sectarian violence in the country. [584]
The Ahmadis , a small minority representing 0.22–2% of Pakistan's population, [585] are officially considered non-Muslims by virtue of the constitutional amendment . [586] The Ahmadis are particularly persecuted, especially since 1974 when they were banned from calling themselves Muslims. In 1984, Ahmadiyya places of worship were banned from being called "mosques". [587] As of 2012 [update] , 12% of Pakistani Muslims self-identify as non-denominational Muslims . [588] There are also several Quraniyoon communities. [589] [590]
Sufism , a mystical Islamic tradition, has a long history and a large following among the Sunni Muslims in Pakistan, at both the academic and popular levels. Popular Sufi culture is centered around gatherings and celebrations at the shrines of saints and annual festivals that feature Sufi music and dance. Two Sufis whose shrines receive much national attention are Ali Hajweri in Lahore (c. 12th century) [591] and Shahbaz Qalander in Sehwan , Sindh (c. 12th century). [592]
There are two levels of Sufism in Pakistan. The first is the 'populist' Sufism of the rural population. This level of Sufism involves belief in intercession through saints, veneration of their shrines, and forming bonds with a pir (saint). Many rural Pakistani Muslims associate with pirs and seek their intercession. [593] The second level of Sufism in Pakistan is 'intellectual Sufism', which is growing among the urban and educated population. They are influenced by the writings of Sufis such as the medieval theologian al-Ghazali , the Sufi reformer Shaykh Aḥmad Sirhindi , and Shah Wali Allah . [594] Contemporary Islamic fundamentalists criticise Sufism's popular character, which in their view does not accurately reflect the teachings and practice of the Prophet and his companions. [595]

Hinduism
Hinduism is the second-largest religion in Pakistan after Islam, according to the 1998 census. [596] As of 2010 [update] , Pakistan had the fifth-largest Hindu population in the world, and PEW predicts that by 2050 Pakistan will have the fourth-largest Hindu population in the world. [597] In the 1998 census the Hindu (jati) population was found to be 2,111,271 while the Hindu (scheduled castes) numbered an additional 332,343. [596] Hindus are found in all provinces of Pakistan but are mostly concentrated in Sindh. They speak a variety of languages such as Sindhi , Seraiki , Aer, Dhatki, Gera, Goaria, Gurgula, Jandavra, Kabutra, Koli, Loarki, Marwari , Sansi, Vaghri, [598] and Gujarati . [540]
At the time of Pakistan's creation the 'hostage theory' gained currency. According to this theory, the Hindu minority in Pakistan was to be given a fair deal in Pakistan in order to ensure the protection of the Muslim minority in India. [599] [600] However, Khawaja Nazimuddin, the second Prime Minister of Pakistan , stated:
Some Hindus in Pakistan feel that they are treated as second-class citizens and many have continued to migrate to India. [602] Pakistani Hindus faced riots after the Babri Masjid demolition, [603] endured a massacre (in 2005) by security forces in Balochistan, [604] and have experienced other attacks, forced conversions, and abductions. [605]

Christianity and other religions
Christians formed the next largest religious minority, after Hindus, with a population of 2,092,902, according to the 1998 census. [606] They were followed by the Bahá'í Faith , which had a following of 30,000, then Sikhism , Buddhism , and Zoroastrianism , each back then claiming 20,000 adherents, [607] and a very small community of Jains . There is a Roman Catholic community in Karachi that was established by Goan and Tamil migrants when Karachi's infrastructure was being developed by the British during the colonial administration between World War I and World War II . The influence of atheism is very small, with 1.0% of the population identifying as atheist in 2005. [608] However, the figure rose to 2.0% in 2012 according to Gallup . [608]

Culture and society
Civil society in Pakistan is largely hierarchical, emphasising local cultural etiquette and traditional Islamic values that govern personal and political life. The basic family unit is the extended family , [609] although for socio-economic reasons there has been a growing trend towards nuclear families . [610] The traditional dress for both men and women is the Shalwar Kameez ; trousers , jeans , and shirts are also popular among men. [63] In recent decades, the middle class has increased to around 35 million and the upper and upper-middle classes to around 17 million, and power is shifting from rural landowners to the urbanised elites. [611] Pakistani festivals, including Eid-ul-Fitr , Eid-ul-Azha , Ramazan , Christmas , Easter , Holi , and Diwali , are mostly religious in origin. [609] Increasing globalisation has resulted in Pakistan ranking 56th on the A.T. Kearney /FP Globalization Index . [612]

Clothing, arts, and fashion
The Shalwar Kameez is the national dress of Pakistan and is worn by both men and women in all four provinces : Punjab , Sindh, Balochistan, and Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa as well as in FATA and Azad Kashmir . Each province has its own style of Shalwar Kameez . Pakistanis wear clothes in a range of exquisite colours and designs and in type of fabric ( silk , chiffon , cotton , etc). [613] Besides the national dress, domestically tailored suits and neckties are often worn by men, and are customary in offices, schools, and social gatherings. [613]
The fashion industry has flourished in the changing environment of the fashion world. Since Pakistan came into being, its fashion has evolved in different phases and developed a unique identity. Today, Pakistani fashion is a combination of traditional and modern dress and has become a mark of Pakistani culture. Despite modern trends, regional and traditional forms of dress have developed their own significance as a symbol of native tradition. This regional fashion continues to evolve into both more modern and purer forms. The Pakistan Fashion Design Council based in Lahore organizes PFDC Fashion Week and the Fashion Pakistan Council based in Karachi organizes Fashion Pakistan Week . Pakistan's first fashion week was held in November 2009. [614]

Role of women in Pakistani society
The social status of women in Pakistan varies and depends considerably on social class, upbringing, and region due to uneven socioeconomic development and the impact of social influences on women's lives in the country. [615] Pakistan has had a long history of feminist activism since its birth. [615] Since 1947 the APWA and Aurat Foundation , both influential feminist organisations, have played strong roles in raising awareness about women's rights in the country. [615] Personalities such as Begum Rana'a , Benazir Bhutto, Malala Yousafzai and Kalsoom Nawaz have been influential in Pakistan's feminist movement. [615] Overall, the status of women has improved due to enhanced religious and educational instruction. However, when looked at in a global perspective, the situation in Pakistan is quite alarming. In 2014 the World Economic Forum ranked Pakistan as the second-worst country in the world in terms of gender equality . [616]
The relationship of women to the opposite gender is culturally that of gender subordination . Women are traditionally assigned, or assumed to have, certain roles related mainly to domestic chores while men are considered the breadwinners and professionals of the family. In urban areas of the country, more and more women are assuming professional roles and contributing to family economics, but the ratio of these women compared with those in traditional roles is small. The occupations most favoured by females and acceptable to society are teaching and tutoring . [615] [617] Due to heightened awareness among people, educational opportunities for Pakistani women have increased over the years. [618] On 24 February 2016, the elected assembly of Pakistan's Punjab province passed a new law called "Punjab Protection of Women Against Violence Bill 2015", which provides women with protection against a multitude of crimes including cyber crime, domestic violence, and emotional, economic and psychological abuse. [619]

Media and entertainment
The private print media , state-owned Pakistan Television Corporation (PTV), and Pakistan Broadcasting Corporation (PBC) for radio were the dominant media outlets until the beginning of the 21st century. Pakistan now has a large network of domestic, privately-owned 24-hour news media and television channels . [620] A 2016 report by the Reporters Without Borders ranked Pakistan 147th on the Press Freedom Index , while at the same time terming the Pakistani media "among the freest in Asia when it comes to covering the squabbling among politicians." [621] BBC calls the Pakistani media "among the most outspoken in South Asia". [622] Pakistani media has also played a vital role in exposing corruption. [623]
The Lollywood , Kariwood , Punjabi, and Pashto film industry is based in Karachi, Lahore, and Peshawar. While Bollywood films were banned from public cinemas from 1965 until 2008, they have remained an important part of popular culture. [624] [625] In contrast to the ailing Pakistani film industry, Urdu televised dramas and theatrical performances continue to be popular, as many entertainment media outlets air them regularly. [626] Urdu dramas dominate the television entertainment industry , which has launched critically acclaimed miniseries and featured popular actors and actresses since the 1990s. [627] In the 1960s–1970s, pop music and disco (1970s) dominated the country's music industry. In the 1980s–1990s, British influenced rock music appeared and jolted the country's entertainment industry. [628] In the 2000s, heavy metal music gained popular and critical acclaim. [629]
Pakistani music ranges from diverse forms of provincial folk music and traditional styles such as Qawwali and Ghazal Gayaki to modern musical forms that fuse traditional and western music. [630] [631] Pakistan has many famous folk singers. The arrival of Afghan refugees in the western provinces has stimulated interest in Pashto music, although there has been intolerance of it in some places. [632]

Diaspora
According to the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Pakistan has the sixth-largest diaspora in the world. [554] Statistics gathered by the Pakistani government show that there are around 7 million Pakistanis residing abroad, with the vast majority living in the Middle East, Europe, and North America. [633] Pakistan ranks 10th in the world for remittances sent home. [634] [635] The largest inflow of remittances, as of 2016, is from Saudi Arabia, amounting to $5.9 billion. [636] The term Overseas Pakistani is officially recognised by the Government of Pakistan . The Ministry of Overseas Pakistanis was established in 2008 to deal exclusively with all matters of overseas Pakistanis such as attending to their needs and problems, developing projects for their welfare, and working for resolution of their problems and issues. Overseas Pakistanis are the second-largest source of foreign exchange remittances to Pakistan after exports. Over the last several years, home remittances have maintained a steadily rising trend, with a more than 100% increase from US$8.9 billion in 2009–10 to US$19.9 billion in 2015–16. [409] [634] [635]
The Overseas Pakistani Division (OPD) was created in September 2004 within the Ministry of Labour (MoL). It has since recognised the importance of overseas Pakistanis and their contribution to the nation's economy. Together with Community Welfare Attaches (CWAs) and the Overseas Pakistanis Foundation (OPF), the OPD is making efforts to improve the welfare of Pakistanis who reside abroad. The division aims to provide better services through improved facilities at airports, and suitable schemes for housing, education, and health care. It also facilitates the reintegration into society of returning overseas Pakistanis. Notable members of the Pakistani diaspora include London Mayor Sadiq Khan , UK Cabinet Member Sajid Javid , former UK Conservative Party Chair Baroness Warsi , singers Zayn Malik and Nadia Ali , MIT Physics Professor Dr. Nergis Mavalvala , actors Riz Ahmed and Kumail Nanjiani , businessmen Shahid Khan and Sir Anwar Pervez , Boston University professors Adil Najam and Hamid Nawab , Texas A&M Professor Muhammad Suhail Zubairy , Yale Professor Sara Suleri , UC San Diego Professor Farooq Azam , and historian Ayesha Jalal .

Literature and philosophy
Pakistan has literature in Urdu , Sindhi , Punjabi , Pashto , Baluchi , Persian , English , and many other languages. [637] The Pakistan Academy of Letters is a large literary community that promotes literature and poetry in Pakistan and abroad. [638] The National Library publishes and promotes literature in the country. Before the 19th century, Pakistani literature consisted mainly of lyric and religious poetry and mystical and folkloric works. During the colonial period, native literary figures were influenced by western literary realism and took up increasingly varied topics and narrative forms. Prose fiction is now very popular. [639] [640]
The national poet of Pakistan, Muhammad Iqbal , wrote poetry in Urdu and Persian. He was a strong proponent of the political and spiritual revival of Islamic civilisation and encouraged Muslims all over the world to bring about a successful revolution. [ clarification needed ] [642] [643] [644] Well-known figures in contemporary Pakistani Urdu literature include Faiz Ahmed Faiz and Saadat Hasan Manto . Sadequain and Gulgee are known for their calligraphy and paintings. [640] The Sufi poets Shah Abdul Latif , Bulleh Shah , Mian Muhammad Bakhsh , and Khawaja Farid enjoy considerable popularity in Pakistan. [645] Mirza Kalich Beg has been termed the father of modern Sindhi prose. [646] Historically, philosophical development in the country was dominated by Muhammad Iqbal , Sir Syed , Muhammad Asad , Maududi , and Mohammad Ali Johar . [647]
Ideas from British and American philosophy greatly shaped philosophical development in Pakistan. Analysts such as M. M. Sharif and Zafar Hassan established the first major Pakistani philosophical movement in 1947. [ clarification needed ] [648] After the 1971 war , philosophers such as Jalaludin Abdur Rahim , Gianchandani , and Malik Khalid incorporated Marxism into Pakistan's philosophical thinking. [649] Influential work by Manzoor Ahmad , Jon Elia , Hasan Askari Rizvi , and Abdul Khaliq brought mainstream social , political , and analytical philosophy to the fore in academia. [649] Works by Noam Chomsky have influenced philosophical ideas in various fields of social and political philosophy. [650] [651]

Architecture
Four periods are recognised in Pakistani architecture: pre-Islamic , Islamic , colonial , and post-colonial . With the beginning of the Indus civilisation around the middle of the 3rd millennium BC, [652] an advanced urban culture developed for the first time in the region, with large buildings, some of which survive to this day. [653] Mohenjo Daro , Harappa, and Kot Diji are among the pre-Islamic settlements that are now tourist attractions. [174] The rise of Buddhism and the influence of Greek civilisation led to the development of a Greco-Buddhist style, [654] starting from the 1st century AD. The high point of this era was the Gandhara style . An example of Buddhist architecture is the ruins of the Buddhist monastery Takht-i-Bahi in Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa. [655]
The arrival of Islam in what is today Pakistan meant the sudden end of Buddhist architecture in the area and a smooth transition to the predominantly pictureless Islamic architecture . The most important Indo-Islamic -style building still standing is the tomb of the Shah Rukn-i-Alam in Multan. During the Mughal era, design elements of Persian-Islamic architecture were fused with and often produced playful forms of Hindustani art. Lahore, as the occasional residence of Mughal rulers, contains many important buildings from the empire. Most prominent among them are the Badshahi Mosque , the fortress of Lahore with the famous Alamgiri Gate , the colourful, Mughal -style Wazir Khan Mosque , [656] the Shalimar Gardens in Lahore, and the Shahjahan Mosque in Thatta . In the British colonial period, predominantly functional buildings of the Indo-European representative style developed from a mixture of European and Indian-Islamic components. Post-colonial national identity is expressed in modern structures such as the Faisal Mosque , the Minar-e-Pakistan , and the Mazar-e-Quaid . [657] Several examples of architectural infrastructure demonstrating the influence of British design can be found in Lahore , Peshawar , and Karachi . [657]

Food and drink
Pakistani cuisine is similar to that of other regions of South Asia, since much of it originated from the royal kitchens of 16th-century Mughal emperors. Pakistan has a greater variety of meat dishes compared to the rest of the sub-continent. Most of those dishes have their roots in British , Central Asian and Middle Eastern cuisine . Unlike Middle Eastern cuisine, Pakistani cooking uses large quantities of spices, herbs, and seasoning. Garlic , ginger , turmeric , red chili , and garam masala are used in most dishes, and home cooking regularly includes curry. Chapati , a thin flatbread made from wheat, is a staple food, usually served with curry, meat, vegetables, and lentils. Rice is also common; it is served plain, fried with spices, and in sweet dishes. [12] [658] [659]
Lassi is a traditional drink in the Punjab region . Black tea with milk and sugar is popular throughout Pakistan and is consumed daily by most of the population. [63] [660] Sohan halwa is a popular sweet dish from the southern region of Punjab province and is enjoyed all over Pakistan. [661]

Sports
Most sports played in Pakistan originated and were substantially developed by athletes and sports fans from the United Kingdom who introduced them during the British Raj . Field hockey is the national sport of Pakistan; it has won three gold medals in the Olympic Games held in 1960 , 1968 , and 1984 . [662] Pakistan has also won the Hockey World Cup a record four times, held in 1971 , 1978 , 1982 , and 1994 . [663]
Cricket , however, is the most popular game across the country. [664] The cricket team (known as Shaheen ) won the Cricket World Cup held in 1992 ; it was runner-up once, in 1999 . Pakistan was runner-up in the inaugural World Twenty20 (2007) in South Africa and won the World Twenty20 in England in 2009. In March 2009, militants attacked the touring Sri Lankan cricket team , [665] after which no international cricket was played in Pakistan until May 2015, when the Zimbabwean team agreed to a tour .
In athletics, the country has a proud history with 14 gold medals at the Asian Games . [666] Abdul Khaliq won the 100-metre gold medal in the 1954 and 1958 Asian Games . [667] In squash , world-class players such as Jahangir Khan [668] and Jansher Khan have won the World Open Squash Championship a combined 14 times during their careers. [669] [670] Jahangir Khan also won the British Open a record ten times. [668] In mountaineering , Nazir Sabir , Hassan Sadpara , and Samina Baig are the only Pakistanis to have climbed Mount Everest . [671] Pakistan has competed many times at the Olympic Games in field hockey, boxing, athletics, swimming, and shooting. [672] Pakistan's Olympics medal tally stands at ten, of which eight were earned in field hockey. [673] As of 2016, Pakistan's Commonwealth Games and Asian Games medal tallies stand at 69 and 165, respectively. [674] [675] At the national level, polo is popular, with regular national events in different parts of the country. [676] Boxing, billiards, snooker, rowing, canoeing, kayaking, caving, tennis, golf, and volleyball are also actively pursued, and Pakistan has produced regional and international champions in these sports. [61] [670] [672] Basketball enjoys regional popularity, especially in Lahore and Karachi . [677] [678]
Pakistan has hosted or co-hosted several international sporting events: the 1989 and 2004 South Asian Games ; the 1984 , 1993 , 1996 and 2003 World Squash Championships ; the 1987 and 1996 Cricket World Cup ; and the 1990 Hockey World Cup .

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00058
The Guardian
The Guardian is a British daily newspaper, known from 1821 until 1959 as the Manchester Guardian . Along with its sister papers The Observer and The Guardian Weekly , The Guardian is part of the Guardian Media Group , owned by The Scott Trust Limited . The Trust was created in 1936 "to secure the financial and editorial independence of The Guardian in perpetuity and to safeguard the journalistic freedom and liberal values of The Guardian free from commercial or political interference." The Scott Trust became a limited company in 2008, with a constitution to maintain the same protections for The Guardian . Profits are reinvested in journalism rather than to the benefit of an owner or shareholders. [2]
The Guardian is edited by Katharine Viner , who succeeded Alan Rusbridger in 2015. [3] [4] In 2016, The Guardian ' s print edition had an average daily circulation of roughly 162,000 copies in the country, behind The Daily Telegraph and The Times . [1] The newspaper has an online UK edition as well as two international websites, Guardian Australia (founded in 2013) and Guardian US (founded in 2011). The newspaper's online edition was the fifth most widely read in the world in October 2014, with over 42.6 million readers. [5] Its combined print and online editions reach nearly 9 million British readers. [6]
Notable scoops include the 2011 News International phone hacking scandal , in particular the hacking of murdered English teenager Milly Dowler 's phone. [7] The investigation led to the closure of the UK's biggest selling Sunday newspaper, and one of the highest circulation newspapers in the world, the News of the World . [8] The newspaper also released news of the secret collection of Verizon telephone records held by US President Barack Obama 's administration in June 2013, [9] and subsequently revealed the existence of the PRISM surveillance program after it was leaked to the paper by NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden . [10] In 2016, it led the investigation into the Panama Papers , exposing the then British Prime Minister David Cameron 's links to offshore bank accounts .
The Guardian has been named Newspaper of the Year four times at the annual British Press Awards , the most recent in 2014 for reporting on government surveillance. [11] The paper is still occasionally referred to by its nickname of The Grauniad , given originally for the purported frequency of its typographical errors . [12]

History

1821 to 1972

Early years
The Manchester Guardian was founded in Manchester in 1821 by cotton merchant John Edward Taylor with backing from the Little Circle , a group of non-conformist businessmen. [13] They launched their paper after the police closure of the more radical Manchester Observer , a paper that had championed the cause of the Peterloo Massacre protesters. [14] Taylor had been hostile to the radical reformers, writing: "They have appealed not to the reason but the passions and the suffering of their abused and credulous fellow-countrymen, from whose ill-requited industry they extort for themselves the means of a plentiful and comfortable existence. They do not toil, neither do they spin, but they live better than those that do." [15] When the government closed down the Manchester Observer , the mill-owners' champions had the upper hand. [16]
The influential journalist Jeremiah Garnett joined Taylor during the establishment of the paper, and all of the Little Circle wrote articles for the new paper. [17]
The prospectus announcing the new publication proclaimed that it would "zealously enforce the principles of civil and religious Liberty ... warmly advocate the cause of Reform ... endeavour to assist in the diffusion of just principles of Political Economy and ... support, without reference to the party from which they emanate, all serviceable measures". [18] In 1825 the paper merged with the British Volunteer and was known as The Manchester Guardian and British Volunteer until 1828. [19]
The working-class Manchester and Salford Advertiser called the Manchester Guardian "the foul prostitute and dirty parasite of the worst portion of the mill-owners". [20] The Manchester Guardian was generally hostile to labour's claims. Of the 1832 Ten Hours Bill, the paper doubted whether in view of the foreign competition "the passing of a law positively enacting a gradual destruction of the cotton manufacture in this kingdom would be a much less rational procedure." [21] The Manchester Guardian dismissed strikes as the work of outside agitators – "... if an accommodation can be effected, the occupation of the agents of the Union is gone. They live on strife ..." [22]
The Manchester Guardian was highly critical of Abraham Lincoln 's conduct during the American Civil War , writing on the news that Abraham Lincoln had been assassinated: "Of his rule, we can never speak except as a series of acts abhorrent to every true notion of constitutional right and human liberty ..." [23]

CP Scott
CP Scott made the newspaper nationally recognised. He was editor for 57 years from 1872, and became its owner when he bought the paper from the estate of Taylor's son in 1907. Under Scott, the paper's moderate editorial line became more radical, supporting William Gladstone when the Liberals split in 1886, and opposing the Second Boer War against popular opinion. [24] Scott supported the movement for women's suffrage , but was critical of any tactics by the Suffragettes that involved direct action : [25] "The really ludicrous position is that Mr Lloyd George is fighting to enfranchise seven million women and the militants are smashing unoffending people's windows and breaking up benevolent societies' meetings in a desperate effort to prevent him." Scott thought the Suffragettes' "courage and devotion" was "worthy of a better cause and saner leadership". [26] It has been argued that Scott's criticism reflected a widespread disdain, at the time, for those women who "transgressed the gender expectations of Edwardian society ". [25]
Scott commissioned JM Synge and his friend Jack Yeats to produce articles and drawings documenting the social conditions of the west of Ireland (pre-First World War), and these pieces were published in 1911 in the collection Travels in Wicklow, West Kerry and Connemara . [27]
Scott's friendship with Chaim Weizmann played a role in the Balfour Declaration of 1917 , and in 1948 The Manchester Guardian was a supporter of the new State of Israel .
In June 1936 ownership of the paper passed to the Scott Trust (named after the last owner, John Russell Scott, who was the first chairman of the Trust). This move ensured the paper's independence. [ citation needed ]

Spanish Civil War
Traditionally affiliated with the centrist to centre-left Liberal Party , and with a northern, non-conformist circulation base, the paper earned a national reputation and the respect of the left during the Spanish Civil War . George Orwell writes in Homage to Catalonia : "Of our larger papers, the Manchester Guardian is the only one that leaves me with an increased respect for its honesty." With the pro-Liberal News Chronicle , the Labour -supporting Daily Herald , the Communist Party 's Daily Worker and several Sunday and weekly papers, it supported the Republican government against General Francisco Franco 's insurgent nationalists.

Post-war
The paper so loathed Labour's left-wing champion Aneurin Bevan "and the hate-gospellers of his entourage" that it called for Attlee 's post-war Labour government to be voted out of office. [28] The newspaper opposed the creation of the National Health Service as it feared the state provision of healthcare would "eliminate selective elimination" and lead to an increase of congenitally deformed and feckless people. [29]
The Manchester Guardian strongly opposed military intervention during the 1956 Suez Crisis : "The Anglo-French ultimatum to Egypt is an act of folly, without justification in any terms but brief expediency. It pours petrol on a growing fire. There is no knowing what kind of explosion will follow." [30]

1972 to 2000

Northern Ireland conflict
When 13 civil rights demonstrators in Northern Ireland were killed by British soldiers on 30 January 1972 (known as Bloody Sunday ), The Guardian said that "Neither side can escape condemnation." [31] Of the protesters, they wrote, "The organizers of the demonstration, Miss Bernadette Devlin among them, deliberately challenged the ban on marches. They knew that stone throwing and sniping could not be prevented, and that the IRA might use the crowd as a shield ." [31] Of the army, they wrote, "there seems little doubt that random shots were fired into the crowd, that aim was taken at individuals who were neither bombers nor weapons carriers and that excessive force was used". [31]
Many Irish people believed that the Widgery Tribunal 's ruling on the killings was a whitewash, [32] a view that was later supported with the publication of the Saville inquiry in 2010, [33] but in 1972 The Guardian declared that "Widgery's report is not one-sided" (20 April 1972). [34] At the time the paper also supported internment without trial in Northern Ireland: "Internment without trial is hateful, repressive and undemocratic. In the existing Irish situation, most regrettably, it is also inevitable... .To remove the ringleaders, in the hope that the atmosphere might calm down, is a step to which there is no obvious alternative." [35] Before then, The Guardian had called for British troops to be sent to the region: British soldiers could "present a more disinterested face of law and order," [36] but only on condition that "Britain takes charge." [37]

Sarah Tisdall
In 1983 the paper was at the centre of a controversy surrounding documents regarding the stationing of cruise missiles in Britain that were leaked to The Guardian by civil servant Sarah Tisdall . The paper eventually complied with a court order to hand over the documents to the authorities, which resulted in a six-month prison sentence for Tisdall, [38] though she served only four. "I still blame myself," said Peter Preston , who was the editor of The Guardian at the time, but he went on to argue that the paper had no choice because it "believed in the rule of law". [39]

First Gulf War
In the lead-up to the first Gulf War , between 1990 and 1991, The Guardian expressed doubts about military action against Iraq: "Frustration in the Gulf leads temptingly to the invocation of task forces and tactical bombing, but the military option is no option at all. The emergence yesterday of a potential hostage problem of vast dimensions only emphasised that this is far too complex a crisis for gunboat diplomacy. Loose talk of 'carpet bombing' Baghdad should be put back in the bottle of theoretical but unacceptable scenarios." [40]
But on the eve of the war, the paper rallied to the war cause: "The simple cause, at the end, is just. An evil regime in Iraq instituted an evil and brutal invasion. Our soldiers and airmen are there, at UN behest, to set that evil to rights. Their duties are clear. ... Let the momentum, and the resolution, be swift." [41] After the event, journalist Maggie O'Kane conceded that she and her colleagues had been a mouthpiece for war propaganda: "... we, the media, were harnessed like 2,000 beach donkeys and led through the sand to see what the British and US military wanted us to see in this nice clean war". [42]

Alleged penetration by Russian intelligence
In 1994, KGB defector Oleg Gordievsky identified Guardian literary editor Richard Gott as "an agent of influence". While Gott denied that he received cash, he admitted he had lunch at the Soviet Embassy and taken benefits from the KGB on overseas visits. Gott resigned from his post. [43]
Gordievsky commented on the newspaper: "The KGB loved The Guardian . It was deemed highly susceptible to penetration." [44]

Jonathan Aitken
In 1995, both the Granada Television programme World In Action and The Guardian were sued for libel by the then cabinet minister Jonathan Aitken , for their allegation that Harrods owner Mohamed Al Fayed had paid for Aitken and his wife to stay at the Hôtel Ritz in Paris, which would have amounted to accepting a bribe on Aitken's part. Aitken publicly stated that he would fight with "the simple sword of truth and the trusty shield of British fair play". [45] The court case proceeded, and in 1997 The Guardian produced evidence that Aitken's claim of his wife paying for the hotel stay was untrue. [46] In 1999, Aitken was jailed for perjury and perverting the course of justice . [47]

Kosovo War
The paper supported NATO 's military intervention in the Kosovo War in 1998–1999. Though the United Nations Security Council did not support the action, The Guardian stated that "the only honourable course for Europe and America is to use military force". [48] Mary Kaldor 's piece was headlined "Bombs away! But to save civilians, we must get in some soldiers too." [49]

Since 2000
In the early 2000s, The Guardian challenged the Act of Settlement 1701 and the Treason Felony Act 1848 . [50] [51] In October 2004, The Guardian published a humorous column by Charlie Brooker in its entertainment guide, which appeared to call for the assassination of George W. Bush . [52] This caused some controversy and the paper was forced to issue an apology and remove the article from its website. [53] [54] Following the 7 July 2005 London bombings , The Guardian published an article on its comment pages by Dilpazier Aslam , a 27-year-old British Muslim and journalism trainee from Yorkshire . [55] Aslam was a member of Hizb ut-Tahrir , an Islamist group, and had published a number of articles on their website. According to the paper, it did not know that Aslam was a member of Hizb ut-Tahrir when he applied to become a trainee, though several staff members were informed of this once he started at the paper. [56] The Home Office has claimed the group's "ultimate aim is the establishment of an Islamic state (Caliphate), according to Hizb ut-Tahrir via non-violent means". The Guardian asked Aslam to resign his membership of the group and, when he did not do so, terminated his employment. [57] In early 2009, the paper started a tax investigation into a number of major UK companies, [58] including publishing a database of the tax paid by the FTSE 100 companies. [59] Internal documents relating to Barclays Bank 's tax avoidance were removed from The Guardian website after Barclays obtained a gagging order . [60] The paper played a pivotal role in exposing the depth of the News of the World phone hacking affair . The Economist 's Intelligent Life magazine opined that,

Accusations of anti-Semitism and bias in coverage of Israel
In recent decades The Guardian has been accused of biased criticism of Israeli government policy [62] and of bias against the Palestinians. [63] In December 2003, columnist Julie Burchill cited "striking bias against the state of Israel" as one of the reasons she left the paper for The Times . [64] A leaked report from the European Monitoring Centre on Racism cited The Economist 's claim that for "many British Jews," the British media's reporting on Israel "is spiced with a tone of animosity, 'as to smell of anti-Semitism ' ... This is above all the case with the Guardian and The Independent ". The EU said the report, dated February 2003, was not published because it was insubstantial in its current state and lacking sufficient evidence. [65] [66]
Responding to these accusations, a Guardian editorial in 2002 condemned anti-Semitism and defended the paper's right to criticise the policies and actions of the Israeli government, arguing that those who view such criticism as inherently anti-Jewish are mistaken. [67] Harriet Sherwood, then The Guardian's foreign editor, later its Jerusalem correspondent, has also denied that The Guardian has an anti-Israel bias, saying that the paper aims to cover all viewpoints in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict . [68]
On 6 November 2011, Chris Elliott, the Guardian ' s readers' editor, wrote that "Guardian reporters, writers and editors must be more vigilant about the language they use when writing about Jews or Israel," citing recent cases where The Guardian received complaints regarding language chosen to describe Jews or Israel. Elliott noted that, over nine months, he upheld complaints regarding language in certain articles that were seen as anti-Semitic, revising the language and footnoting this change. [69]
The Guardian ' s style guide section referred to Tel Aviv as the capital of Israel in 2012. [70] [71] The Guardian later clarified: "In 1980, the Israeli Knesset enacted a law designating the city of Jerusalem, including East Jerusalem, as the country's capital. In response, the UN security council issued resolution 478, censuring the "change in character and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem" and calling on all member states with diplomatic missions in the city to withdraw. The UN has reaffirmed this position on several occasions, and almost every country now has its embassy in Tel Aviv. While it was therefore right to issue a correction to make clear Israel's designation of Jerusalem as its capital is not recognised by the international community, we accept that it is wrong to state that Tel Aviv – the country's financial and diplomatic centre – is the capital. The style guide has been amended accordingly." [72]
On 11 August 2014 the print edition of The Guardian published a pro-Israeli advocacy advert during the 2014 Israel–Gaza conflict featuring Elie Wiesel , headed by the words "Jews rejected child sacrifice 3,500 years ago. Now it's Hamas' turn." The Times had decided against running the ad, although it had already appeared in major American newspapers. [73] One week later, Chris Elliott expressed the opinion that the newspaper should have rejected the language used in the advert and should have negotiated with the advertiser on this matter. [74]

Clark County
In August 2004, for the US presidential election , the daily G2 supplement launched an experimental letter-writing campaign in Clark County, Ohio , an average-sized county in a swing state . The editor of the G2 supplement Ian Katz bought a voter list from the county for $25 and asked readers to write to people listed as undecided in the election, giving them an impression of the international view and the importance of voting against President George W. Bush. The paper scrapped "Operation Clark County" on 21 October 2004 after first publishing a column of responses—nearly all of them outraged—to the campaign under the headline "Dear Limey assholes." [75] The public's dislike of the campaign likely contributed to Bush's victory in Clark County. [76]

Guardian America
In 2007, the paper launched Guardian America , an attempt to capitalise on its large online readership in the United States, which at the time stood at more than 5.9 million. The company hired former American Prospect editor, New York magazine columnist and New York Review of Books writer Michael Tomasky to head the project and hire a staff of American reporters and web editors. The site featured news from The Guardian that was relevant to an American audience: coverage of US news and the Middle East, for example. [77]
Tomasky stepped down from his position as editor of Guardian America in February 2009, ceding editing and planning duties to other US and London staff. He retained his position as a columnist and blogger, taking the title editor-at-large. [78]
In October 2009, the company abandoned the Guardian America homepage, instead directing users to a US news index page on the main Guardian website. [79] The following month, the company laid off six American employees, including a reporter, a multimedia producer and four web editors. The move came as Guardian News and Media opted to reconsider its US strategy amid a huge effort to cut costs across the company. [80] In subsequent years, however, The Guardian has hired various commentators on US affairs including Ana Marie Cox , Michael Wolff , Naomi Wolf , Glenn Greenwald and George W. Bush's former speechwriter Josh Treviño . [81] Treviño's first blog post was an apology for a controversial tweet posted in June 2011 over the second Gaza flotilla, the controversy which had been revived by the appointment. [82]
Guardian US launched in September 2011, led by editor-in-chief Janine Gibson , which replaced the previous Guardian America service. [83] After a period during which Katharine Viner served as the US editor-in-chief before taking charge of Guardian News and Media as a whole, Viner's former deputy, Lee Glendinning, was appointed to succeed her as head of the American operation at the beginning of June 2015. [84]

Gagged from reporting Parliament
In October 2009, The Guardian reported that it was forbidden to report on a parliamentary matter - a question recorded in a Commons order paper, to be answered by a minister later that week. [85] The paper noted that it was being "forbidden from telling its readers why the paper is prevented—for the first time in memory—from reporting parliament. Legal obstacles, which cannot be identified, involve proceedings, which cannot be mentioned, on behalf of a client who must remain secret. The only fact the Guardian can report is that the case involves the London solicitors Carter-Ruck ." The paper further claimed that this case appears "to call into question privileges guaranteeing free speech established under the 1688 Bill of Rights ". [86] The only parliamentary question mentioning Carter-Ruck in the relevant period was by Paul Farrelly MP, in reference to legal action by Barclays and Trafigura . [87] [88] The part of the question referencing Carter-Ruck relates to the latter company's September 2009 gagging order on the publication of a 2006 internal report [89] into the 2006 Côte d'Ivoire toxic waste dump scandal, which involved a class action case that the company only settled in September 2009 after The Guardian published some of the commodity trader's internal emails. [90] The reporting injunction was lifted the next day, as Carter-Ruck withdrew it before The Guardian could challenge it in the High Court. [91] Alan Rusbridger credited the rapid back-down of Carter-Ruck to Twitter, [92] as did a BBC article. [93]

Edward Snowden leaks and intervention by the UK government
In June 2013, the newspaper broke news of the secret collection of Verizon telephone records held by Barack Obama 's administration [9] and subsequently revealed the existence of the PRISM surveillance program after it was leaked to the paper by former NSA contractor Edward Snowden . [10] The newspaper was subsequently contacted by the British government's Cabinet Secretary, Sir Jeremy Heywood , under instruction from Prime Minister David Cameron and Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg, who ordered that the hard drives containing the information be destroyed. [94] The Guardian 's offices were then visited in July by agents from the UK's GCHQ , who supervised the destruction of the hard drives containing information acquired from Snowden. [95] In June 2014 The Register reported that the information the government sought to suppress by destroying the hard drives related to the location of a "beyond top secret" internet monitoring base in Seeb , Oman , and the close involvement of BT and Cable & Wireless in intercepting internet communications. [96] Julian Assange criticized the newspaper for not publishing the entirety of the content when it had the chance. [97]

Ownership and finances
The Guardian is part of the Guardian Media Group (GMG) of newspapers, radio stations and print media including; The Observer Sunday newspaper, The Guardian Weekly international newspaper, and new media— Guardian Abroad website, and guardian.co.uk . All the aforementioned were owned by The Scott Trust , a charitable foundation existing between 1936 and 2008, which aimed to ensure the paper's editorial independence in perpetuity, maintaining its financial health to ensure it did not become vulnerable to take overs by for-profit media groups. At the beginning of October 2008, the Scott Trust's assets were transferred to a new limited company, The Scott Trust Limited, with the intention being that the original trust would be wound up. [98] Dame Liz Forgan , chair of the Scott Trust, reassured staff that the purposes of the new company remained the same as under the previous arrangements.
The Guardian 's ownership by the Scott Trust is probably a factor in its being the only British national daily to conduct (since 2003) an annual social, ethical and environmental audit in which it examines, under the scrutiny of an independent external auditor, its own behaviour as a company. [99] It is also the only British national daily newspaper to employ an internal ombudsman (called the "readers' editor") to handle complaints and corrections.
The Guardian and its parent groups participate in Project Syndicate , established by George Soros , and intervened in 1995 to save the Mail & Guardian in South Africa. However, Guardian Media Group sold the majority of its shares of the Mail & Guardian in 2002. [ citation needed ]
The Guardian has been consistently loss-making. The National Newspaper division of GMG, which also includes The Observer , reported operating losses of £49.9m in 2006, up from £18.6m in 2005. [100] The paper was therefore heavily dependent on cross-subsidisation from profitable companies within the group.
The continual losses made by the National Newspaper division of the Guardian Media Group caused it to dispose of its Regional Media division by selling titles to competitor Trinity Mirror in March 2010. This included the flagship Manchester Evening News , and severed the historic link between that paper and The Guardian . The sale was in order to safeguard the future of The Guardian newspaper as is the intended purpose of the Scott Trust. [101]
In June 2011 Guardian News and Media revealed increased annual losses of £33m and announced that it was looking to focus on its online edition for news coverage, leaving the print edition to contain more comments and features. It was also speculated that The Guardian might become the first British national daily paper to be fully online. [102] [103]
For the three years up to June 2012, the paper lost £100,000 a day, which prompted Intelligent Life to question whether The Guardian could survive. [104]
Between 2007 and 2014 The Guardian Media Group sold all their side businesses, of regional papers and online portals for classifieds and consolidated, into The Guardian as sole product. The sales let them acquire a capital stock of £838.3m as of July 2014, supposed to guarantee the independence of The Guardian in perpetuity. In the first year, the paper made more losses than predicted, and in January 2016 the publishers announced, that The Guardian will cut 20 per cent of staff and costs within the next three years. [105]

"Membership" subscription scheme
In 2014, The Guardian launched a membership scheme. [106] The scheme aims to reduce the financial losses incurred by The Guardian without introducing a paywall , thus maintaining open access to the website. Website readers can pay a monthly subscription, with three tiers available. [107]

Political stance and editorial opinion
Founded by textile traders and merchants, The Guardian had a reputation as "an organ of the middle class", [108] or in the words of C. P. Scott's son Ted, "a paper that will remain bourgeois to the last". [109] "I write for the Guardian ," said Sir Max Hastings in 2005, [110] "because it is read by the new establishment," reflecting the paper's then-growing influence.
The Scott Trust describes one of its "core purposes" to be "to secure the financial and editorial independence of the Guardian in perpetuity: as a quality national newspaper without party affiliation; remaining faithful to its liberal tradition". [111] [112] The paper's readership is generally on the mainstream left of British political opinion: a MORI poll taken between April and June 2000 showed that 80 per cent of Guardian readers were Labour Party voters; [113] according to another MORI poll taken in 2005, 48 per cent of Guardian readers were Labour voters and 34 per cent Liberal Democrat voters. [114] The newspaper's reputation as a platform for liberal and left-wing opinions has led to the use of the epithets " Guardian reader" and "Guardianista" for people holding such views, or as a negative stereotype of such people as middle class, earnest and politically correct . [115] [116]
Although the paper is often considered to be "linked inextricably" to the Labour Party, [112] three of The Guardian 's four leader writers joined the more centrist Social Democratic Party on its foundation in 1981. The paper was enthusiastic in its support for Tony Blair in his successful bid to lead the Labour Party, [117] and to be elected Prime Minister. [118] On 19 January 2003, two months before the 2003 invasion of Iraq , The Guardian reported: "Military intervention in the Middle East holds many dangers. But if we want a lasting peace it may be the only option. ... War with Iraq may yet not come, but, conscious of the potentially terrifying responsibility resting with the British Government, we find ourselves supporting the current commitment to a possible use of force." [119]
Then Guardian features editor Ian Katz, asserted in 2004 that "it is no secret we are a centre-left newspaper". [120] In 2008, Guardian columnist Jackie Ashley said that editorial contributors were a mix of "right-of-centre libertarians , greens, Blairites, Brownites, Labourite but less enthusiastic Brownites, etc," and that the newspaper was "clearly left of centre and vaguely progressive". She also said that "you can be absolutely certain that come the next general election, The Guardian 's stance will not be dictated by the editor, still less any foreign proprietor (it helps that there isn't one) but will be the result of vigorous debate within the paper". [121] The paper's comment and opinion pages, though often written by centre-left contributors such as Polly Toynbee , have allowed some space for right-of-centre voices such as Max Hastings and Michael Gove . Since an editorial in 2000, The Guardian has favoured abolition of the British monarchy. [122]
In the run-up to the 2010 general election , following a meeting of the editorial staff, [123] the paper declared its support for the Liberal Democrats, due in particular, to the party's stance on electoral reform . The paper suggested tactical voting to prevent a Conservative victory, given Britain's first-past-the-post electoral system. [124] At the 2015 election , the paper switched its support to the Labour Party . The paper argued that Britain needed a new direction and Labour "speaks with more urgency than its rivals on social justice, standing up to predatory capitalism, on investment for growth, on reforming and strengthening the public realm, Britain's place in Europe and international development". [125]
Assistant Editor Michael White, in discussing media self-censorship in March 2011, says: "I have always sensed liberal, middle class ill-ease in going after stories about immigration, legal or otherwise, about welfare fraud or the less attractive tribal habits of the working class, which is more easily ignored altogether. Toffs, including royal ones, Christians, especially popes, governments of Israel, and US Republicans are more straightforward targets." [126]
In a 2013 interview for NPR , the Guardian's Latin America correspondent Rory Carroll stated that many editors at The Guardian believed and continue to believe that they should support Hugo Chávez "because he was a standard-bearer for the left". [127]
In the 2015 Labour Party leadership election , The Guardian supported Yvette Cooper and was critical of left-winger Jeremy Corbyn , the successful candidate. [128] Although the majority of political columnists in The Guardian were against Corbyn winning, Owen Jones , Seumas Milne and George Monbiot wrote supportive articles about him. [129]

Controversy
Journalist Glenn Greenwald of The Intercept , a former contributor to The Guardian , has accused The Guardian of falsifying the words of WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange in a report about the interview he gave to Italian newspaper La Repubblica. Greenwald wrote: "This article is about how those [ Guardian 's ] false claims — fabrications, really — were spread all over the internet by journalists, causing hundreds of thousands of people (if not millions) to consume false news." [130] The Guardian later retracted its article about Assange.
Randeep Ramesh, Social Affairs Editors of The Guardian, has expressed his support for controversial charity CAGE , a support organisation for people investigated due to terrorist connections. [131]

Circulation and format
The Guardian had a certified average daily circulation of 204,222 copies in December 2012 — a drop of 11.25 per cent on January 2012 — as compared to sales of 547,465 for The Daily Telegraph , 396,041 for The Times , and 78,082 for The Independent . [132] In March 2013, its average daily circulation had fallen to 193,586, according to the Audit Bureau of Circulations. [133] Circulation has continued to decline and stood at 161,091 in December 2016, a decline of 2.98 per cent year-on-year. [1]

Publication history
The first edition was published on 5 May 1821, [134] at which time The Guardian was a weekly, published on Saturdays and costing 7 d ; the stamp duty on newspapers (4d per sheet) forced the price up so high that it was uneconomic to publish more frequently. When the stamp duty was cut in 1836, The Guardian added a Wednesday edition and with the abolition of the tax in 1855 it became a daily paper costing 2d.
In 1952, the paper took the step of printing news on the front page, replacing the adverts that had hitherto filled that space. Then-editor AP Wadsworth wrote: "It is not a thing I like myself, but it seems to be accepted by all the newspaper pundits that it is preferable to be in fashion."
In 1959, the paper dropped "Manchester" from its title, becoming simply The Guardian , and in 1964 it moved to London, losing some of its regional agenda but continuing to be heavily subsidised by sales of the more downmarket but more profitable Manchester Evening News . The financial position remained extremely poor into the 1970s; at one time it was in merger talks with The Times . The paper consolidated its centre-left stance during the 1970s and 1980s. It was both shocked and revitalised by the launch of The Independent in 1986 which competed for a similar readership and provoked the entire broadsheet industry into a fight for circulation.
On 12 February 1988, The Guardian had a significant redesign; as well as improving the quality of its printers' ink, it also changed its masthead to a juxtaposition of an italic Garamond " The ", with a bold Helvetica " Guardian ", that remained in use until the 2005 redesign.
In 1992, The Guardian relaunched its features section as G2 , a tabloid-format supplement. This innovation was widely copied by the other "quality" broadsheets and ultimately led to the rise of "compact" papers and The Guardian 's move to the Berliner format . In 1993 the paper declined to participate in the broadsheet price war started by Rupert Murdoch 's The Times . In June 1993, The Guardian bought The Observer from Lonrho , thus gaining a serious Sunday sister newspaper with similar political views.
Its international weekly edition is now titled The Guardian Weekly , though it retained the title Manchester Guardian Weekly for some years after the home edition had moved to London. It includes sections from a number of other internationally significant newspapers of a somewhat left-of-centre inclination, including Le Monde and The Washington Post . The Guardian Weekly was also linked to a website for expatriates, Guardian Abroad , which was launched in 2007 but had been taken offline by 2012.

Moving to the Berliner paper format
The Guardian is printed in full colour, [135] and was the first newspaper in the UK to use the Berliner format for its main section, while producing sections and supplements in a range of page sizes including tabloid, approximately A4, and pocket-size (approximately A5).
In 2004, The Guardian announced plans to change to a Berliner or " midi " format, similar to that used by Die Tageszeitung in Germany, Le Monde in France and many other European papers. At 470×315 mm, this is slightly larger than a traditional tabloid . Planned for the autumn of 2005, this change followed moves by The Independent and The Times to start publishing in tabloid (or compact) format. On Thursday, 1 September 2005, The Guardian announced that it would launch the new format on Monday 12 September 2005. [136] Sister Sunday newspaper The Observer also changed to this new format on 8 January 2006.
The advantage The Guardian saw in the Berliner format was that, though it is only a little wider than a tabloid, and is equally easy to read on public transport, its greater height gives more flexibility in page design. The new presses mean that printing can go across the strip down the middle of the centre page, known as the "gutter", allowing the paper to print striking double-page pictures. The new presses also made it the first UK national paper to print in full colour on every page.
The format switch was accompanied by a comprehensive redesign of the paper's look. On Friday 9 September 2005, the newspaper unveiled its newly designed front page, which débuted on Monday 12 September 2005. Designed by Mark Porter , the new look includes a new masthead for the newspaper, its first since 1988. A typeface family designed by Paul Barnes and Christian Schwartz was created for the new design. With just over 200 fonts, it is "one of the most ambitious custom type programs ever commissioned by a newspaper". [137] [138] Especially notable is Guardian Egyptian , a highly legible slab serif that is used in various weights for both text and headlines and is central to the redesign.
The switch cost Guardian Newspapers £80 million and involved setting up new printing presses in east London and Manchester. This was necessary because, before The Guardian 's move, no printing presses in Britain could produce newspapers in the Berliner format. There were additional complications, as one of the paper's presses was part-owned by Telegraph Newspapers and Express Newspapers , contracted to use the plant until 2009. Another press was shared with the Guardian Media Group's north-western tabloid local papers, which did not wish to switch to the Berliner format.

Reception
The new format was generally well received by Guardian readers, who were encouraged to provide feedback on the changes. The only controversy was over the dropping of the Doonesbury cartoon strip. The paper reported thousands of calls and emails complaining about its loss; within 24 hours the decision was reversed and the strip was reinstated the following week. G2 supplement editor Ian Katz, who was responsible for dropping it, apologised in the editors' blog saying, "I'm sorry, once again, that I made you—and the hundreds of fellow fans who have called our helpline or mailed our comments' address—so cross." [139] However, some readers were dissatisfied as the earlier deadline needed for the all-colour sports section meant coverage of late-finishing evening football matches became less satisfactory in the editions supplied to some parts of the country.
The investment was rewarded with a circulation rise. In December 2005, the average daily sale stood at 380,693, nearly 6 per cent higher than the figure for December 2004. [140] (However, as of December 2012, circulation had dropped to 204,222.) [141] In 2006, the US-based Society for News Design chose The Guardian and Polish daily Rzeczpospolita as the world's best-designed newspapers—from among 389 entries from 44 countries. [142]

Regular content and features
Each weekday The Guardian comes with the G2 supplement containing feature articles, columns, television and radio listings, and a quick crossword. Since the change to the Berliner format, there is a separate daily Sports section. Other regular supplements during the week are shown below.
Before the redesign in 2005, the main news section was in the large broadsheet format, but the supplements were all in the half-sized tabloid format, with the exception of the glossy Weekend section, which was a 290×245 mm magazine, and The Guide , which was in a small 225×145 mm format.
With the change of the main section to the Berliner format, the specialist sections are now printed as Berliner, as is a now-daily Sports section, but G2 has moved to a "magazine-sized" demi-Berliner format. A Thursday Technology section and daily science coverage in the news section replaced Life and Online. Weekend and The Guide are still in the same small formats as before the change.
On Monday to Thursday prior to the recession, the supplements carried substantial quantities of recruitment advertising, as well as editorial on their specialised topics. However, this has diminished since the onset of recession [ citation needed ] , to the point that the supplements have been seriously contracted or no longer appear as independent sections. The formerly sixty-page-thick Society supplement (Wednesday) is now no more and has been absorbed into the main part of the paper.

G2
The following sections are in G2 every day from Monday to Friday: Arts, TV and Radio, Puzzles.
In G2 :
MediaGuardian:
EducationGuardian
In G2 :
SocietyGuardian (covers the British public sector and related issues)
In G2 :
Formerly TechnologyGuardian (print version ceased to appear from 17 December 2009) [143]
In G2 :
Film & Music supplement
The Guide (a weekly listings magazine )
Weekend (supplement)
Cook
Review (covers literature, cinema, the arts)
Travel
Family
Sport

Regular cartoon strips
Editorial cartoonists Martin Rowson and Steve Bell have received hate mail for their treatment of topics that some deem controversial. [144]

Online media
The Guardian and its Sunday sibling The Observer publish all their news online, with free access both to current news and an archive of three million stories. A third of the site's hits are for items over a month old. [145] As of May 2013, it was the most popular UK newspaper website with 8.2m unique visitors per month, just ahead of Mail Online with 7.6m unique monthly visitors. [146] In April 2011, MediaWeek reported that The Guardian was the fifth most popular newspaper site in the world. [147]
The Comment is Free section features columns by the paper's journalists and regular commentators, as well as articles from guest writers, including readers' comments and responses below. The section includes all the opinion pieces published in the paper itself, as well as many others that only appear online. Censorship is exercised by Moderators who can ban posts – with no right of appeal – by those who they feel have overstepped the mark. The Guardian has taken what they call a very "open" stance in delivering news, and have launched an open platform for their content. This allows external developers to easily use Guardian content in external applications, and even to feed third-party content back into the Guardian network. [148] The Guardian also had a number of talkboards that were noted for their mix of political discussion and whimsy, until they were closed on Friday, 25 February 2011. [149] They were spoofed in The Guardian's own regular humorous Chatroom column in G2 . The spoof column purported to be excerpts from a chatroom on permachat.co.uk , a real URL that pointed to The Guardian's talkboards.
In August 2013, a webshow titled Thinkfluencer [150] was launched by Guardian Multimedia in association with Arte .
The paper has also launched a dating website, Soulmates, [151] and is experimenting with new media, having previously offered a free twelve part weekly podcast series by Ricky Gervais . [152] In January 2006, Gervais' show topped the iTunes podcast chart having been downloaded by two million listeners worldwide, [153] and was scheduled to be listed in the 2007 Guinness Book of Records as the most downloaded podcast. [154]

GuardianFilms
In 2003, The Guardian started the film production company GuardianFilms, headed by journalist Maggie O'Kane. Much of the company's output is documentary made for television– and it has included Salam Pax 's Baghdad Blogger for BBC Two 's daily flagship Newsnight , some of which have been shown in compilations by CNN International , Sex On The Streets and Spiked , both made for the UK's Channel 4 television. [155]
"GuardianFilms was born in a sleeping bag in the Burmese rainforest ," wrote O'Kane in 2003. [156] "I was a foreign correspondent for the paper, and it had taken me weeks of negotiations, dealing with shady contacts and a lot of walking to reach the cigar-smoking Karen twins– the boy soldiers who were leading attacks against the country's ruling junta. After I had reached them and written a cover story for the newspaper's G2 section, I got a call from the BBC 's documentary department, which was researching a film on child soldiers. Could I give them all my contacts?
"The plight of the Karen people, who were forced into slave labour in the rainforest to build pipelines for oil companies (some of them British), was a tale of human suffering that needed to be told by any branch of the media that was interested. I handed over all the names and numbers I had, as well as details of the secret route through Thailand to get into Burma . Good girl. Afterwards– and not for the first time– it seemed to me that we at The Guardian should be using our resources ourselves. Instead of providing contact numbers for any independent TV company prepared to get on the phone to a journalist, we should make our own films."
According to GuardianFilms's own webpage, its international work has focused on training talented local journalists based on the premise that "the era of a traditional London or Washington based foreign correspondent or fireman is coming to an end and the world urgently needs a more searching, challenging journalism brought to us by people who speak the language and can secure access far beyond the 'Green Zone Journalist' limits of the traditional correspondent". It says it is especially focused on reporting the Muslim world in a more challenging manner, and has trained a number of journalists in Iraq, Afghanistan and Zimbabwe. [157]
GuardianFilms has received several broadcasting awards. In addition to two Amnesty International Media Awards in 2004 and 2005, The Baghdad Blogger: Salam Pax won a Royal Television Society Award in 2005. Baghdad: A Doctor's Story won an Emmy Award for Best International Current Affairs film in 2007. [158] In 2008, photojournalist Sean Smith's Inside the Surge won the Royal Television Society award for best international news film – the first time a newspaper has won such an award. [159] [160] The same year, The Guardian 's Katine website was awarded for its outstanding new media output at the One World Media awards. Again in 2008, GuardianFilms' undercover video report revealing vote rigging by Robert Mugabe 's Zanu PF party during the 2007 Zimbabwe election won best news programme of the year at the Broadcast Awards. [158] [161]

References in popular culture
The paper's nickname The Grauniad (sometimes abbreviated as "Graun") originated with the satirical magazine Private Eye . [162] This anagram played on The Guardian's early reputation for frequent typographical errors , including misspelling its own name as The Gaurdian . [163]
The very first issue of the newspaper contained a number of errors, perhaps the most notable being a notification that there would soon be some goods sold at atction instead of auction . Fewer typographical errors are seen in the paper since the end of hot-metal typesetting . [164] One Guardian writer, Keith Devlin , suggested that the high number of observed misprints was due more to the quality of the readership than the misprints' greater frequency. [165] The fact that the newspaper was printed in Manchester until 1961 and the early, more error-prone, prints were sent to London by train may have contributed to this image as well. [166] [167] When John Cole was appointed news editor by Alastair Hetherington in 1963, he sharpened the paper's comparatively "amateurish" setup. [168]

Awards

Received
The Guardian has been awarded the National Newspaper of the Year in 1999, 2005, [169] 2010 [170] and 2013 [11] by the British Press Awards , and Front Page of the Year in 2002 ("A declaration of war", 12 September 2001). [169] [171] It was also co-winner of the World's Best-designed Newspaper as awarded by the Society for News Design (2006).
Guardian journalists have won a range of British Press Awards, including: [169]
Other awards include:
The guardian.co.uk website won the Best Newspaper category three years running in 2005, 2006 and 2007 Webby Awards , beating (in 2005) The New York Times , The Washington Post , The Wall Street Journal and Variety . [172] It has been the winner for six years in a row of the British Press Awards for Best Electronic Daily Newspaper. [173] The site won an Eppy award from the US-based magazine Editor & Publisher in 2000 for the best-designed newspaper online service. [174] The website is known for its commentary on sporting events, particularly its over-by-over cricket commentary. [ citation needed ]
In 2007 the newspaper was ranked first in a study on transparency that analysed 25 mainstream English-language media vehicles, which was conducted by the International Center for Media and the Public Agenda of the University of Maryland . [175] It scored 3.8 out of a possible 4.0.
The Guardian and The Washington Post shared the 2014 Pulitzer Prize for public service reporting for their coverage of the NSA's and GCHQ's worldwide electronic surveillance program and the document leaks by whistleblower Edward Snowden. [176]

Given
The Guardian is the sponsor of two major literary awards: The Guardian First Book Award , established in 1999 as a successor to the Guardian Fiction Award , which had run since 1965, and the Guardian Children's Fiction Prize , founded in 1967. In recent years the newspaper has also sponsored the Hay Festival in Hay-on-Wye .
The annual Guardian Student Media Awards , founded in 1999, recognise excellence in journalism and design of British university and college student newspapers , magazines and websites.
In memory of Paul Foot , who died in 2004, The Guardian and Private Eye jointly set up the Paul Foot Award , with an annual £10,000 prize fund, for investigative or campaigning journalism. [177]

Editors

Notable regular contributors (past and present)

Guardian News & Media Archive
The Guardian and its sister newspaper The Observer opened The Newsroom , an archive and visitor centre in London, in 2002. The centre preserved and promoted the histories and values of the newspapers through its archive, educational programmes and exhibitions. The Newsroom's activities were all transferred to Kings Place in 2008. [180] Now known as the Guardian News & Media Archive, the archive preserves and promotes the histories and values of The Guardian and The Observer newspapers by collecting and making accessible material that provides an accurate and comprehensive history of the papers. The archive holds official records of The Guardian and The Observer and also seeks to acquire material from individuals who have been associated with the papers. As well as corporate records, the archive holds correspondence, diaries, notebooks, original cartoons and photographs belonging to staff of the papers. [181] This material may be consulted by members of the public by prior appointment. There is also an extensive Manchester Guardian archive at the University of Manchester 's John Rylands University Library and there is a collaboration programme between the two archives. The British Library also has a large archive of The Manchester Guardian , available in online, hard copy, microform, and CD-ROM in their British Library Newspapers collection.
In November 2007 The Guardian and The Observer made their archives available over the internet via DigitalArchive. The current extent of the archives available are 1821 to 2000 for The Guardian and 1791 to 2000 for The Observer : these archives will eventually run up to 2003.
The Newsroom's other components were also transferred to Kings Place in 2008. The Guardian 's Education Centre provides a range of educational programmes for students and adults. The Guardian 's exhibition space was also moved to Kings Place, and has a rolling programme of exhibitions that investigate and reflect upon aspects of news and newspapers and the role of journalism. This programme often draws on the archive collections held in the GNM Archive.

Notes and references

Further reading

External links
WebPage index: 00059
George W. Bush
George Walker Bush (born July 6, 1946) is an American politician who served as the 43rd President of the United States from 2001 to 2009. He was also the 46th Governor of Texas from 1995 to 2000. After graduating from Yale University in 1968 and Harvard Business School in 1975, he worked in the oil industry. Bush married Laura Welch in 1977 and ran unsuccessfully for the House of Representatives shortly thereafter. He later co-owned the Texas Rangers baseball team before defeating Ann Richards in the 1994 Texas gubernatorial election . Bush was elected president in 2000 after a close and controversial win over Democratic rival Al Gore , becoming the fourth president to be elected while receiving fewer popular votes than his opponent. [3]
From a prominent political family , he is the eldest son of Barbara and George H. W. Bush , the 41st President of the United States, making him only the second president to assume the nation's highest office after his father, following the lead of John Quincy Adams . [4] His brother, Jeb Bush , a former Governor of Florida , was a candidate for the Republican presidential nomination in the 2016 presidential election . His paternal grandfather, Prescott Bush , was a United States Senator from Connecticut .
The September 11 terrorist attacks occurred eight months into Bush's first term as president. Bush responded with what became known as the Bush Doctrine : launching a " War on Terror ", an international military campaign that included the war in Afghanistan in 2001 and the Iraq War in 2003. He also promoted policies on the economy, health care, education, Social Security reform, and amending the Constitution to prohibit same-sex marriage . [5] He signed into law broad tax cuts , the Patriot Act , the No Child Left Behind Act , the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act , Medicare prescription drug benefits for seniors, and funding for the AIDS relief program known as PEPFAR . His tenure included national debates on immigration , Social Security , electronic surveillance , and torture .
In the 2004 Presidential race, Bush defeated Democratic Senator John Kerry in another relatively close election. After his re-election, Bush received increasingly heated criticism from across the political spectrum [6] [7] [8] for his handling of the Iraq War, Hurricane Katrina , [9] [10] [11] and other challenges. Amid this criticism, the Democratic Party regained control of Congress in the 2006 elections . In December 2007, the United States entered its longest post- World War II recession, often referred to as the " Great Recession ", prompting the Bush administration to obtain congressional passage of multiple economic programs intended to preserve the country's financial system. Nationally, Bush was both one of the most popular and unpopular presidents in history, having received the highest recorded presidential approval ratings in the wake of the September 11 attacks, as well as one of the lowest approval ratings during the 2008 financial crisis . [12]
Bush left office in 2009, returning to Texas where he purchased a home in Crawford. He wrote a memoir, Decision Points . [13] His presidential library was opened in 2013. His presidency has been ranked among the worst in historians' polls published in the late 2000s and 2010s. [14] [15] [16]

Early life and career
George Walker Bush was born on July 6, 1946, at Grace-New Haven Hospital (now Yale–New Haven Hospital ) in New Haven, Connecticut , [17] as the first child of George Herbert Walker Bush and his wife, the former Barbara Pierce . He was raised in Midland and Houston, Texas , with four siblings, Jeb , Neil , Marvin and Dorothy . Another younger sister, Robin, died from leukemia at the age of three in 1953. [18] His grandfather, Prescott Bush , was a U.S. Senator from Connecticut . [19] His father, George H.W. Bush, was Ronald Reagan 's Vice President from 1981 to 1989 and the 41st U.S. President from 1989 to 1993. Bush has English and some German ancestry, along with more distant Dutch , Welsh , Irish , French , and Scottish roots. [20]

Education
Bush attended public schools in Midland, Texas , until the family moved to Houston after he had completed seventh grade. He then spent two years at The Kinkaid School , a prep school in Houston. [21]
Bush attended high school at Phillips Academy , a boarding school (then all-male) in Andover, Massachusetts , where he played baseball and was the head cheerleader during his senior year. [22] [23] He attended Yale University from 1964 to 1968, graduating with a Bachelor of Arts degree in history . [24] During this time, he was a cheerleader and a member of the Delta Kappa Epsilon , serving as the president of the fraternity during his senior year. [25] [26] [27] Bush became a member of the Skull and Bones society as a senior. [28] Bush was a rugby union player and was on Yale's 1st XV. [29] He characterized himself as an average student. [30] His GPA during his first three years at Yale was 77, and he had a similar average under a nonnumeric rating system in his final year. [31]
Beginning in the fall of 1973, Bush attended Harvard Business School . He graduated in 1975 with an M.B.A. degree. He is the only U.S. president to have earned an M.B.A. [32]

Family and personal life
At a backyard barbecue in 1977, friends introduced him to Laura Welch , a school teacher and librarian. After a three-month courtship, she accepted his marriage proposal and they wed on November 5 of that year. [33] The couple settled in Midland, Texas. Bush left his family's Episcopal Church to join his wife's United Methodist Church . [34] On November 25, 1981, Laura Bush gave birth to fraternal twin daughters, Barbara and Jenna . [33]
Prior to his marriage, Bush had multiple episodes of alcohol abuse. [35] In one instance on September 4, 1976, he was arrested near his family's summer home in Kennebunkport, Maine for driving under the influence of alcohol. He pleaded guilty, was fined $150, and had his Maine driver's license briefly suspended. [36] Bush said his wife has had a stabilizing effect on his life, [33] and attributes his 1986 decision to give up alcohol to her influence. [37] While Governor of Texas, Bush said of his wife, "I saw an elegant, beautiful woman who turned out not only to be elegant and beautiful, but very smart and willing to put up with my rough edges, and I must confess has smoothed them off over time." [33]
Bush has been an avid reader throughout his adult life, preferring biographies and histories. [38] During his time as president, Bush read the Bible daily. [39] He also read 14 Lincoln biographies , and during the last three years of his presidency, he reportedly read 186 books. Walt Harrington, a journalist, recalled seeing "books by John Fowles , F. Scott Fitzgerald , James Joyce , and Gore Vidal lying about, as well as biographies of Willa Cather and Queen Victoria " in his home when Bush was a Texas oilman. Other activities include cigar smoking and golf. [40] Since leaving the White House, Bush has also taken up oil painting. [41]

Military career
In May 1968, Bush was commissioned into the Texas Air National Guard . [42] After two years of active-duty service while training, [43] he was assigned to Houston, flying Convair F-102s with the 147th Reconnaissance Wing out of the Ellington Field Joint Reserve Base . [42] [44] Critics, including former Democratic National Committee Chairman Terry McAuliffe , have alleged that Bush was favorably treated due to his father's political standing as a member of the House of Representatives , citing his selection as a pilot despite his low pilot aptitude test scores and his irregular attendance. [42] In June 2005, the United States Department of Defense released all the records of Bush's Texas Air National Guard service, which remain in its official archives. [45]
In late 1972 and early 1973, he drilled with the 187th Fighter Wing of the Alabama Air National Guard . He had moved to Montgomery, Alabama , to work on the unsuccessful U.S. Senate campaign of Republican Winton M. Blount . [46] [47] In 1972, Bush was suspended from flying for failure to take a scheduled physical exam. [48] He was honorably discharged from the Air Force Reserve on November 21, 1974. [49]

Business career
In 1977, Bush established Arbusto Energy , a small oil exploration company, although it did not begin operations until the following year. [50] [51] He later changed the name to Bush Exploration. In 1984, his company merged with the larger Spectrum 7 , and Bush became chairman. [52] The company was hurt by decreased oil prices, and it folded into HKN, Inc. , [52] [53] with Bush becoming a member of HKN's board of directors. [52] Questions of possible insider trading involving HKN arose, but a Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) investigation concluded that the information Bush had at the time of his stock sale was not sufficient to constitute insider trading. [52] [54]
In April 1989, Bush purchased a controlling interest in the Texas Rangers baseball franchise, where he served as managing general partner for five years. [55] He actively led the team's projects and regularly attended its games, often choosing to sit in the open stands with fans. [56] Bush's sale of his shares in the Rangers in 1998 brought him over $15 million from his initial $800,000 investment. [57]

Early political involvement
In 1978 , Bush ran for the House of Representatives from Texas's 19th congressional district . The retiring member, George H. Mahon , had held the district for the Democratic Party since 1935. Bush's opponent, Kent Hance , portrayed him as out of touch with rural Texans, and Bush lost the election with 46.8 percent of the vote to Hance's 53.2 percent. [58]
Bush and his family moved to Washington, D.C., in 1988 to work on his father's campaign for the U.S. presidency. [59] [60] He served as a campaign advisor and liaison to the media, and assisted his father by campaigning across the country. [52] In December 1991, Bush was one of seven people named by his father to run his father's 1992 presidential re-election campaign, as a "campaign advisor". [61] The previous month, his father had asked him to tell White House chief of staff John H. Sununu that he should resign. [62]

Governor of Texas (1995–2000)
Bush declared his candidacy for the 1994 Texas gubernatorial election at the same time that his brother Jeb sought the governorship of Florida . His campaign focused on four themes: welfare reform, tort reform , crime reduction, and education improvement. [52] Bush's campaign advisers were Karen Hughes , Joe Allbaugh , and Karl Rove . [63]
After easily winning the Republican primary, Bush faced popular Democratic incumbent Governor Ann Richards . [52] [64] In the course of the campaign, Bush pledged to sign a bill allowing Texans to obtain permits to carry concealed weapons . Richards had vetoed the bill, but Bush signed it into law after he became governor. [65] According to The Atlantic Monthly , the race "featured a rumor that she was a lesbian, along with a rare instance of such a tactic's making it into the public record – when a regional chairman of the Bush campaign allowed himself, perhaps inadvertently, to be quoted criticizing Richards for 'appointing avowed homosexual activists ' to state jobs". [66] The Atlantic , and others, connected the lesbian rumor to Karl Rove, [67] but Rove denied being involved. [68] Bush won the general election with 53.5 percent against Richards' 45.9 percent. [69]
Bush used a budget surplus to push through Texas's largest tax-cut, $2 billion. [63] He extended government funding for organizations providing education of the dangers of alcohol and drug use and abuse, and helping to reduce domestic violence . [70] Critics contended that during his tenure, Texas ranked near the bottom in environmental evaluations. Supporters pointed to his efforts to raise the salaries of teachers and improve educational test scores. [52]
In 1999, Bush signed a law that required electric retailers to buy a certain amount of energy from renewable sources (RPS), [71] [72] [73] which helped Texas eventually become the leading producer of wind powered electricity in the U.S. [74] [75] [76]
In 1998 , Bush won re-election with a record [52] 69 percent of the vote. [77] He became the first governor in Texas history to be elected to two consecutive four-year terms. [52] For most of Texas history, governors served two-year terms; a constitutional amendment extended those terms to four years starting in 1975. [78] In his second term, Bush promoted faith-based organizations and enjoyed high approval ratings. [52] He proclaimed June 10, 2000 to be Jesus Day in Texas, a day on which he "urge[d] all Texans to answer the call to serve those in need". [79]
Throughout Bush's first term, national attention focused on him as a potential future presidential candidate. Following his re-election, speculation soared. [52] Within a year, he decided to seek the 2000 Republican presidential nomination.

Presidential campaigns

2000 presidential candidacy

Primary
Lame duck incumbent president Bill Clinton was a Democrat, and the field for nomination for President of both parties was wide open. Bush was governor of Texas in June 1999 when he announced his candidacy for President of the United States. He entered a large field of hopefuls for the Republican Party presidential nomination that included John McCain , Alan Keyes , Steve Forbes , Gary Bauer , Orrin Hatch , Elizabeth Dole , Dan Quayle , Pat Buchanan , Lamar Alexander , John Kasich , and Bob Smith .
Bush portrayed himself as a compassionate conservative , implying he was more centrist than other Republicans. He campaigned on a platform that included bringing integrity and honor back to the White House, increasing the size of the United States Armed Forces , cutting taxes, improving education, and aiding minorities. [52] By early 2000, the race had centered on Bush and McCain. [52]
Bush won the Iowa caucuses , and although he was heavily favored to win the New Hampshire primary , he trailed McCain by 19 percent and lost that primary. Despite this, Bush regained momentum, and according to political observers, he effectively became the front runner after the South Carolina primary —which according to The Boston Globe —made history for his campaign's negativity. The New York Times described it as a smear campaign . [80] [81] [82]

General election
On July 25, 2000, Bush surprised some observers when he selected Dick Cheney —a former White House Chief of Staff , U.S. Representative , and Secretary of Defense —to be his running mate . At the time, Cheney was serving as head of Bush's Vice-Presidential search committee. Soon after at the 2000 Republican National Convention , Bush and Cheney were officially nominated by the Republican Party.
Bush continued to campaign across the country and touted his record as governor of Texas. [52] During his campaign, Bush criticized his Democratic opponent, incumbent Vice President Al Gore , over gun control and taxation. [83]
When the election returns were tallied on November 7, Bush had won 29 states, including Florida. The closeness of the Florida outcome led to a recount . [52] The initial recount also went to Bush, but the outcome was tied up in lower courts for a month until eventually reaching the U.S. Supreme Court . [84] On December 9, in the controversial Bush v. Gore ruling, [85] the Court reversed a Florida Supreme Court decision that had ordered a third count, and stopped an ordered statewide hand recount based on the argument that the use of different standards among Florida's counties violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment . [52] The machine recount showed that Bush had won the Florida vote by a margin of 537 votes out of six million cast. [86] Although he had received 543,895 fewer individual nationwide votes than Gore, Bush won the election, receiving 271 electoral votes to Gore's 266 (Gore's statewide victories had electoral votes tallying 267; however, one of Gore's pledged electors abstained, rendering the official tally at 266). Bush was the first person to win an American presidential election with fewer popular votes than another candidate since Benjamin Harrison in 1888. [86]

2004 presidential candidacy
In his 2004 bid for re-election, Bush commanded broad support in the Republican Party and did not encounter a primary challenge. He appointed Ken Mehlman as campaign manager, and Karl Rove devised a political strategy . [87] Bush and the Republican platform emphasized a strong commitment to the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, [88] support for the USA PATRIOT Act , [89] a renewed shift in policy for constitutional amendments banning abortion and same-sex marriage , [88] [90] reforming Social Security to create private investment accounts, [88] creation of an ownership society , [88] and opposing mandatory carbon emissions controls. [91] Bush also called for the implementation of a guest worker program for immigrants, [88] which was criticized by conservatives. [92]
The Bush campaign advertised across the U.S. against Democratic candidates, including Bush's emerging opponent, Massachusetts Senator John Kerry . Kerry and other Democrats attacked Bush on the Iraq War , and accused him of failing to stimulate the economy and job growth. The Bush campaign portrayed Kerry as a staunch liberal who would raise taxes and increase the size of government. The Bush campaign continuously criticized Kerry's seemingly contradictory statements on the war in Iraq, [52] and argued that Kerry lacked the decisiveness and vision necessary for success in the War on Terror.
In the election, Bush carried 31 of 50 states, receiving a total of 286 electoral votes . He won an absolute majority of the popular vote (50.7 percent to his opponent's 48.3 percent). [93] Bush's father George H.W. Bush was the previous president who won an absolute majority of the popular vote; he accomplished that feat in the 1988 election. Additionally, it was the first time since Herbert Hoover 's election in 1928 that a Republican president was elected alongside re-elected Republican majorities in both Houses of Congress.

Presidency (2001–2009)
Bush had originally outlined an ambitious domestic agenda, but his priorities were significantly altered following the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks . [94] Wars were waged in Afghanistan and Iraq, and there were significant domestic debates regarding immigration, healthcare, Social Security, economic policy, and treatment of terrorist detainees. Over an eight-year period, Bush's once-high approval ratings [95] steadily declined, while his disapproval numbers increased significantly. [96] In 2007, the United States entered the longest post-World War II recession. [97]

Domestic policy

Economic policy
Bush took office during a period of economic recession in the wake of the bursting of the Dot-com bubble . [98] The terrorist attacks also impacted the economy. His administration increased federal government spending from $1.789 trillion to $2.983 trillion (60 percent) while revenues increased from $2.025 trillion to $2.524 trillion (from 2000 to 2008). Individual income tax revenues increased by 14 percent, corporate tax revenues by 50 percent, customs and duties by 40 percent. Discretionary defense spending was increased by 107 percent, discretionary domestic spending by 62 percent, Medicare spending by 131 percent, social security by 51 percent, and income security spending by 130 percent. Cyclically adjusted, revenues rose by 35 percent and spending by 65 percent. [99]
The increase in spending was more than under any predecessor since Lyndon B. Johnson . [100] The number of economic regulation governmental workers increased by 91,196. [101]
The surplus in fiscal year 2000 was $237 billion—the third consecutive surplus and the largest surplus ever. [102] In 2001, Bush's budget estimated that there would be a $5.6 trillion surplus over the next ten years. [103] Facing congressional opposition, Bush held townhall style meetings across the U.S. in order to increase public support for his plan for a $1.35 trillion tax cut program —one of the largest tax cuts in U.S. history. [52] Bush argued that unspent government funds should be returned to taxpayers, saying "the surplus is not the government's money. The surplus is the people's money." [52] Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan warned of a recession and Bush stated that a tax cut would stimulate the economy and create jobs. [104] Treasury Secretary Paul H. O'Neill , opposed some of the tax cuts on the basis that they would contribute to budget deficits and undermine Social Security . [105] O'Neill disputes the claim, made in Bush's book Decision Points , that he never openly disagreed with him on planned tax cuts. [106] By 2003, the economy showed signs of improvement, though job growth remained stagnant. [52] Another tax cut program was passed that year.
During the 2001 to 2008 years, GDP grew at an average annual rate of 2.125 percent, [107] less than for past business cycles. [108]
Bush entered office with the Dow Jones Industrial Average at 10,587, and the average peaked in October 2007 at over 14,000. When Bush left office, the average was at 7,949, one of the lowest levels of his presidency. [109]
Unemployment originally rose from 4.2 percent in January 2001 to 6.3 percent in June 2003, but subsequently dropped to 4.5 percent as of July 2007. [110] Adjusted for inflation, median household income dropped by $1,175 between 2000 and 2007, [111] while Professor Ken Homa of Georgetown University has noted that "Median real after-tax household income went up 2 percent". [112] The poverty rate increased from 11.3 percent in 2000 to 12.3 percent in 2006 after peaking at 12.7 percent in 2004. [113] By October 2008, due to increases in spending, [114] the national debt had risen to $11.3 trillion, [115] an increase of over 100 percent from 2000 when the debt was only $5.6 trillion. [116] [117] Most debt was accumulated as a result of what became known as the " Bush tax cuts " and increased national security spending. [118] In March 2006, then-Senator Barack Obama said when he voted against raising the debt ceiling : "The fact that we are here today to debate raising America's debt limit is a sign of leadership failure." [119] By the end of Bush's presidency, unemployment climbed to 7.2 percent. [120]
In December 2007, the United States entered the longest post– World War II recession, [97] which included a housing market correction , a subprime mortgage crisis , soaring oil prices , and a declining dollar value. [121] In February, 63,000 jobs were lost, a five-year record. [122] [123] To aid with the situation, Bush signed a $170 billion economic stimulus package which was intended to improve the economic situation by sending tax rebate checks to many Americans and providing tax breaks for struggling businesses. The Bush administration pushed for significantly increased regulation of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in 2003, [124] and after two years, the regulations passed the House but died in the Senate. Many Republican senators, as well as influential members of the Bush Administration, feared that the agency created by these regulations would merely be mimicking the private sector's risky practices. [125] [126] [127] In September 2008, the crisis became much more serious beginning with the government takeover of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac followed by the collapse of Lehman Brothers and a federal bailout of American International Group for $85 billion. [128]
Many economists and world governments determined that the situation became the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression . [129] [130] Additional regulation over the housing market would have been beneficial, according to former Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan . [131] Bush, meanwhile, proposed a financial rescue plan to buy back a large portion of the U.S. mortgage market. [132] Vince Reinhardt, a former Federal Reserve economist now at the American Enterprise Institute , said "it would have helped for the Bush administration to empower the folks at Treasury and the Federal Reserve and the comptroller of the currency and the FDIC to look at these issues more closely", and additionally, that it would have helped "for Congress to have held hearings". [126]
In November 2008, over 500,000 jobs were lost, which marked the largest loss of jobs in the United States in 34 years. [133] The Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that in the last four months of 2008, 1.9 million jobs were lost. [134] By the end of 2008, the U.S. had lost a total of 2.6 million jobs. [135]

Education and health
Bush undertook a number of educational agendas, such as increasing the funding for the National Science Foundation and National Institutes of Health in his first years of office, and creating education programs to strengthen the grounding in science and mathematics for American high school students. Funding for the NIH was cut in 2006, the first such cut in 36 years, due to rising inflation. [136]
One of the administration's early major initiatives was the No Child Left Behind Act , which aimed to measure and close the gap between rich and poor student performance, provide options to parents with students in low-performing schools, and target more federal funding to low-income schools. This landmark education initiative passed with broad bipartisan support, including that of Senator Ted Kennedy of Massachusetts . [137] It was signed into law by Bush in early 2002. [138] Many contend that the initiative has been successful, as cited by the fact that students in the U.S. have performed significantly better on state reading and math tests since Bush signed "No Child Left Behind" into law. [139] Critics argue that it is underfunded [140] and that NCLBA's focus on "high-stakes testing" and quantitative outcomes is counterproductive. [141]
After being re-elected, Bush signed into law a Medicare drug benefit program that, according to Jan Crawford , resulted in "the greatest expansion in America's welfare state in forty years;" the bill's costs approached $7 trillion. [142] In 2007, Bush opposed and vetoed State Children's Health Insurance Program (SCHIP) legislation, which was added by the Democrats onto a war funding bill and passed by Congress. The SCHIP legislation would have significantly expanded federally funded health care benefits and plans to children of some low-income families from about six million to ten million children. It was to be funded by an increase in the cigarette tax. [143] Bush viewed the legislation as a move toward socialized health care , and asserted that the program could benefit families making as much as $83,000 per year who did not need the help. [144]

Social services and Social Security
Following Republican efforts to pass the Medicare Act of 2003 , Bush signed the bill, which included major changes to the Medicare program by providing beneficiaries with some assistance in paying for prescription drugs, while relying on private insurance for the delivery of benefits. [145] The retired persons lobby group AARP worked with the Bush Administration on the program and gave their endorsement. Bush said the law, estimated to cost $400 billion over the first ten years, would give the elderly "better choices and more control over their health care". [146]
Bush began his second term by outlining a major initiative to " reform " Social Security, [147] which was facing record deficit projections beginning in 2005. Bush made it the centerpiece of his domestic agenda despite opposition from some in the U.S. Congress. [147] In his 2005 State of the Union Address , Bush discussed the potential impending bankruptcy of the program and outlined his new program, which included partial privatization of the system, personal Social Security accounts, and options to permit Americans to divert a portion of their Social Security tax ( FICA ) into secured investments. [147] Democrats opposed the proposal to partially privatize the system. [147]
Bush embarked on a 60-day national tour, campaigning for his initiative in media events known as "Conversations on Social Security", in an attempt to gain public support. [148] Nevertheless, public support for the proposal declined [149] and the House Republican leadership decided not to put Social Security reform on the priority list for the remainder of their 2005 legislative agenda. [150] The proposal's legislative prospects were further diminished by the fall of 2005 political fallout from Hurricane Katrina . [151] After the Democrats gained control of both houses of Congress as a result of the 2006 midterm elections , there was no prospect of further congressional action on the Bush proposal for the remainder of his term in office.

Environmental policies
Upon taking office in 2001, Bush stated his opposition to the Kyoto Protocol , an amendment to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change which seeks to impose mandatory targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions, citing that the treaty exempted 80 percent of the world's population [152] and would have cost tens of billions of dollars per year. [153] He also cited that the Senate had voted 95–0 in 1997 on a resolution expressing its disapproval of the protocol.
In May 2001, Bush signed an executive order to create an inter-agency task force to streamline energy projects, [154] and later signed two other executive orders to tackle environmental issues. [155]
In 2002, Bush announced the Clear Skies Act of 2003 , [156] aimed at amending the Clean Air Act to reduce air pollution through the use of emissions trading programs. Many experts argued that this legislation would have weakened the original legislation by allowing higher emission rates of pollutants than were previously legal. [157] The initiative was introduced to Congress, but failed to make it out of committee.
Later in 2006, Bush declared the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands a national monument, creating the largest marine reserve to date. The Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument comprises 84 million acres (340,000 km 2 ) and is home to 7,000 species of fish, birds, and other marine animals, many of which are specific to only those islands. [158] The move was hailed by conservationists for "its foresight and leadership in protecting this incredible area". [159]
Bush has said that he believes that global warming is real [160] and has noted that it is a serious problem, but he asserted there is a "debate over whether it's man-made or naturally caused". [161] The Bush Administration's stance on global warming remained controversial in the scientific and environmental communities. Critics have alleged that the administration [162] misinformed the public and did not do enough to reduce carbon emissions and deter global warming. [163]

Energy policies
In his 2006 State of the Union Address , Bush declared, "America is addicted to oil" and announced his Advanced Energy Initiative to increase energy development research. [164]
In his 2007 State of the Union Address , Bush renewed his pledge to work toward diminished reliance on foreign oil by reducing fossil fuel consumption and increasing alternative fuel production. [165] Amid high gasoline prices in 2008, Bush lifted a ban on offshore drilling . [166] However, the move was largely symbolic because there was still a federal law banning offshore drilling. Bush said, "This means that the only thing standing between the American people and these vast oil reserves is action from the U.S. Congress." [166] Bush had said in June 2008, "In the long run, the solution is to reduce demand for oil by promoting alternative energy technologies. My administration has worked with Congress to invest in gas-saving technologies like advanced batteries and hydrogen fuel cells ... In the short run, the American economy will continue to rely largely on oil. And that means we need to increase supply, especially here at home. So my administration has repeatedly called on Congress to expand domestic oil production." [167]
In his 2008 State of the Union Address , Bush announced that the U.S. would commit $2 billion over the next three years to a new international fund to promote clean energy technologies and fight climate change, saying, "Along with contributions from other countries, this fund will increase and accelerate the deployment of all forms of cleaner, more efficient technologies in developing nations like India and China, and help leverage substantial private-sector capital by making clean energy projects more financially attractive." He also announced plans to reaffirm the United States' commitment to work with major economies, and, through the UN, to complete an international agreement that will slow, stop, and eventually reverse the growth of greenhouse gases; he stated, "This agreement will be effective only if it includes commitments by every major economy and gives none a free ride." [168]

Stem cell research and first veto
Federal funding for medical research involving the creation or destruction of human embryos through the Department of Health and Human Services and the National Institutes of Health has been forbidden by law since the passage in 1995 of the Dickey-Wicker Amendment by Congress and the signature of President Bill Clinton . [169] Bush has said that he supports adult stem cell research and has supported federal legislation that finances adult stem cell research. However, Bush did not support embryonic stem cell research. [170] On August 9, 2001, Bush signed an executive order lifting the ban on federal funding for the 71 existing "lines" of stem cells, [171] but the ability of these existing lines to provide an adequate medium for testing has been questioned. Testing can be done on only 12 of the original lines, and all approved lines have been cultured in contact with mouse cells, which creates safety issues that complicate development and approval of therapies from these lines. [172] On July 19, 2006, Bush used his veto power for the first time in his presidency to veto the Stem Cell Research Enhancement Act . The bill would have repealed the Dickey-Wicker Amendment, thereby permitting federal money to be used for research where stem cells are derived from the destruction of an embryo. [173]

Genetic Nondiscrimination
On May 21, 2008 President George W. Bush signed into law the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA). [174] [175] The bill aims to protect Americans against discrimination based on their genetic information when it comes to health insurance and employment. The issue had been debated for 13 years before becoming law. It is designed to protect citizens while not hindering genetic research.

Immigration
Nearly 8 million immigrants came to the United States from 2000 to 2005, more than in any other five-year period in the nation's history. [176] Almost half entered illegally. [177] In 2006, Bush urged Congress to allow more than 12 million illegal immigrants to work in the United States with the creation of a "temporary guest-worker program". Bush also urged Congress to provide additional funds for border security and committed to deploying 6,000 National Guard troops to the Mexico–United States border . [178] From May to June 2007, Bush strongly supported the Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act of 2007 , which was written by a bipartisan group of Senators with the active participation of the Bush administration. [179] The bill envisioned a legalization program for illegal immigrants, with an eventual path to citizenship; establishing a guest worker program; a series of border and work site enforcement measures; a reform of the green card application process and the introduction of a point-based "merit" system for green cards; elimination of " chain migration " and of the Diversity Immigrant Visa ; and other measures. Bush argued that the lack of legal status denies the protections of U.S. laws to millions of people who face dangers of poverty and exploitation, and penalizes employers despite a demand for immigrant labor. [180] Bush contended that the proposed bill did not amount to amnesty. [181]
A heated public debate followed, which resulted in a substantial rift within the Republican Party, most conservatives opposed it because of its legalization or amnesty provisions. [182] The bill was eventually defeated in the Senate on June 28, 2007, when a cloture motion failed on a 46–53 vote. [183] Bush expressed disappointment upon the defeat of one of his signature domestic initiatives. [184] The Bush administration later proposed a series of immigration enforcement measures that do not require a change in law. [185]
On September 19, 2010, former Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert said that Bush offered to accept 100,000 Palestinian refugees as American citizens if a permanent settlement had been reached between Israel and the Palestinian Authority. [186]

Hurricane Katrina
Hurricane Katrina , one of the most damaging natural disasters in U.S. history, struck early in Bush's second term. Katrina formed in late August during the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season and devastated much of the north-central Gulf Coast of the United States , particularly New Orleans. [187]
Bush declared a state of emergency in Louisiana on August 27, [188] and in Mississippi and Alabama the following day; [189] he authorized the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to manage the disaster, but his announcement failed to spur these agencies to action. [190] The eye of the hurricane made landfall on August 29, and New Orleans began to flood due to levee breaches; later that day, Bush declared that a major disaster existed in Louisiana, [191] officially authorizing FEMA to start using federal funds to assist in the recovery effort.
On August 30, DHS Secretary Michael Chertoff declared it "an incident of national significance", [192] triggering the first use of the newly created National Response Plan . Three days later, on September 2, National Guard troops first entered the city of New Orleans. [193] The same day, Bush toured parts of Louisiana, Mississippi , and Alabama and declared that the success of the recovery effort up to that point was "not enough". [194]
As the disaster in New Orleans intensified, critics charged that Bush was misrepresenting his administration's role in what they saw as a flawed response. Leaders attacked Bush for having appointed apparently incompetent leaders to positions of power at FEMA, notably Michael D. Brown ; [195] it was also argued that the federal response was limited as a result of the Iraq War [196] and Bush himself did not act upon warnings of floods. [197] [198] [199] Bush responded to mounting criticism by accepting full responsibility for the federal government's failures in its handling of the emergency. [193] It has been argued that with Katrina, Bush passed a political tipping point from which he would not recover. [200]

Midterm dismissal of U.S. attorneys
During Bush's second term, a controversy arose over the Justice Department's midterm dismissal of seven United States Attorneys . [201] The White House maintained that the U.S. attorneys were fired for poor performance. [202] Attorney General Alberto Gonzales later resigned over the issue, along with other senior members of the Justice Department. [203] [204] The House Judiciary Committee issued subpoenas for advisers Harriet Miers and Josh Bolten to testify regarding this matter, but Bush directed Miers and Bolten to not comply with those subpoenas, invoking his right of executive privilege . Bush maintained that all of his advisers were protected under a broad executive privilege protection to receive candid advice. The Justice Department determined that the President's order was legal. [205]
Although Congressional investigations focused on whether the Justice Department and the White House were using the U.S. Attorney positions for political advantage, no official findings have been released. On March 10, 2008, the Congress filed a federal lawsuit to enforce their issued subpoenas. [206] On July 31, 2008, a United States district court judge ruled that Bush's top advisers were not immune from Congressional subpoenas. [207]
In all, twelve Justice Department officials resigned rather than testify under oath before Congress. They included Attorney General Alberto Gonzales [208] and his chief of staff Kyle Sampson , [209] Gonzales' liaison to the White House Monica Goodling , [210] aide to the president Karl Rove [211] and his senior aide Sara Taylor . [212] In addition, legal counsel to the president Harriet Miers [213] and deputy chief of staff to the president Joshua Bolten [214] were both found in contempt of Congress . [212]
In 2010, the Justice Department investigator concluded that though political considerations did play a part in as many as four of the attorney firings, [215] the firings were "inappropriately political", but not criminal. According to the prosecutors, there was insufficient evidence to pursue prosecution for any criminal offense. [216]

Purge of the Central Intelligence Agency
Following the resignation of CIA director George Tenet in 2004, Bush nominated Porter Goss to head the agency. The White House ordered Goss to purge agency officers who were disloyal to the administration. [217] After Goss' appointment, many of the CIA's senior agents were fired or quit. The CIA has been accused of deliberately leaking classified information to undermine the 2004 election. [218]

Foreign policy
In July 2001, Bush visited Pope John Paul II at Castel Gandolfo. [219] During his Presidential campaign, Bush's foreign policy platform included support for stronger economic and political relationship with Latin America , especially Mexico , and a reduction of involvement in " nation-building " and other small-scale military engagements. The administration pursued a national missile defense . [220] Bush was an advocate of China's entry into the World Trade Organization . [221]
In his 2002 State of the Union Address, Bush referred to an axis of evil including Iraq , Iran and North Korea . [222] After the September 11 attacks on New York, Bush launched the War on Terror, in which the United States military and a small international coalition invaded Afghanistan . In 2003, Bush then launched the invasion of Iraq , searching for Weapons of Mass Destruction, which he described as being part of the War on Terrorism. [223] Those invasions led to the toppling of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan and the removal of Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq.
Bush began his second term with an emphasis on improving strained relations with European nations. He appointed long-time adviser Karen Hughes to oversee a global public relations campaign. Bush lauded the pro-democracy struggles in Georgia and Ukraine. [224]
In March 2006, a visit to India led to renewed ties between the two countries, reversing decades of U.S. policy. [225] The visit focused particularly on areas of nuclear energy and counter-terrorism cooperation, discussions that would lead eventually to the India–United States Civil Nuclear Agreement . [226]
This is in stark contrast to the stance taken by his predecessor, Clinton, whose approach and response to India after the 1998 nuclear tests was that of sanctions and hectoring. The relationship between India and the United States was one that dramatically improved during Bush's tenure. [227]
Midway through Bush's second term, it was questioned whether Bush was retreating from his freedom and democracy agenda, highlighted in policy changes toward some oil-rich former Soviet republics in central Asia. [228]
In an address before both Houses of Congress on September 20, 2001, Bush thanked the nations of the world for their support following the September 11 attacks. He specifically thanked UK Prime Minister Tony Blair for traveling to Washington to show "unity of purpose with America", and said "America has no truer friend than Great Britain." [229]

September 11 attacks
The September 11 terrorist attacks were a major turning point in Bush's presidency. That evening, he addressed the nation from the Oval Office , promising a strong response to the attacks. He also emphasized the need for the nation to come together and comfort the families of the victims. On September 14, he visited Ground Zero , meeting with Mayor Rudy Giuliani , firefighters, police officers, and volunteers. Bush addressed the gathering via a megaphone while standing on a heap of rubble, to much applause: "I can hear you. The rest of the world hears you. And the people who knocked these buildings down will hear all of us soon." [230]
In a September 20 speech, Bush condemned Osama bin Laden and his organization Al-Qaeda , and issued an ultimatum to the Taliban regime in Afghanistan, where bin Laden was operating, to "hand over the terrorists, or ... share in their fate". [231]

War on Terrorism
After September 11, Bush announced a global War on Terror. The Afghan Taliban regime was not forthcoming with Osama bin Laden, so Bush ordered the invasion of Afghanistan to overthrow the Taliban regime. [232] In his January 29, 2002 State of the Union Address , he asserted that an " axis of evil " consisting of North Korea, Iran, and Iraq was "arming to threaten the peace of the world" and "pose[d] a grave and growing danger". [233] The Bush Administration asserted both a right and the intention to wage preemptive war , or preventive war . [234] This became the basis for the Bush Doctrine which weakened the unprecedented levels of international and domestic support for the United States which had followed the September 11 attacks. [235]
Dissent and criticism of Bush's leadership in the War on Terror increased as the war in Iraq continued. [236] [237] [238] In 2006, a National Intelligence Estimate concluded that the Iraq War had become the " cause célèbre for jihadists ". [239] [240]

Afghanistan invasion
On October 7, 2001, U.S. and British forces initiated bombing campaigns that led to the arrival of Northern Alliance troops in Kabul on November 13. The main goals of the war were to defeat the Taliban , drive al-Qaeda out of Afghanistan, and capture key al-Qaeda leaders. In December 2001, the Pentagon reported that the Taliban had been defeated, [241] but cautioned that the war would go on to continue weakening Taliban and al-Qaeda leaders. [241] Later that month the UN had installed the Afghan Transitional Administration chaired by Hamid Karzai . [242] [243] In 2002, based on UNICEF figures, Nicholas Kristof reported that "our invasion of Afghanistan may end up saving one million lives over the next decade" as the result of improved healthcare and greater access to humanitarian aid. [244]
Efforts to kill or capture al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden failed as he escaped a battle in December 2001 in the mountainous region of Tora Bora , which the Bush Administration later acknowledged to have resulted from a failure to commit enough U.S. ground troops. [245] It was not until May 2011, two years after Bush left office, that bin Laden was killed by U.S. forces. Bin Laden's successor, Ayman al-Zawahiri , remains at large.
Despite the initial success in driving the Taliban from power in Kabul, by early 2003 the Taliban was regrouping, amassing new funds and recruits. [246] The 2005 failure of Operation Red Wings showed that the Taliban had returned. [247] In 2006, the Taliban insurgency appeared larger, fiercer and better organized than expected, with large-scale allied offensives such as Operation Mountain Thrust attaining limited success. [248] [249] [250] As a result, Bush commissioned 3,500 additional troops to the country in March 2007. [251]

Iraq invasion
Beginning with his January 29, 2002 State of the Union address, Bush began publicly focusing attention on Iraq, which he labeled as part of an " axis of evil " allied with terrorists and posing "a grave and growing danger" to U.S. interests through possession of weapons of mass destruction . [233] [252]
In the latter half of 2002, CIA reports contained assertions of Saddam Hussein 's intent of reconstituting nuclear weapons programs, not properly accounting for Iraqi biological and chemical weapons , and that some Iraqi missiles had a range greater than allowed by the UN sanctions. [253] [254] Contentions that the Bush Administration manipulated or exaggerated the threat and evidence of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction capabilities would eventually become a major point of criticism for the president. [255] [256]
In late 2002 and early 2003, Bush urged the United Nations to enforce Iraqi disarmament mandates, precipitating a diplomatic crisis . In November 2002, Hans Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei led UN weapons inspectors in Iraq, but were advised by the U.S. to depart the country four days prior to the U.S. invasion, despite their requests for more time to complete their tasks. [257] The U.S. initially sought a UN Security Council resolution authorizing the use of military force but dropped the bid for UN approval due to vigorous opposition from several countries. [258]
More than 20 nations (most notably the United Kingdom), designated the " coalition of the willing " joined the United States [259] in invading Iraq. They launched the invasion on March 20, 2003. The Iraqi military was quickly defeated. The capital, Baghdad , fell on April 9, 2003. On May 1, Bush declared the end of major combat operations in Iraq. The initial success of U.S. operations increased his popularity, but the U.S. and allied forces faced a growing insurgency led by sectarian groups; Bush's " Mission Accomplished " speech was later criticized as premature. [260] From 2004 until 2007, the situation in Iraq deteriorated further, with some observers arguing that there was a full-scale civil war in Iraq . [261] Bush's policies met with criticism, including demands domestically to set a timetable to withdraw troops from Iraq. The 2006 report of the bipartisan Iraq Study Group , led by James Baker , concluded that the situation in Iraq was "grave and deteriorating". While Bush admitted that there were strategic mistakes made in regards to the stability of Iraq, [262] he maintained he would not change the overall Iraq strategy. [263] [264] According to Iraq Body Count , some 251,000 Iraqis have been killed in the civil war following the U.S.-led invasion, including at least 163,841 civilians. [265]
In January 2005, free, democratic elections were held in Iraq for the first time in 50 years. [266] According to Iraqi National Security Advisor Mowaffak al-Rubaie , "This is the greatest day in the history of this country." [266] Bush praised the event as well, saying that the Iraqis "have taken rightful control of their country's destiny". [266] This led to the election of Jalal Talabani as President and Nouri al-Maliki as Prime Minister of Iraq. A referendum to approve a constitution in Iraq was held in October 2005, supported by most Shiites and many Kurds . [267]
On January 10, 2007, Bush announced a surge of 21,500 more troops for Iraq , as well as a job program for Iraqis, more reconstruction proposals, and $1.2 billion for these programs. [268] On May 1, 2007, Bush used his second-ever veto to reject a bill setting a deadline for the withdrawal of U.S. troops, [269] saying the debate over the conflict was "understandable" but insisting that a continued U.S. presence there was crucial. [270]
In March 2008, Bush praised the Iraqi government's "bold decision" to launch the Battle of Basra against the Mahdi Army , calling it "a defining moment in the history of a free Iraq". [271] He said he would carefully weigh recommendations from his commanding General David Petraeus and Ambassador Ryan Crocker about how to proceed after the end of the military buildup in the summer of 2008. He also praised the Iraqis' legislative achievements, including a pension law, a revised de-Baathification law, a new budget, an amnesty law, and a provincial powers measure that, he said, set the stage for the Iraqi elections . [272] By July 2008, American troop deaths had reached their lowest number since the war began, [273] and due to increased stability in Iraq, Bush announced the withdrawal of additional American forces. [273]

Surveillance
Following the events of September 11, Bush issued an executive order authorizing the President's Surveillance Program which included allowing the NSA to monitor communications between suspected terrorists outside the U.S and parties within the U.S. without obtaining a warrant as required by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act . [274] As of 2009, the other provisions of the program remained highly classified. [275] Once the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel questioned its original legal opinion that FISA did not apply in a time of war, the program was subsequently re-authorized by the President on the basis that the warrant requirements of FISA were implicitly superseded by the subsequent passage of the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists . [276] The program proved to be controversial , as critics of the administration, as well as organizations such as the American Bar Association , argued that it was illegal. [277] In August 2006, a U.S. district court judge ruled that the NSA electronic surveillance program was unconstitutional, [278] but on July 6, 2007, that ruling was vacated by the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit on the grounds that the plaintiffs lacked standing . [279] On January 17, 2007, Attorney General Alberto Gonzales informed U.S. Senate leaders that the program would not be reauthorized by the President, but would be subjected to judicial oversight. [280] Later in 2007, the NSA launched a replacement for the program, referred to as PRISM , that was subject to the oversight of the United States Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court . [281] This program was not publicly revealed until reports by The Washington Post [281] and The Guardian [282] emerged in June 2013. [281]

Interrogation policies
Bush authorized the CIA to use waterboarding and several other " enhanced interrogation techniques " that several critics, including Barack Obama, would label as torture. [283] [284] [285] [286] Between 2002 and 2003 the CIA considered certain enhanced interrogation techniques, such as waterboarding, to be legal based on a secret Justice Department legal opinion arguing that terror detainees were not protected by the Geneva Conventions ' ban on torture and Vice President Cheney said enhanced interrogation including waterboarding was not torture or illegal. [287] [288] The CIA had exercised the technique on certain key terrorist suspects under authority given to it in the Bybee Memo from the Attorney General, though that memo was later withdrawn. [289] While not permitted by the U.S. Army Field Manuals which assert "that harsh interrogation tactics elicit unreliable information", [287] the Bush administration believed these enhanced interrogations "provided critical information" to preserve American lives. [290] Critics, such as former CIA officer Bob Baer, have stated that information was suspect, "you can get anyone to confess to anything if the torture's bad enough." [291]
On October 17, 2006, Bush signed into law the Military Commissions Act of 2006 , [292] a law enacted in the wake of the Supreme Court's decision in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld , 548 U.S. 557 (2006), [293] which allows the U.S. government to prosecute unlawful enemy combatants by military commission rather than a standard trial. The law also denies them access to habeas corpus and bars the torture of detainees, but allows the president to determine what constitutes torture. [292]
On March 8, 2008, Bush vetoed H.R. 2082, [294] a bill that would have expanded congressional oversight over the intelligence community and banned the use of waterboarding as well as other forms of interrogation not permitted under the United States Army Field Manual on Human Intelligence Collector Operations , saying that "the bill Congress sent me would take away one of the most valuable tools in the War on Terror". [295] In April 2009, the ACLU sued and won release of the secret memos that had authorized the Bush administration's interrogation tactics. [296] One memo detailed specific interrogation tactics including a footnote that described waterboarding as torture as well as that the form of waterboarding used by the CIA was far more intense than authorized by the Justice Department. [297]

North Korea condemnation
Bush publicly condemned Kim Jong-il of North Korea, naming North Korea one of three states in an " axis of evil ", and saying that "the United States of America will not permit the world's most dangerous regimes to threaten us with the world's most destructive weapons." [233] Within months, "both countries had walked away from their respective commitments under the U.S.–DPRK Agreed Framework of October 1994." [298] North Korea's October 9, 2006, detonation of a nuclear device further complicated Bush's foreign policy, which centered for both terms of his presidency on "[preventing] the terrorists and regimes who seek chemical, biological, or nuclear weapons from threatening the United States and the world". [233] Bush condemned North Korea's position, reaffirmed his commitment to "a nuclear-free Korean Peninsula", and stated that "transfer of nuclear weapons or material by North Korea to states or non-state entities would be considered a grave threat to the United States", for which North Korea would be held accountable. [299] On May 7, 2007, North Korea agreed to shut down its nuclear reactors immediately pending the release of frozen funds held in a foreign bank account. This was a result of a series of three-way talks initiated by the United States and including China. [300] On September 2, 2007, North Korea agreed to disclose and dismantle all of its nuclear programs by the end of 2007. [301] By May 2009, North Korea had restarted its nuclear program and threatened to attack South Korea. [302]
On June 22, 2010, "While South Korea prospers, the people of North Korea have suffered profoundly," he said, adding that, "communism had resulted in dire poverty, mass starvation and brutal suppression. "In recent years," he went on to say, "the suffering has been compounded by the leader who wasted North Korea's precious few resources on personal luxuries and nuclear weapons programs." [303]

Syria sanctions
Bush expanded economic sanctions on Syria. [304] In early 2007, the Treasury Department , acting on a June 2005 executive order , froze American bank accounts of Syria's Higher Institute of Applied Science and Technology, Electronics Institute, and National Standards and Calibration Laboratory. Bush's order prohibits Americans from doing business with these institutions suspected of helping spread weapons of mass destruction [305] and being supportive of terrorism. [306] Under separate executive orders signed by Bush in 2004 and later 2007, the Treasury Department froze the assets of two Lebanese and two Syrians, accusing them of activities to "undermine the legitimate political process in Lebanon" in November 2007. Those designated included: Assaad Halim Hardan, a member of Lebanon's parliament and current leader of the Syrian Socialist National Party; Wi'am Wahhab, a former member of Lebanon's government (Minister of the Environment) under Prime Minister Omar Karami (2004–2005); Hafiz Makhluf, a colonel and senior official in the Syrian General Intelligence Directorate and a cousin of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad ; and Muhammad Nasif Khayrbik, identified as a close adviser to Assad. [307]

Africa
Bush initiated the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief Program (PEPFAR). The U.S. government has spent some $44 billion on the project since 2003 (a figure that includes $7 billion contributed to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria, a multilateral organization), [308] saving an estimated 5 million lives. [309] According to The New York Times correspondent Peter Baker , "Bush did more to stop AIDS and more to help Africa than any president before or since." [309]

Assassination attempt
On May 10, 2005, Vladimir Arutyunian , a native Georgian who was born to a family of ethnic Armenians , threw a live hand grenade toward a podium where Bush was speaking at Freedom Square in Tbilisi, Georgia . Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili was seated nearby. It landed in the crowd about 65 feet (20 m) from the podium after hitting a girl, but it did not detonate. Arutyunian was arrested in July 2005, confessed, was convicted and was given a life sentence in January 2006. [310]

Other issues
Bush withdrew U.S. support for several international agreements, including the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty (ABM) with Russia. He also signed the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty with Russia.
Bush emphasized a careful approach to the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians; he denounced Palestine Liberation Organization leader Yasser Arafat for his support of violence, but sponsored dialogues between Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and Palestinian National Authority President Mahmoud Abbas . Bush supported Sharon's unilateral disengagement plan, and lauded the democratic elections held in Palestine after Arafat's death.
Bush also expressed U.S. support for the defense of Taiwan following the stand-off in April 2001 with the People's Republic of China over the Hainan Island incident , when an EP-3E Aries II surveillance aircraft collided with a People's Liberation Army Air Force jet, leading to the detention of U.S. personnel. From 2003 to 2004, Bush authorized U.S. military intervention in Haiti and Liberia to protect U.S. interests. Bush condemned the militia attacks Darfur and denounced the killings in Sudan as genocide. [311] Bush said that an international peacekeeping presence was critical in Darfur, but opposed referring the situation to the International Criminal Court .
In the State of the Union address in January 2003, Bush outlined a five-year strategy for global emergency AIDS relief, the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief . Bush announced $15 billion for this effort [312] which directly supported life-saving antiretroviral treatment for more than 3.2 million men, women and children worldwide. [313]
On June 10, 2007, Bush met with Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha and became the first president to visit Albania. [314] Bush has voiced his support for the independence of Kosovo. [315] Bush opposed South Ossetia 's independence. [316] On August 15, 2008, Bush said of Russia's invasion of the country of Georgia : "Bullying and intimidation are not acceptable ways to conduct foreign policy in the 21st century." [317]
Bush opened the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City, Utah. Departing from previous practice, he stood among a group of U.S. athletes rather than from a ceremonial stand or box, saying: "On behalf of a proud, determined, and grateful nation, I declare open the Games of Salt Lake City, celebrating the Olympic Winter Games." [318] In 2008, in the course of a good-will trip to Asia, he attended the Summer Olympics in Beijing. [319]
Bush twice invoked Section 3 of the Twenty-fifth Amendment , which allows a President to temporarily transfer the powers and duties of his office to the Vice President who then becomes Acting President . On June 29, 2002, Bush underwent a colonoscopy and chose to invoke Section 3 of the amendment, making Vice President Dick Cheney the Acting President. The medical procedure began at 7:09 am. EDT and ended at 7:29 am. EDT. Bush woke up twenty minutes later, but did not resume his presidential powers and duties until 9:24 am. EDT after the president's doctor, Richard Tubb , conducted an overall examination. Tubb said he recommended the additional time to make sure the sedative had no after effects. On July 21, 2007, Bush again invoked Section 3 in response to having to undergo a colonoscopy, again making Vice President Cheney the Acting President. Bush invoked Section 3 at 7:16 am. EDT. He reclaimed his powers at 9:21 am. EDT. In both cases, Bush specifically cited Section 3 when he transferred the Presidential powers to the Vice President and when he reclaimed those powers. [320]

Judicial appointments

Supreme Court
Following the announcement of Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O'Connor 's retirement on July 1, 2005, Bush nominated John Roberts to succeed her. On September 5, following the death of Chief Justice William Rehnquist , this nomination was withdrawn and Bush instead nominated Roberts for Chief Justice to succeed Rehnquist. Roberts was confirmed by the Senate as the 17th Chief Justice on September 29, 2005.
On October 3, 2005, Bush nominated long time White House Counsel Harriet Miers for O'Connor's position. After facing significant opposition from both parties, who found her to be ill-prepared and uninformed on the law, [321] Miers asked that her name be withdrawn on October 27. Four days later, on October 31, Bush nominated federal appellate judge Samuel Alito . Alito was confirmed as the 110th Supreme Court Justice on January 31, 2006. [322]

Other courts
In addition to his two Supreme Court appointments, Bush appointed 61 judges to the United States courts of appeals and 261 judges to the United States district courts . Each of these numbers, along with his total of 324 judicial appointments, is third in American history, behind both Ronald Reagan and Bill Clinton . Bush experienced a number of judicial appointment controversies . Debate during one confirmation session lasted "39 stupefying hours" according to The New York Times . On August 3, 2001, the Senate did not consent to keep existing nominations in status quo , returning 40 judicial nominations, and 164 total nominations. [323] [324] [325]
At the outset, Judicature magazine noted that the "Senate Democrats were gearing up for the approaching confirmation hearings" before the first set of nominees were sent to the Senate. It then cites The New York Times as saying "Senate Democrats have pledged they will not automatically vote to confirm Mr. Bush's judicial nominees and will subject them to intense scrutiny." [326]
The Senate confirmed only 8 out of 60 judicial nominations by October 2001. In February 2003, the Democrats successfully filibustered the nomination of Miguel Estrada . [327]

Cultural and political image

Domestic

Image
Bush's upbringing in West Texas , his accent, his vacations on his Texas ranch, and his penchant for country metaphors contribute to his folksy, American cowboy image. [328] [329] "I think people look at him and think John Wayne ," said Piers Morgan , editor of the British Daily Mirror . [330] It has been suggested that Bush's accent was an active choice, as a way of distinguishing himself from Northeastern intellectuals and anchoring himself to his Texas roots. [331] Both supporters and detractors have pointed to his country persona as reasons for their support or criticism. [329]
Bush has been parodied by the media, [332] comedians, and other politicians. [333] Detractors tended to cite linguistic errors made by Bush during his public speeches, which are colloquially referred to as Bushisms . [334] Some pundits labeled Bush "the worst president ever". [335] [336] [337] [338] [339] In contrast to his father, who was perceived as having troubles with an overarching unifying theme, Bush embraced larger visions and was seen as a man of larger ideas and associated huge risks. [340] Tony Blair wrote in 2010 that the caricature of Bush as being dumb is "ludicrous" and that Bush is "very smart". [341] In an interview with Playboy , New York Times columnist David Brooks said George W. Bush "was 60 IQ points smarter in private than he was in public. He doesn't want anybody to think he's smarter than they are, so puts on a Texas act." [342]

Job approval
Bush began his presidency with approval ratings near 50 percent. [343] After the September 11 attacks , Bush gained an approval rating of 90 percent, [344] maintaining 80 to 90 percent approval for four months after the attacks. It remained over 50 percent during most of his first term [12] and then fell to as low as 19 percent in his second term. [345]
In 2000 and again in 2004, Time magazine named George W. Bush as its Person of the Year , a title awarded to someone who the editors believe "has done the most to influence the events of the year". [346] In May 2004, Gallup reported that 89 percent of the Republican electorate approved of Bush. [347] However, the support waned due mostly to a minority of Republicans' frustration with him on issues of spending, illegal immigration, and Middle Eastern affairs. [348]
Within the United States armed forces, according to an unscientific survey, the president was strongly supported in the 2004 presidential elections. [349] While 73 percent of military personnel said that they would vote for Bush, 18 percent preferred his Democratic rival, John Kerry . [349] According to Peter Feaver , a Duke University political scientist who has studied the political leanings of the U.S. military, members of the armed services supported Bush because they found him more likely than Kerry to complete the War in Iraq. [349]
Bush's approval rating went below the 50 percent mark in AP - Ipsos polling in December 2004. [350] Thereafter, his approval ratings and approval of his handling of domestic and foreign policy issues steadily dropped. Bush received heavy criticism for his handling of the Iraq War , his response to Hurricane Katrina and to the Abu Ghraib prisoner abuse , NSA warrantless surveillance , the Plame affair , and Guantanamo Bay detention camp controversies. [351] There were calls for Bush's impeachment , though most polls showed a plurality of Americans would not support such an action. [352] The arguments offered for impeachment usually centered on the NSA warrantless surveillance controversy, [353] the Bush administration's justification for the war in Iraq, [354] and alleged violations of the Geneva Conventions . [355] Representative Dennis Kucinich (D- OH ), who had run against Bush during the 2004 presidential campaign, introduced 35 articles of impeachment on the floor of the House of Representatives against Bush on June 9, 2008, but Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D- CA ) declared that impeachment was "off the table". [356]
Polls conducted in 2006 showed an average of 37 percent approval ratings for Bush, [357] the lowest for any second-term president at that point of his term since Harry S. Truman in March 1951 (when Truman's approval rating was 28 percent), [350] [358] which contributed to what Bush called the "thumping" of the Republican Party in the 2006 mid-term elections . [359] Throughout most of 2007, Bush's approval rating hovered in the mid-thirties; [360] the average for his entire second term was 37 percent, according to Gallup. [361]
By the beginning of 2008, his final year in office, Bush's approval rating had dropped to a low of just 19 percent, largely from the loss of support among Republicans. [345] Commenting on his low poll numbers and accusations of being "the worst president," [362] [363] Bush would say, "I make decisions on what I think is right for the United States based upon principles. I frankly don't give a damn about the polls." [364]
In the spring of that year, Bush's disapproval ratings reached the highest ever recorded for any president in the 70-year history of the Gallup poll , with 69 percent of those polled in April 2008 disapproving of the job Bush was doing as president and 28 percent approving—although the majority (66 percent) of Republicans still approved of his job performance. [365]
In polls conducted in the fall, just before the 2008 election, his approval ratings remained at record lows of 19 to 20 percent, [366] [367] while his disapproval ratings ranged from 67 percent to as high as 75 percent. [367] [368] In polling conducted January 9–11, 2009, his final job approval rating by Gallup was 34 percent, which placed him on par with Jimmy Carter and Harry S. Truman , the other presidents whose final Gallup ratings measured in the low 30s ( Richard Nixon 's final Gallup approval rating was even lower, at 24 percent). [369] According to a CBS News / New York Times poll conducted January 11–15, 2009, Bush's final approval rating in office was 22 percent, the lowest in American history. [366]

Foreign perceptions
Bush was criticized internationally and targeted by the global anti-war and anti-globalization campaigns for his administration's foreign policy. [370] [371] Views of him within the international community —even in France, a close ally of the United States—were more negative than those of most previous American presidents in history. [372]
Bush was described as having especially close personal relationships with Tony Blair of Great Britain and Vicente Fox of Mexico, although formal relations were sometimes strained. [373] [374] [375] Other leaders, such as Afghan president Hamid Karzai , [376] Ugandan president Yoweri Museveni , [377] Spanish prime minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero , [378] and Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez , [379] openly criticized the president. Later in Bush's presidency, tensions arose between him and Vladimir Putin , which led to a cooling of their relationship. [380]
In 2006, most respondents in 18 of 21 countries surveyed around the world were found to hold an unfavorable opinion of Bush. Respondents indicated that they judged his administration as negative for world security. [381] [382] In 2007, the Pew Global Attitudes Project reported that during the Bush presidency, attitudes towards the United States, and towards Americans, became less favorable around the world. [383]
A March 2007 survey of Arab opinion conducted by Zogby International and the University of Maryland found that Bush was the most disliked leader in the Arab world. [384]
The Pew Research Center 's 2007 Global Attitudes poll found that out of 47 countries, in only nine countries did most respondents express "a lot of confidence" or "some confidence" in Bush: Ethiopia, Ghana, India, Israel, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Mali, Nigeria, and Uganda. [385]
During a June 2007 visit to the predominantly Muslim [386] Albania , Bush was greeted enthusiastically. Albania has a population of 2.8 million, [387] has troops in both Iraq and Afghanistan, and the country's government is highly supportive of American foreign policy. [388] A huge image of the President was hung in the middle of the capital city of Tirana flanked by Albanian and American flags while a local street was named after him. [389] [390] A shirt-sleeved statue of Bush was unveiled in Fushë-Krujë , a few kilometers northwest of Tirana . [391] The Bush administration's support for the independence of Albanian-majority Kosovo, while endearing him to the Albanians , has troubled U.S. relations with Serbia, leading to the February 2008 torching of the U.S. embassy in Belgrade . [392]

Acknowledgments and dedications
On May 7, 2005, during an official state visit to Latvia, Bush was awarded the Order of the Three Stars presented to him by President Vaira Vīķe-Freiberga . [393] A few places outside the United States bear Bush's name. In 2005, the Tbilisi City Council voted to rename a street in honor of the U.S. president. [394] Previously known as Melaani Drive, the street links the Georgian capital's airport with the city center and was used by Bush's motorcade during his visit four months earlier. [395] A street in Tirana , formerly known as Rruga Puntorët e Rilendjes , situated directly outside the Albanian Parliament , was renamed after Bush a few days before he made the first-ever visit by an American president to Albania in June 2007. [396] In Jerusalem , a small plaza with a monument bearing his name is also dedicated to Bush. [397]
In 2012, Estonian President Toomas Hendrik Ilves awarded Bush the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana for his work in expanding NATO. [398]

Reception
The George W. Bush presidency has been ranked among the worst in surveys of presidential scholars published in the late 2000s and 2010s. [14] [15] [16]
After his re-election in 2004, Bush received increasingly heated criticism from across the political spectrum [6] [7] [8] for his handling of the Iraq War, Hurricane Katrina , [9] [10] [11] and other challenges. Amid this criticism, the Democratic Party regained control of Congress in the 2006 elections . In December 2007, the United States entered its longest post- World War II recession, often referred to as the " Great Recession ", prompting the Bush administration to obtain congressional passage of multiple economic programs intended to preserve the country's financial system. Nationally, Bush was both one of the most popular and unpopular presidents in history, having received the highest recorded presidential approval ratings in the wake of the September 11 attacks, as well as one of the lowest approval ratings during the 2008 financial crisis . [12]
For his part, Bush said in 2013, "Ultimately history will judge the decisions I made, and I won't be around because it will take time for the objective historians to show up. So I am pretty comfortable with it. I did what I did." [399]

Post-presidency

Residence (2009–present)
Following the inauguration of Barack Obama , Bush and his family flew from Andrews Air Force Base to a homecoming celebration in Midland, Texas , following which they returned to their ranch in Crawford, Texas . [400] They bought a home in the Preston Hollow neighborhood of Dallas , Texas, where they settled down. [401]
He makes regular appearances at various events throughout the Dallas/Fort Worth area, most notably when he conducted the opening coin toss at the Dallas Cowboys first game in the team's new stadium in Arlington [402] and an April 2009 visit to a Texas Rangers game, where he thanked the people of Dallas for helping him settle in and was met with a standing ovation. [403] He also attended every home playoff game for the Texas Rangers 2010 season and, accompanied by his father, threw out the ceremonial first pitch at Rangers Ballpark in Arlington for Game 4 of the 2010 World Series on October 31, 2010. [404]
On August 6, 2013, Bush was successfully treated for a coronary artery blockage with a stent . The blockage had been found during an annual medical examination . [405]
In reaction to the 2016 shooting of Dallas police officers , Bush stated: "Laura and I are heartbroken by the heinous acts of violence in our city last night. Murdering the innocent is always evil, never more so than when the lives taken belong to those who protect our families and communities." [406]

Publications and appearances
Since leaving office, Bush has kept a relatively low profile [407] though he has made public appearances, most notably after the release of his memoirs in 2010 and for the 10th anniversary of the September 11 attacks in 2011. In March 2009, he delivered his first post-presidency speech in Calgary , Alberta, [408] [409] appeared via video on The Colbert Report during which he praised U.S. troops for earning a "special place in American history," [410] and attended the funeral of Senator Ted Kennedy . [411] Bush made his debut as a motivational speaker on October 26 at the "Get Motivated" seminar in Dallas. [412] In the aftermath of the Fort Hood shooting that took place on November 5, 2009, in Texas, the Bushes paid an undisclosed visit to the survivors and victims' families the day following the shooting, having contacted the base commander requesting that the visit be private and not involve press coverage. [413]
Bush released his memoirs, Decision Points , on November 9, 2010. During a pre-release appearance promoting the book, Bush said he considered his biggest accomplishment to be keeping "the country safe amid a real danger", and his greatest failure to be his inability to secure the passage of Social Security reform . [414] He also made news defending his administration's enhanced interrogation techniques, specifically the waterboarding of Khalid Sheikh Mohammed , saying, "I'd do it again to save lives." [415]
In 2012, he wrote the foreword of The 4% Solution: Unleashing the Economic Growth America Needs , an economics book published by the George W. Bush Presidential Center . [416] [417] He also presented the book at the Parkland Memorial Hospital in Dallas, Texas. [418]
Bush appeared on NBC 's The Tonight Show with Jay Leno on November 19, 2013, along with the former First Lady , Laura Bush. When asked by Leno why he does not comment publicly about the Obama administration , Bush said, "I don't think it's good for the country to have a former president criticize his successor." [419] Despite this statement, on Saturday, April 25, 2015, Bush criticized President Barack Obama at a meeting of the Republican Jewish Coalition at the Venetian Hotel in Las Vegas. Bush criticized Obama's handling of Iran, specifically with respect to sanctions and a nuclear deal, saying: "You think the Middle East is chaotic now? Imagine what it looks like for our grandchildren. That's how Americans should view the deal." Bush also attacked Obama's withdrawal of U.S. troops from Iraq in 2011, calling it a "strategic blunder", borrowing a term that had been used by South Carolina Senator Lindsey Graham . [420]
Alongside the 2014 United States–Africa Leaders Summit , Bush, Michelle Obama , the State Department, and the George W. Bush Institute hosted a daylong forum on education and health with the spouses of the African leaders attending the summit. Bush urged African leaders to avoid discriminatory laws that make the treatment of HIV/AIDS more difficult. [421]
Bush has spoken in favor of increased global participation of women in politics and societal matters in foreign countries. [422] [423]
On November 2, 2014, Bush spoke at an event to 200 business and civic leaders at the George W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum to raise awareness for the upcoming Museum of the Bible in Washington D.C. [39] [424]
Bush published a biography of his father, George Bush , called 41: A Portrait of My Father . It was released on November 11, 2014. [425]
In an interview published by Israel Hayom magazine on June 12, 2015, Bush said that "boots on the ground" would be needed in order to defeat the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIS). He added that people had said during his Presidency that he should withdraw American troops from Iraq, but he chose the opposite, sending 30,000 more troops in order to defeat Al Qaeda in Iraq , and that Al Qaeda in Iraq was defeated. Bush was also asked about Iran but declined to answer, stating that any answer he gives would be interpreted as undermining President Barack Obama . [426]
In February 2016, George W. Bush spoke and campaigned for his brother Jeb Bush in South Carolina during a rally for the Jeb Bush presidential campaign in the 2016 Republican Party presidential primaries . [427]
While Bush endorsed the Republican Party's 2012 presidential nominee Mitt Romney , he declined to endorse the 2016 Republican nominee Donald Trump [428] and he did not attend the 2016 Republican National Convention , which formally nominated Trump. [429] On the eve of Trump's nomination, it was reported that Bush had privately expressed concern about the current direction of the Republican Party and told a group of his former aides and advisors, "I'm worried that I will be the last Republican president." [430] [431] Bush and his wife Laura did not vote for Trump in the 2016 presidential election according to a spokesperson for the Bush family, instead choosing to leave their presidential ballots blank. [432] After the election, Bush, his father, and his brother Jeb called Trump on the phone to congratulate him on his victory. [433] Both he and Laura attended Trump's inauguration , and images of Bush struggling to put on a rain poncho during the ceremony became an internet meme . [434]
In February 2017, Bush released a book of his own portraits of veterans called Portraits of Courage (full title: Portraits of Courage: A Commander in Chief's Tribute to America's Warriors . [435]

Collaborations
In January 2010, at President Obama's request, Bush and Bill Clinton established the Clinton Bush Haiti Fund to raise contributions for relief and recovery efforts following the 2010 Haiti earthquake earlier that month. [436]
On May 2, 2011, President Obama called Bush, who was at a restaurant with his wife, to inform him that Osama bin Laden had been killed . [437] The Bushes joined the Obamas in New York City to mark the tenth anniversary of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. At the Ground Zero memorial, Bush read a letter that President Abraham Lincoln wrote to a widow who lost five sons during the Civil War. [438]

Visual art
After serving as president, Bush began painting as a hobby after reading Winston Churchill's essay "Painting as a Pastime". Subjects have included people, dogs, and still life . [439] He has also painted self-portraits and portraits of world leaders, including Vladimir Putin and Tony Blair. [440] [441] [442]
In February 2017, Bush released a book of his own portraits of veterans called Portraits of Courage . [435] The net proceeds from his book are donated to the George W. Bush Presidential Center .
His paintings have been met with a lukewarm reception from some art critics. Bill Arning, director of the Contemporary Arts Museum Houston , called his portraits "thickly painted in what I would call 'high-amateur' mode" and wrote, "I would say they need to be less based on photographic reproduction. You can tell when someone is taking a found photograph and making a painting out of it [...] I think he'd be well advised to work from other, multiple photographic sources or the real person to get a little bit more liveliness going on." [443]

Legacy
President Bush's legacy continues to develop today. Supporters credit Bush's counterterrorism policies with preventing another major terrorist attack from occurring in the US after 9/11 and also praise individual policies such as the Medicare prescription drug benefit and the AIDS relief program known as PEPFAR . Critics often point to his handling of the Iraq War , specifically the failure to find weapons of mass destruction , that were the main rationale behind the initial invasion—as well as his handling of tax policy , Hurricane Katrina , climate change and the 2008 financial crisis —as proof that George W. Bush was unfit to be president. [444] [445] [446]
Several historians and commentators hold the view that Bush was one of the most consequential presidents in American history. Princeton University scholar Julian Zelizer described Bush's presidency as a "transformative" one, and said that "some people hate him, some people love him, but I do think he'll have a much more substantive perception as time goes on". [447] Bryon Williams of The Huffington Post referred to Bush as "the most noteworthy president since FDR " and said that the Patriot Act "increased authority of the executive branch at the expense of judicial opinions about when searches and seizures are reasonable" as evidence. [448] Bush's administration presided over the largest tax cuts since the Reagan administration , [449] and his homeland security reforms proved to be the most significant expansion of the federal government since the Great Society . [450] Much of these policies have endured in the administrations of his two immediate successors, Barack Obama and Donald Trump . [451] [452] A 2010 Siena Research Institute survey of the opinions of historians, political scientists, and presidential scholars ranked him 39th out of 43 presidents. The survey respondents gave President Bush low ratings on his handling of the U.S. economy, communication, ability to compromise, foreign policy accomplishments, and intelligence. [453]
Among the public, his reputation has improved somewhat since his presidency ended in 2009. In February 2012, Gallup reported that "Americans still rate George W. Bush among the worst presidents, though their views have become more positive in the three years since he left office." [454] Gallup had earlier noted that Bush's favorability ratings in public opinion surveys had begun to rise a year after he had left office, from 40 percent in January 2009 and 35 percent in March 2009, to 45 percent in July 2010, a period during which he had remained largely out of the news. [455] Other pollsters have noted similar trends of slight improvement in Bush's personal favorability since the end of his presidency. [456] In April 2013, Bush's approval rating stood at 47 percent approval and 50 percent disapproval in a poll jointly conducted for The Washington Post and ABC , his highest approval rating since December 2005. Bush had achieved notable gains among seniors, non-college whites, and moderate and conservative Democrats since leaving office, although majorities disapproved of his handling of the economy (53 percent) and the Iraq War (57 percent). [457] His 47 percent approval rating was equal to that of President Obama's in the same polling period. [458] A CNN poll conducted that same month found that 55 percent of Americans said Bush's presidency had been a failure, with opinions divided along party lines, and 43 percent of independents calling it a success. [459]

See also
WebPage index: 00060
Washington University in St. Louis
Washington University in St. Louis (also referred to as WashU , or WUSTL ) is a private research university located in St. Louis , Missouri , United States. Founded in 1853, and named after George Washington , the university has students and faculty from all 50 U.S. states and more than 120 countries. [6] Twenty-five Nobel laureates have been affiliated with Washington University, nine having done the major part of their pioneering research at the university. [7] Washington University's undergraduate program is ranked 19th by U.S. News & World Report [8] in 2017 and 11th by the Wall Street Journal in 2016. [9] The university is ranked 23rd in the world in 2016 by the Academic Ranking of World Universities . [10]
Washington University is made up of seven graduate and undergraduate schools that encompass a broad range of academic fields . [11] To prevent confusion over its location, the Board of Trustees added the phrase "in St. Louis" in 1976. [12]

History

Early history (1853–1900)
Washington University was conceived by 17 St. Louis business, political, and religious leaders concerned by the lack of institutions of higher learning in the Midwest . Missouri State Senator Wayman Crow and Unitarian minister William Greenleaf Eliot , grandfather of the poet T.S. Eliot , led the effort.
The university's first chancellor was Joseph Gibson Hoyt . Crow secured the university charter from the Missouri General Assembly in 1853, and Eliot was named President of the Board of Trustees. Early on, Eliot solicited support from members of the local business community, including John O'Fallon , but Eliot failed to secure a permanent endowment. Washington University is unusual among major American universities in not having had a prior financial endowment. The institution had no backing of a religious organization, single wealthy patron, or earmarked government support.
During the three years following its inception, the university bore three different names. The board first approved "Eliot Seminary," but William Eliot was uncomfortable with naming a university after himself and objected to the establishment of a seminary, which would implicitly be charged with teaching a religious faith. He favored a nonsectarian university. [13] In 1854, the Board of Trustees changed the name to "Washington Institute" in honor of George Washington . Naming the University after the nation's first president, only seven years before the American Civil War and during a time of bitter national division, was no coincidence. During this time of conflict, Americans universally admired George Washington as the father of the United States and a symbol of national unity. The Board of Trustees believed that the university should be a force of unity in a strongly divided Missouri. In 1856, the University amended its name to "Washington University." The university amended its name once more in 1976, when the Board of Trustees voted to add the suffix "in St. Louis" to distinguish the university from the nearly two dozen other universities bearing Washington's name. [12]
Although chartered as a university, for many years Washington University functioned primarily as a night school located on 17th Street and Washington Avenue in the heart of downtown St. Louis. Owing to limited financial resources, Washington University initially used public buildings. Classes began on October 22, 1854, at the Benton School building. At first the university paid for the evening classes, but as their popularity grew, their funding was transferred to the St. Louis Public Schools . [14] Eventually the board secured funds for the construction of Academic Hall and a half dozen other buildings. Later the university divided into three departments: the Manual Training School, Smith Academy , and the Mary Institute .
In 1867, the university opened the first private nonsectarian law school west of the Mississippi River . By 1882, Washington University had expanded to numerous departments, which were housed in various buildings across St. Louis. Medical classes were first held at Washington University in 1891 after the St. Louis Medical College decided to affiliate with the University, establishing the School of Medicine . During the 1890s, Robert Sommers Brookings , the president of the Board of Trustees, undertook the tasks of reorganizing the university's finances, putting them onto a sound foundation, and buying land for a new campus.

Modern era (1900–1955)
Washington University spent its first half century in downtown St. Louis bounded by Washington Ave., Lucas Place, and Locust Street. By the 1890s, owing to the dramatic expansion of the Manual School and a new benefactor in Robert Brookings, the University began to move west. The University Board of Directors began a process to find suitable ground and hired the landscape architecture firm Olmsted, Olmsted & Eliot of Boston. A committee of Robert S. Brookings, Henry Ware Eliot , and William Huse found a site of 103 acres (41.7 ha) just beyond Forest Park , located west of the city limits in St. Louis County . The elevation of the land was thought to resemble the Acropolis and inspired the nickname of "Hilltop" campus, renamed the Danforth campus in 2006 to honor former chancellor William H. Danforth .
In 1899, the university opened a national design contest for the new campus. The renowned Philadelphia firm Cope & Stewardson won unanimously with its plan for a row of Collegiate Gothic quadrangles inspired by Oxford and Cambridge Universities. [15] The cornerstone of the first building, Busch Hall, was laid on October 20, 1900. The construction of Brookings Hall , Ridgley, and Cupples began shortly thereafter. The school delayed occupying these buildings until 1905 to accommodate the 1904 World's Fair and Olympics. The delay allowed the university to construct ten buildings instead of the seven originally planned. This original cluster of buildings set a precedent for the development of the Danforth Campus; Cope & Stewardson’s original plan and its choice of building materials have, with few exceptions, guided the construction and expansion of the Danforth Campus to the present day. [15]
By 1915, construction of a new medical complex was completed on Kingshighway in what is now St. Louis’s Central West End. Three years later, Washington University admitted its first women medical students. [16]
In 1922, a young physics professor, Arthur Holly Compton , conducted a series of experiments in the basement of Eads Hall that demonstrated the "particle" concept of electromagnetic radiation. Compton’s discovery, known as the “ Compton Effect ,” earned him the Nobel Prize in physics in 1927.
During World War II, as part of the Manhattan Project , a cyclotron at Washington University was used to produce small quantities of the newly discovered element plutonium via neutron bombardment of uranium nitrate hexahydrate . The plutonium produced there in 1942 was shipped to the Metallurgical Laboratory Compton had established at the University of Chicago where Glenn Seaborg 's team used it for extraction, purification, and characterization studies of the exotic substance.
After working for many years at the University of Chicago, Arthur Holly Compton returned to St. Louis in 1946 to serve as Washington University's ninth chancellor. Compton reestablished the Washington University football team, making the declaration that athletics were to be henceforth played on a "strictly amateur" basis with no athletic scholarships. Under Compton’s leadership, enrollment at the University grew dramatically, fueled primarily by World War II veterans' use of their GI Bill benefits. [17]
In 1947, Gerty Cori , a professor at the School of Medicine, became the first American woman to win a Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Professors Carl and Gerty Cori became Washington University's fifth and sixth Nobel laureates for their discovery of how glycogen is broken down and resynthesized in the body.
The process of desegregation at Washington University began in 1947 with the School of Medicine and the School of Social Work. [18] During the mid and late 1940s, the University was the target of critical editorials in the local African American press, letter-writing campaigns by churches and the local Urban League , and legal briefs by the NAACP intended to strip its tax-exempt status. In spring 1949, a Washington University student group, the Student Committee for the Admission of Negroes (SCAN), began campaigning for full racial integration. In May 1952, the Board of Trustees passed a resolution desegregating the school's undergraduate divisions. [19]

Recent history (1955–present)
During the latter half of the 20th century, Washington University transitioned from a strong regional university to a national research institution. In 1957, planning began for the construction of the “South 40,” a complex of modern residential halls. With the additional on-campus housing, Washington University, which had been predominantly a “streetcar college” of commuter students, began to attract a more national pool of applicants. [20] By 1964, over two-thirds of incoming students came from outside the St. Louis area. [21]
In 1971, the Board of Trustees appointed Chancellor William Henry Danforth , who guided the university through the social and financial crises of the 1970s and strengthened the university’s often strained relationship with the St. Louis community. During his 24-year chancellorship, Danforth significantly improved the School of Medicine , established 70 new faculty chairs, secured a $1.72 billion endowment, and tripled the amount of student scholarships. [22]
In 1995, Mark S. Wrighton , former Provost at MIT , was elected the university’s 14th chancellor. During Chancellor Wrighton's tenure undergraduate applications to Washington University have more than doubled. Since 1995, the University has added more than 190 endowed professorships, revamped its Arts & Sciences curriculum, and completed more than 30 new buildings. [23]
The growth of Washington University’s reputation has coincided with a series of record-breaking fund-raising efforts during the last three decades. From 1983 to 1987, the “Alliance for Washington University” campaign raised $630.5 million, which was then the most successful fund-raising effort in national history. [24] From 1998 to 2004, the “Campaign for Washington University” raised $1.55 billion, which has been applied to additional scholarships, professorships, and research initiatives. [25]

U.S. presidential and vice-presidential debates
Washington University has been selected by the Commission on Presidential Debates to host more presidential and vice-presidential debates than any other institution in history. [26] United States presidential election debates were held at the Washington University Athletic Complex in 1992, 2000, 2004 , and 2016. A presidential debate was planned to occur in 1996, but owing to scheduling difficulties between the candidates, the debate was canceled. [27] The university hosted the only 2008 vice presidential debate, between Republican Sarah Palin and Democrat Joe Biden , on October 2, 2008, also at the Washington University Athletic Complex. The university hosted the second 2016 presidential debate, between Republican Party candidate Donald Trump and Democratic Party candidate Hillary Clinton , on October 9, 2016.
Although Chancellor Wrighton had noted after the 2004 debate that it would be "improbable" that the university will host another debate and was not eager to commit to the possibility, [28] he subsequently changed his view and the university submitted a bid for the 2008 debates. "These one-of-a-kind events are great experiences for our students, they contribute to a national understanding of important issues, and they allow us to help bring national and international attention to the St. Louis region as one of America's great metropolitan areas," said Wrighton. [29]

Rankings and reputation
Washington University's undergraduate program is ranked 19th in the nation in the 2017 U.S. News & World Report National Universities ranking. [8] Additionally, 19 undergraduate disciplines are ranked among the top 10 programs in the country. [42] In 2013, the ranking's peer assessment score was 4.1. [43]
In 2013, Washington University received a record 30,117 applications for a freshman class of 1,500 with an acceptance rate of 13.7%. [44] More than 90% of incoming freshmen whose high schools ranked were ranked in the top 10% of their high school classes. In 2006, the university ranked fourth overall and second among private universities in the number of enrolled National Merit Scholar freshmen, according to the National Merit Scholar Corporation's annual report. [45] In 2008, Washington University was ranked #1 for quality of life according to The Princeton Review , among other top rankings. In addition, the Olin Business School's undergraduate program is among the top 4 in the country. [46] The Olin Business School's undergraduate program is also among the country's most competitive, admitting only 14% of applicants in 2007 and ranking #1 in SAT scores with an average composite of 1492 M+CR according to BusinessWeek . [47] [48]
Graduate schools include the School of Medicine , currently ranked sixth in the nation, and the George Warren Brown School of Social Work , currently ranked first. The program in occupational therapy at Washington University currently occupies the first spot for the 2016 U.S. News & World Report rankings, and the program in physical therapy is ranked first as well. For the 2015 edition, the School of Law is ranked 18th, the Clinical Psychology in the Arts and Science department ranked 14th, and the Olin Business School is ranked 19th. [49] [50] Additionally, the Graduate School of Architecture and Urban Design was ranked ninth in the nation by the journal DesignIntelligence in its 2013 edition of "America's Best Architecture & Design Schools."
Global rankings include 23rd in the Academic Ranking of World Universities in 2016. Also in 2016, Washington University ranked 42nd in the world according to the Times Higher Education World University Rankings . Washington University ranked 22nd in CWTS Leiden Ranking 2013, Netherland. [51]

Geography and campuses

Danforth Campus
The main, or Danforth Campus (formerly known as the Hilltop Campus) is mostly between Forest Park Parkway, Wydown Boulevard, North Big Bend Boulevard, and North Skinker Boulevard.
Although the school includes St. Louis in its name, the majority of the school's main campus (including Brookings Hall) is located in unincorporated St. Louis County and suburban Clayton .

Medical Campus
Washington University Medical Center comprises 164 acres (66.4 ha) spread over approximately 12 city blocks, located along the eastern edge of Forest Park within the Central West End neighborhood of St. Louis . The campus is home to the Washington University School of Medicine and its associated teaching hospitals, Barnes-Jewish Hospital and St. Louis Children's Hospital . Many of the buildings are connected via a series of skyways and corridors.
The School's 2,100 employed and volunteer faculty Physicians and Nurse Practitioners also serve as the medical staff of Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children's hospitals, which are part of BJC HealthCare. Washington University and BJC have taken on many joint venture projects, such as the Center for Advanced Medicine, completed in December 2001. BJC Institute of Health at Washington University is the newest research building with 680,000 square feet (63,000 m 2 ).
Olin Residence Hall , named for Spencer T. Olin , provides residential services for 200 medical and graduate students. [52]
The Medical Campus is accessible via the Central West End MetroLink station , which provides a quick link to the Danforth, North, and West Campuses.
Medical Campus Includes:

North and West Campuses
Washington University's North Campus and West Campus principally house administrative functions that are not student focused. North Campus lies in St. Louis City near the Delmar Loop . The University acquired the building and adjacent property in 2004, formerly home to the Angelica Uniform Factory. [53] Several University administrative departments are located at the North Campus location, including offices for Quadrangle Housing, Accounting and Treasury Services, Parking and Transportation Services, Army ROTC , and Network Technology Services. The North Campus location also provides off-site storage space for the Performing Arts Department. Renovations are still ongoing; recent additions to the North Campus space include a small eatery operated by Bon Appétit Management Company , the University's on-campus food provider, completed during spring semester 2007, as well as the Family Learning Center, operated by Bright Horizons and opened in September 2010.
The West Campus is located about one mile (1.6 km) to the west of the Danforth Campus in Clayton, Missouri , and primarily consists of a four-story former department store building housing mostly administrative space. The West Campus building was home to the Clayton branch of the Famous-Barr department store until 1990, when the University acquired the property and adjacent parking and began a series of renovations. [54] Today, the basement level houses the West Campus Library, the University Archives, the Modern Graphic History Library, and conference space. The ground level still remains a retail space. The upper floors house consolidated capital gifts, portions of alumni and development, and information systems offices from across the Danforth and Medical School campuses. There is also a music rehearsal room on the second floor. The West Campus is also home to the Center for the Application of Information Technologies (CAIT), which provides IT training services.
Both the North and West Campuses are accessible by the St. Louis MetroLink , which, with the Delmar Loop and Forsyth MetroLink Stations directly adjacent to these campuses, provides easy travel around the St. Louis metropolitan area, including all of Washington University's campuses.

Tyson Research Center
Tyson Research Center is a 1,966.5 acres (3.07 sq mi; 795.81 ha) field station located west of St. Louis on the Meramec River . Washington University obtained Tyson as surplus property from the federal government in 1963. It is used by the University as a biological field station and research/education center. In 2010 the Living Learning Center was named one of the first two buildings accredited nationwide as a "living building" under the Living Building Challenge, [55] opened to serve as a biological research station and classroom for summer students.

Academics

Arts & Sciences
For the Fall 2011 semester Arts & Sciences enrolled 942 out of 18,079 applicants (5.2%).
Arts & Sciences at Washington University comprises three divisions: the College of Arts & Sciences, the Graduate School of Arts & Sciences, and University College in Arts & Sciences. Barbara Schaal is Dean of the Faculty of Arts & Sciences. James E. McLeod was the Vice Chancellor for Students and Dean of the College of Arts & Sciences; according to a University news release he died at the University's Barnes-Jewish Hospital on Tuesday, September 6, 2011 of renal failure as a result of a two-year-long struggle with cancer. Richard J. Smith is Dean of the Graduate School of Arts & Sciences.

Business
Founded as the School of Commerce and Finance in 1917, the Olin Business School was named after entrepreneur John M. Olin in 1988. The school's academic programs include BSBA, MBA, Professional MBA (PMBA), Executive MBA (EMBA), MS in Finance, MS in Supply Chain Management, MS in Customer Analytics, Master of Accounting, Global Master of Finance Dual Degree program, and Doctorate programs, as well as non-degree executive education . In 2002, an Executive MBA program was established in Shanghai, in cooperation with Fudan University .
Olin has a network of more than 16,000 alumni worldwide. [57] Over the last several years, the school’s endowment has increased to $213 million (2004) and annual gifts average $12 million per year. [58] [ citation needed ] Simon Hall was opened in 1986 after a donation from John E. Simon. On May 2, 2014, the $90 million conjoined Knight and Bauer Halls were dedicated, following a $15 million gift from Charles F. Knight and Joanne Knight and a $10 million gift from George and Carol Bauer through the Bauer Foundation.
Undergraduate BSBA students take 40–60% of their courses within the business school and are able to formally declare majors in eight areas: accounting, entrepreneurship, finance, healthcare management, marketing, managerial economics and strategy, organization and human resources , international business , and operations and supply chain management . Graduate students are able to pursue an MBA either full-time or part-time. Students may also take elective courses from other disciplines at Washington University, including law and many other fields. Mark P. Taylor is the Dean of the Olin Business School.

School of Design & Visual Arts
For the Fall 2011 semester Design & Visual Arts enrolled 106 out of 1,422 applicants (7.5%).
Created in 2005 by merging the existing Colleges of Art and Architecture, the Sam Fox School of Design & Visual Arts combines the strengths of these fields into a single collaborative unit offering both undergraduate and graduate programs. The School comprises:
Architecture offers BS and BA degrees as well as M. Arch and MUD. There is a combined six-year BS and M. Arch degree program as well as joint M. Arch programs with most of the other schools in the University. The Graduate School of Architecture and Urban Design was ranked 5th in the nation by the journal DesignIntelligence in its 2008 edition of "America's Best Architecture & Design Schools."
Art offers the BFA and MFA in Art in the context of a full university environment. Students take courses in the College of Arts & Sciences as well as courses in the College of Art to provide a well rounded background. One third of students in the school pursue a combined study degree program, second major, and/or minors in other undergraduate divisions at Washington University [60] [ citation needed ] . U.S. News & World Report ranked the MFA program 13th in the nation in 2012. [61]
In October 2006 the Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum moved into new facilities designed by Pritzker Prize -winning architect, and former faculty member, Fumihiko Maki . [62]
Carmon Colangelo is the Dean of the Sam Fox School of Design & Visual Arts. Bruce Lindsey is Dean of the College of Architecture and the Graduate School of Architecture & Urban Design. Franklin "Buzz" Spector is the Dean of the College and Graduate School of Art.

School of Engineering & Applied Science
The School of Engineering & Applied Science at Washington University in St. Louis (WashU Engineering) is a top-ranked, dynamic school with 88 tenured and tenure-track professors, 40 additional full-time faculty, 1,300 undergraduate students, 560 master's students, 380 PhD students, and more than 20,000 alumni. Aaron Bobick serves as dean of the school.
With approximately $27 million in annual research awards, the school focuses intellectual efforts on medicine and health, energy and environment, entrepreneurship, and security. The school is ranked among the top 50 by the magazine U.S. News & World Report , and the biomedical engineering graduate program was ranked 12th by U.S. News & World Report in 2012–2013.
Departments include:

School of Law
Washington University School of Law offers joint-degree programs with the Olin Business School, the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, the School of Medicine, and the School of Social Work. It also offers an LLM in Intellectual Property and Technology Law, an LLM in Taxation, an LLM in US Law for Foreign Lawyers, a Master of Juridical Studies (MJS), and a Juris Scientiae Doctoris (JSD). The law school offers 3 semesters of courses in the Spring, Summer, and Fall, and requires at least 85 hours of coursework for the JD.
In the 2015 US News & World Report America's Best Graduate Schools, the law school is ranked 18th nationally, out of over 180 law schools. [63] In particular, its Clinical Education Program is currently ranked 4th in the nation. [64] This year, the median score placed the average student in the 96th percentile of test takers. [65] The law school offers a full-time day program, beginning in August, for the J.D. degree. The law school is located in a state-of-the-art building, Anheuser-Busch Hall (opened in 1997). The building combines traditional architecture, a five-story open-stacks library, an integration of indoor and outdoor spaces, and the latest wireless and other technologies. National Jurist ranked Washington University 4th among the "25 Most Wired Law Schools."
Nancy Staudt is the Dean of the School of Law.

Medicine
The Washington University School of Medicine , founded in 1891, is highly regarded as one of the world's leading centers for medical research and training. [66] The School ranks first in the nation in student selectivity. [67] Among its many recent initiatives, The Genome Center at Washington University (directed by Richard K. Wilson ) played a leading role in the Human Genome Project , having contributed 25% of the finished sequence. [68] The School pioneered bedside teaching and led in the transformation of empirical knowledge into scientific medicine. The medical school partners with St. Louis Children's Hospital and Barnes-Jewish Hospital (part of BJC HealthCare), where all physicians are members of the school's faculty.
The Program in Occupational Therapy is currently tied for 1st in the nation for "Best Occupational Therapy Schools" according to U.S. News & World Report . [66] The Program offers a Master of Science degree as well as the Occupational Therapy Doctorate (OTD) at the professional and post-professional levels. M. Carolyn Baum, PhD, serves as the program director and was the most recent president of the American Occupational Therapy Association (AOTA).
David H. Perlmutter, MD, is the Dean of Washington University School of Medicine .

Social Work and Public Health
With roots dating back to 1909 in the university's School of Social Economy, the George Warren Brown School of Social Work (commonly called GWB, the Brown School, or Brown) was founded in 1925. Brown's academic degree offerings include a Master of Social Work (MSW), a Master of Public Health (MPH), a PhD in Social Work, and a PhD in Public Health Sciences. It is currently ranked first among Master of Social Work programs in the United States. [69] The school was endowed by Bettie Bofinger Brown and named for her husband, George Warren Brown, a St. Louis philanthropist and co-founder of the Brown Shoe Company . The school was the first in the country to have a building for the purpose of social work education, and it is also a founding member of the Association of Schools and Programs of Public Health. The school is housed within Brown and Goldfarb Halls, but a third building expansion is currently in progress and slated to be completed in summer 2015. The new building, adjacent to Brown and Goldfarb Halls, targets LEED Gold certification and will add approximately 105,000 square feet, more than doubling the school's teaching, research, and program space.
The school has many nationally and internationally acclaimed scholars in social security , health care, health disparities, communication, social and health policy, and individual and family development. Many of the faculty have training in both social work and public health. The school's current dean is Edward F. Lawlor. In addition to affiliation with the university-wide Institute of Public Health, Brown houses 12 research centers. The Brown School Library collects materials on many topics, with specific emphasis on: children, youth, and families; gerontology; health; mental health; social and economic development; family therapy; and management. The library maintains subscriptions to over 450 academic journals.

Former dental school
Founded as the Missouri Dental College in 1866, the Washington University School of Dental Medicine was the first dental school west of the Mississippi River and the sixth dental school in the U.S. The school closed in 1991.

Museums and library system
With 14 libraries, the Washington University library system is the largest in the state of Missouri, containing over 4.2 million volumes. [70] The main library, Olin Library, is centrally located on the Danforth Campus. Other libraries in the system include:
The Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum , established in 1881, is one of the oldest teaching museums in the country. The collection includes works from 19th, 20th, and 21st century American and European artists, including George Caleb Bingham , Thomas Cole , Pablo Picasso , Max Ernst , Alexander Calder , Jackson Pollock , Rembrandt , Robert Rauschenberg , Barbara Kruger , and Christian Boltanski . Also in the complex is the 3,000 sq ft (300 m 2 ) Newman Money Museum exhibiting the collection of American numismatist Eric P. Newman . In October 2006, the Kemper Art Museum moved from its previous location, Steinberg Hall, into a new facility designed by former faculty member Fumihiko Maki . Interestingly, the new Kemper Art Museum is located directly across from Steinberg Hall, which was Maki's very first commission in 1959.

Research, research centers, and institutes
Virtually all faculty members at Washington University engage in academic research, [71] [ citation needed ] offering opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students across the university's seven schools. Known for its interdisciplinarity and departmental collaboration, many of Washington University's research centers and institutes are collaborative efforts between many areas on campus. [72] [ citation needed ] More than 60% of undergraduates are involved in faculty research across all areas; [73] it is an institutional priority for undergraduates to be allowed to participate in advanced research. According to the Center for Measuring University Performance, it is considered to be one of the top 10 private research universities in the nation. [74] A dedicated Office of Undergraduate Research is located on the Danforth Campus and serves as a resource to post research opportunities, advise students in finding appropriate positions matching their interests, publish undergraduate research journals, and award research grants to make it financially possible to perform research. [75]
During fiscal year 2007, $537.5 million was received in total research support, including $444 million in federal obligations. The University has over 150 National Institutes of Health funded inventions, with many of them licensed to private companies. Governmental agencies and non-profit foundations such as the NIH, United States Department of Defense , National Science Foundation , and NASA provide the majority of research grant funding, with Washington University being one of the top recipients in NIH grants from year-to-year. Nearly 80% of NIH grants to institutions in the state of Missouri went to Washington University alone in 2007. [76] Washington University and its Medical School play a large part in the Human Genome Project , where it contributes approximately 25% of the finished sequence. [77] The Genome Sequencing Center has decoded the genome of many animals, plants, and cellular organisms, including the platypus, chimpanzee, cat, and corn. [78]
NASA hosts its Planetary Data System Geosciences Node on the campus of Washington University. Professors, students, and researchers have been very involved with many unmanned missions to Mars. Professor Raymond Arvidson has been deputy principal investigator of the Mars Exploration Rover mission and co-investigator of the Phoenix Rover robotic arm. [79]
Washington University professor Joseph Lowenstein, with the assistance of several undergraduate students, has been involved in editing, annotating, making a digital archive of the first publication of poet Edmund Spenser 's collective works in 100 years. A large grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities has been given to support this ambitious project centralized at Washington University with support from other colleges in the United States. [80]

Campus life

Student organizations
Washington University has over 300 undergraduate student organizations on campus. [81] Most are funded by the Washington University Student Union , which has a $2 million plus annual budget that is completely student-controlled and is one of the largest student government budgets in the country. Known as SU for short, the Student Union sponsors large-scale campus programs including WILD (a semesterly concert in the quad) and free copies of the New York Times , USA Today , and the St. Louis Post-Dispatch through The Collegiate Readership Program; it also contributes to the Assembly Series, a weekly lecture series produced by the University, and funds the campus television station, WUTV, and the radio station, KWUR . KWUR was named best radio station in St. Louis of 2003 by the Riverfront Times despite the fact that its signal reaches only a few blocks beyond the boundaries of the campus. [82] There are 11 fraternities and 9 sororities, with approximately 35% of the student body being involved in Greek life. The Congress of the South 40 (CS40) is a Residential Life and Events Programming Board, which operates outside of the SU sphere. CS40's funding comes from the Housing Activities Fee of each student living on the South 40.
Many of these organizations and other campus life amenities are housed in the $43 million Danforth University Center on the Danforth Campus , also dedicated in honor of the Danforth family. [83] The building opened on August 11, 2008 and earned LEED Gold certification for its environmentally friendly design. [84]
Washington University has a large number of student-run musical groups on campus, including 12 official a cappella groups. The Pikers, an all-male group, is the oldest such group on campus. The Greenleafs, an all-female group is the oldest (and only) female group on campus. The Mosaic Whispers , founded in 1991, is the oldest co-ed group on campus. They have produced 9 albums and have appeared on a number of compilation albums, including Ben Folds' Ben Folds Presents: University A Cappella! The Amateurs, [85] who also appeared on this album, is another co-ed a cappella group on campus, founded in 1991. They have recorded seven albums and toured extensively. After Dark [86] is a co-ed a cappella group founded in 2001. It has released three albums and has won several Contemporary A Capella Recording (CARA) awards. In 2008 the group performed on MSNBC during coverage of the vice presidential debate with specially written songs about Joe Biden and Sarah Palin . [87] The Ghost Lights, founded in 2010, is the campus's newest and only Broadway, Movies, and Television soundtrack group. They have performed multiple philanthropic concerts in the greater St. Louis area and were honored in November 2010 with the opportunity to perform for Nobel Laureate Douglass North at his birthday celebration.
The campus newspaper is Student Life . The paper is published twice a week under the auspices of Washington University Student Media, Inc., an independent not-for-profit organization incorporated in 1999. The paper was first founded in 1878, making it one of the oldest student newspapers in the country.
The campus political/entertainment talk radio podcast is WURD, which streams for free on iTunes. Its listenership spans multiple continents and its host website has been visited by thousands of listeners.

Greek life
Washington University has twelve fraternities and nine sororities on campus. Approximately 45% of women and 30% of men participate in Greek life, totaling 35% of the student body.

Residences
Washington University is number one on the Princeton Review’s “Best College Dorms” list for 2013. [88]
Over 50% of undergraduate students live on campus. [89] Most of the residence halls on campus are located on the South 40 , named because of its adjacent location on the south side of the Danforth Campus and its size of 40 acres (160,000 m 2 ). It is the location of all the freshman buildings as well as several upperclassman buildings, which are set up in the traditional residential college system. All of the residential halls are co-ed. The South 40 is organized as a pedestrian-friendly environment wherein residences surround a central recreational lawn known as the Swamp. Bear's Den (the largest dining hall on campus), the Habif Health and Wellness Center (Student Health Services), the Residential Life Office, University Police Headquarters, various student-owned businesses (e.g. the laundry service, Wash U Wash), and the baseball, softball, and intramural fields are also located on the South 40.
Another group of residences, known as the Village, is located in the northwest corner of Danforth Campus . Only open to upperclassmen and January Scholars, the North Side consists of Millbrook Apartments, The Village, Village East on-campus apartments, and all fraternity houses except the Zeta Beta Tau house, which is off campus and located just northwest of the South 40. Sororities at Washington University do not have houses by their own accord. The Village is a group of residences where students who have similar interests or academic goals apply as small groups of 4 to 24, known as BLOCs, to live together in clustered suites along with non-BLOCs. Like the South 40, the residences around the Village also surround a recreational lawn.
In addition to South 40 and North Side residence halls, Washington University owns several apartment buildings within walking distance to Danforth Campus, which are open to upperclassmen.

Student media
Washington University supports four major student-run media outlets. The university's student newspaper , Student Life , is available for students. KWUR (90.3 FM) serves as the students' official radio station; the station also attracts an audience in the immediately surrounding community due to its eclectic and free-form musical programming. WUTV is the university's closed-circuit television channel . The university's main student-run political publication is the Washington University Political Review (nicknamed "WUPR"), a self-described "multipartisan" monthly magazine. Washington University undergraduates publish two literary and art journals, The Eliot Review and Spires Intercollegiate Arts and Literary Magazine. A variety of other publications also serve the university community, ranging from in-house academic journals to glossy alumni magazines to WUnderground , the student-run satirical newspaper. [90]

Athletics
Washington University's sports teams are called the Bears. They are members of the National Collegiate Athletic Association and participate in the University Athletic Association at the Division III level. The Bears have won 19 NCAA Division III Championships— one in women's cross country (2011), one in men's tennis (2008), two in men's basketball (2008, 2009), five in women's basketball (1998–2001, 2010), [91] and ten in women's volleyball (1989, 1991–1996, 2003, 2007, 2009) [92] – and 144 UAA titles in 15 different sports. [93] The Athletic Department was headed by John Schael for 34 years, who served as director of athletics in the period 1978-2014. The 2000 Division III Central Region winner of the National Association of Collegiate Directors of Athletics/Continental Airlines Athletics Director of the Year award, [94] Schael helped orchestrate the Bears athletics transformation into one of the top departments in Division III. [94] Schael was succeeded by Josh Whitman, 2014-2016. The department is now led by interim director Justin Carroll.
Washington University also has an extensive club sports program, with teams ranging from men's volleyball [95] to women's Ultimate Frisbee. The Washington University men's club water polo team has been particularly successful, capturing the Collegiate Water Polo Association Division III Club National Championship title in 2011, 2014, 2015, and 2016. [96] [97] Funding for club sports comes from the Student Union budget, as each club is deemed a campus group.
Washington University is home of Francis Field , site of the 1904 Summer Olympics . Francis Field is also home of the Washington University football, soccer, and track and field teams.

Traditions

Notable people
WebPage index: 00061
Reporting of child pornography images on Wikimedia Commons
On April 7, 2010, Larry Sanger , co-founder of Wikipedia , sent a letter to the FBI stating that Wikimedia Commons was hosting child pornography under Title 18 of the United States Code . His accusations focused on images in the Lolicon and pedophilia categories, the latter of which contained explicit drawings of sexual acts between adults and children by French artist Martin van Maele (1863–1926). [1]
Shortly after Sanger posted the letter in public, criticism came in from multiple sources. This ranged from assertions that he had mislabeled lolicon as child pornography to the contention that his actions were an attack on the Wikimedia Foundation , caused by his history with Wikipedia and his own competing online encyclopedia , Citizendium . Sanger denied that the letter was an attempt to undermine Wikipedia, but did confirm it was an attempt to force a policy change for labeling or eliminating "adult" content on Wikipedia .
Things escalated when Fox News began reporting on the issue. In response Jimmy Wales , co-founder of Wikipedia, and other administrators began deleting images en masse , with Fox News reporting that a new policy change was underway. Days later Wales voluntarily relinquished his administrative powers on Commons under heavy criticism from the Wikimedia community. Fox News also received criticism for its handling of the reporting, especially for misrepresenting the situation regarding the self removal of administrative powers by Wales as leaving the Foundation without clear leadership.

Reporting
On April 7, 2010, Larry Sanger sent a letter to the FBI , United States Senators , and Representatives [2] [3] saying that Wikimedia Commons hosted child pornography in the lolicon and pedophilia categories. [2] He later acknowledged that the term "child pornography" may have been misleading because to many people it denotes images of real children and said that with the benefit of hindsight, he would have used the phrase "depictions of child sexual abuse" instead. [4] According to section 1466A(2)(A) of Title 18 of the United States Code , "obscene visual representations of the sexual abuse of children" can be "a visual depiction of any kind, including a drawing, cartoon, sculpture, or painting", and anyone who "knowingly produces, distributes, receives, or possesses with intent to distribute, a visual depiction" of this kind is subject to legal penalties. [4] [5] Section 1466 specifically states, "It is not a required element of any offense under this section that the minor depicted actually exist." [3] [5]
Media in the Wikimedia Commons pedophilia category include graphic drawings of child sexual abuse by French illustrator Martin van Maele . [1] Sanger's opinion was that the content violated section 1466A(2)(A), although the Wikimedia Foundation might argue that the media were exempted per section 1466A(2)(B), which refers to image that have "serious literal, artistic, political, or scientific value". Sanger referred to an online discussion between educational technologists reporting that filtering software was not picking up the images, making them accessible to children in schools, and stated that this discussion was what first made him aware of the issue. [2] Sanger said that he felt both morally and legally obligated to report the presence of these media, because the statutes implied that once aware of such content, one had to do so or risk prosecution oneself. [6]

Wikimedia's responses
Mike Godwin , general counsel for the Wikimedia Foundation, dismissed Sanger's claims. [3] Godwin said that Sanger committed a typical layman's error in trying to invoke statutory law without adequate research, confusing several sections of Title 18. [3] Section 1466A, the section invoked by Sanger, does not deal with child pornography, but with obscenity , while child pornography is addressed in section 2252. [3] Godwin further defended the Foundation by citing Miller v. California which, according to The Register , emphasizes "the importance of community standards in defining what qualifies as obscenity". [3] He also pointed out that the Foundation's projects are created by web users, and cited section 230 of the Communications Decency Act – something he notes U.S. Federal obscenity and child-pornography statutes make a similar exception for. [3]
Wikipedian spokesman Jay Walsh said that the Foundation does not harbor illegal material and any such material uploaded by volunteers would be removed. [7]

Sanger's response
Sanger, a self ascribed libertarian and moralist , stood by his actions and said, "pretending that it's just obvious, even for libertarians, that we have a right to publish such depictions is simply wrong, in my opinion". [4] He told The Register , "If I [did]n't report this – and it's been up for years, apparently – who will? As the co-founder of the project, I believe I have a special personal obligation to rein in egregious wrongdoing when I see it. Or at least try. It bothers me that something I helped start has come to this." [3]
After the report, several allegations were made against Sanger and picked up by sites such as Slashdot : that this was an attempt to destroy the Wikimedia Foundation; that there was a conflict of interest in his reporting; and that he listed his own websites in the letter, among others. [4] [8] [9] In response to his actions being seen as an attempt by him to destroy the Wikimedia Foundation Sanger commented that this was not true, although he hoped that by making things public the Foundation could be forcibly persuaded to eliminate or label content as "adult", so that filtering software would pick it up and more schools would allow Wikipedia . [10] On the allegations that the reporting was a conflict of interest Sanger comments that, while he once worked for Wikipedia and was currently running a site in competing against it, the reporting probably did more harm to his personal career. [4] He also contends that he was required by law to make the report, [10] although the manner in which he chose to do so was not. [11]
Sanger also responded to one specific comment on Slashdot,
In his response Sanger said he found the response chilling and disparaged the community for rating the comment as "Score: 5, Interesting". Sanger goes on to criticize the industry by stating,

Image purge
On May 7, 2010, after Fox News had begun informing and putting pressure on dozens of companies that donate to the Wikimedia Foundation, they reported that the Wikimedia Foundation had begun purging its websites of thousands of pornographic images after co-founder of the Wikimedia Foundation Jimmy Wales had been contacted by several of those donors. [12] [13] [14] Fox News also reported that, according to Wales, this was in preparation for a new policy regarding sexually explicit content. [13] However, Wales later denied the shake-up and that the reporter had ever contacted him. [15]
The purge led to infighting throughout the entire Wikimedia community. [14] Contributors complained that the deletions were "undemocratic and taken too quickly" and could result in images with legitimate educational value being accidentally deleted. [12] Fox News claimed that the situation quickly "devolved into an all-out war pitting board members against board members, and with top leadership sparring with lower level administrators." [14] However, the Wikimedia Foundation responded that, while discussions had become intense, it was a normal part of the process. [16]
On May 9, 2010, Jimmy Wales gave up some site privileges in response to protests by contributors who were angered over his deletion of images without consultation. He can no longer delete files, remove administrators, assign projects or edit protected content; however, he is still able to edit as a regular user. [12] [14] [17] Wales had previously asked that such images be removed. Some of the images he and other administrators deleted were restored as they were deemed to have educational value. [12] His stepping down was picked up by various media when Fox News quoted a source as saying that Wales' voluntary redaction of his administrative powers created "chaos" with no one clearly in charge. [14] [15] [16] [18] [19] The Foundation later denied those claims and posted a response on their blog about co-founder Wales' role in the Wikimedia Foundation. They clarified Wales' position as Chairman Emeritus of the Board of Trustees, noting that there were other executives with higher authority. [16]

Sanger's relations with Wikimedia
Sanger is one of the co-founders of the Wikipedia , but resigned on March 1, 2002. [20] In September 2006 he founded Citizendium , [21] a competitor to Wikipedia . [11] While Sanger has gone on the record that this was not an attack on Wikipedia, nor a way to boost readership of his own free web-based collaborative encyclopedia , there is a significant level of skepticism that Sanger acted without malice. [8] [9] [11] Sanger has had an antagonistic history against Wikipedia since leaving, [22] [23] including criticism of Wikipedia co-founder Wales, and of the Wikipedia community: "The [...] community had essentially been taken over by trolls to a great extent. That was a real problem, and Jimmy Wales absolutely refused to do anything about it." [24]

Criticism of Fox News coverage
Fox News was criticized for its handling of their reporting. In The Guardian , Godwin criticized the network, stating that Fox's releases were "part of its 'self-congratulatory anti-porn-on-the-Internet campaign'." [18] Techdirt also criticized them for their lack of transparency, stating, "While Fox [News] of course plays up Sanger's Wikipedia credentials, they leave out the fact that he has been working on a failed competitor for years (they mention the company name, but not that it's a competitor). They also leave out much of the animosity between Sanger and Wikipedia." [11] Fox News also improperly reported that Wales had a higher position in the Wikimedia Foundation and that his leaving caused a power vacuum. [15] [17] Wales said that the Fox News reporter, Jana Winter, who wrote the article on the alleged stepping down had never contacted him before publishing the article. [15] [18]

See also
WebPage index: 00062
Nudity
Nudity , or nakedness , is the state of wearing no clothing . [1] The wearing of clothing is a predominantly human characteristic arising from functional needs such as protection from the elements and from cold temperatures, after the loss of body hair, and migration to colder regions. [2] The amount of clothing worn depends on functional considerations, such as a need for warmth, as well as social circumstances. In some situations, a minimum amount of clothing or none at all may be considered socially acceptable, while in others much more clothing may be expected. Social considerations involve issues of modesty , decency and social norms , besides other considerations, and these may depend on the context. There may also be legal considerations .

Terminology
Full nudity refers to complete nudity, while partial nudity refers to less than full nudity, with parts of the body covered in some manner. The term partial nudity is sometimes used to refer to exposure of skin beyond what the person using the expression considers to be within the limits of modesty . If the exposure is within the standards of modesty of a given culture and setting (e.g. wearing a bikini at a non-nude beach), terms such as nudity, partial or otherwise, are not normally used. If however, the degree of exposure exceeds the cultural norms of the setting, or if the activity or setting includes nudity as an understood part of its function, such as a nude beach , terminology relating to nudity and degrees thereof are typically used. Toplessness is regarded by most people as partial nudity.
Full frontal nudity describes a state of full nudity with the subject facing forward with the whole front of the body exposed, including intimate parts such as a man's penis or woman's vulva . Partial frontal nudity typically only refers to the exposure of the breasts . Non-frontal nudity describes nudity where the whole back side of the body, including the buttocks , is exposed, or a side-view from any other direction.

History
Hair probably evolved in mammals before about 220 million years ago. The closest genetic relatives of humans, apes and especially chimpanzees , possess an almost complete covering of fur.
Humans are today the only naked primate in nature, that is, most of the body is not naturally covered by fur. Reliable information on the development of nudity and the passage of time are not yet possible because hair does not fossilize.
Researchers at the University of Utah in 2004 found that human skin contains photoreceptors like those in the retina, allowing it to mount an immediate defence against damaging ultraviolet radiations. They suspect that the protein that protects the skin from sunlight evolved following the loss of protective hair, which happened about 1.2 million years ago. [3]

Public nudity
People have a variety of views on nudity, both of their own as well as those of others. This would depend on their level of inhibition , cultural background and upbringing, as well as on context. A society's attitude to public nudity varies depending on the culture, time, location and context of an activity. There are many exceptions and particular circumstances in which nudity is tolerated, accepted or even encouraged in public spaces . Such examples would include a nude beach , within some intentional communities (such as naturist resorts or clubs) and at special events.
In general and across cultures, public indications of sexual arousal are commonly regarded as embarrassing , both to the person aroused and the onlooker, and for this reason those parts of the human body that would indicate arousal are normally covered. Arousal is most evidently indicated by the sex organs and women's breasts , which are routinely covered, even when other parts of the body may be freely uncovered. Yet the nudity taboo may have meanings deeper than the immediate possibility of sexual arousal, for example, in the cumulative weight of tradition and habit . Clothing also expresses and symbolizes authority, and more general norms and values besides those of a sexual nature.
While some European countries, such as Germany , are rather tolerant of public nudity, [4] in many countries public nudity may meet social disapproval or even constitute a misdemeanor of indecent exposure . In 2012, the city council of San Francisco proposed a ban on public nudity in the inner city area. This was met by harsh resistance since the city is usually known for its liberal culture. [5] [6] Similarly, park rangers began filing tickets against nudists at San Onofre State Beach in 2010, also a place with long tradition of public nudity. [7]

Public social nude events
Some people take part in non-sexual public nude events. These may be in a naturist resort or club or at a nude beach . Outdoor nude recreation can take place in private or rural areas, though generally limited to warm weather.
Others practice casual public nudity. Topfree sunbathing is considered acceptable by many on the beaches of Finland , France, Spain, Italy and most of the rest of Europe (and even in some outdoor swimming pools); however, exposure of the genitals is restricted to nudist areas in most regions. In the United States, topfree sunbathing and wearing thongs are not common in many areas, but are limited to nude beaches in various locations. It is normally acceptable for men in the U.S. to be barechested or shirtless when engaged in outdoor recreational activities.
Where the social acceptability of nudity in certain places may be well understood, the legal position is often less clear cut. In England, for example, the law does not actually prohibit simple public nudity, but does forbid indecent exposure [ citation needed ] . In practice, this means that successful prosecution hangs on whether there is a demonstrable intention to shock others, rather than simply a desire to be nude in a public place. Specifically, using nudity to "harass, alarm or distress" others is an offence against the Public Order Act of 1986. Occasional attempts to prove this point by walking naked around the country therefore often result in periods of arrest, followed by release without charge, and inconsistencies in the approach between different police jurisdictions. Differences in the law between England and Scotland appear to make the position harder for naked ramblers once they reach Scotland.
Photography of installations of massed nude people in public places, as made repeatedly around the world by Spencer Tunick , claim artistic merit.

Means of attracting attention
Nudity is at times used to draw attention to a cause, with the participants desiring to remain anonymous. Public nude events are at times staged as a forum for usually unrelated messages, such as clothing-optional bike rides . At times, the cause is merely a personal justification for taking part in a nude event, which are popular in their own right. Many nude calendars are produced each year featuring naked men or women. Some of these are produced to raise money for charities or other causes. Nudity, like sexuality, is also used to draw attention for a commercial purpose, such as for promotion or advertising .

Private nudity

Personal nudity
In the privacy of their own homes, people are more casual in relation to clothing, though what each considers appropriate varies considerably. What and how much clothing a person removes depends on a number of considerations, including the cultural background and on whether the person is alone in the privacy of their own homes. A person's cultural background as well as their religious teachings will affect the way they view their own nudity, alone or in the presence of others, as well as viewing the nudity of others. Some cultures deprecate nudity even in a private context.
Another factor is the level of privacy to which a person can be assured - for example, some parts of a home may be seen from the outside or there may be a possibility of others walking in. The expectation of privacy may be confined to the home and sometimes the backyard. Inside the home, it may be restricted to the bedroom or just the bathroom. If a person is not alone, their comfort in removing clothing in front of another person will generally depend on the nature of a relationship of those who jointly occupy the same private space, as well as the attitudes of others to nudity. Besides the nature of a relationship, attitudes and incidences of nudity will also depend on the level of inhibition that each person has, as well as the level of privacy to which that they can be assured. Sometimes a person may unintentionally intrude on a person who is in the nude, which may lead to embarrassment of one or both of the people. The nude person may seek to quickly cover their private parts, while the clothed person may turn away, but this also depends on cultural differences and the relationship of the people.
In the case of nudity in front of those who do not normally occupy the same private space, that will usually depend on whether the outsider is comfortable with the nudity and whether the nudity is reciprocated, as in the case of social nudism . Social nudism may take place in any private social context, such as at one's home with friends or with acquaintances at a nudist facility or event, such as a naturist club, community center, resort or other facility. Some social gatherings may organise party games , which may involve some level of nudity, such as strip games . Strip games can be played by single-sex groups or by mixed groups and may be intended to generate an atmosphere of fun and lighten the social atmosphere, or to heighten the sexual atmosphere .
A 1999 survey by the Federation of Canadian Naturists found, besides other things, that 39% of Canadians "have walked or would walk around their house nude"; that naturists tend to have above average incomes; that urban dwellers are more likely to be naturists than country dwellers; and that people under the age of 25 are the most likely to be naturists. [8] According to a 2004 United States survey, 31% of men and 14% of women report sleeping in the nude, [9] while a 1996 BBC survey revealed that in the UK 47% of men and 17% of women do. [10]

Sexual nudity
Nudity in front of a sexual partner is widely accepted, but not in all cases. For example, some partners insist on nudity only at the time and place of sex , or with subdued lighting; during bathing with the partner or afterward; covered by a sheet or blanket, or while sleeping.

Personal privacy issues
The invention of photography and more recently the video camera has opened the art of capturing images of people and scenes at a relatively low cost to the true amateur. A person can now capture images in both public and private situations. A feature of most private photographs and videos is that they are not intended for viewing outside of a very limited range of people, and seldom if ever by the general public. Amateur photography , which includes nude photography, which has previously been produced for personal enjoyment, is increasingly being more widely disseminated through the internet, at times without the knowledge and consent of the subject of the photograph, and to their subsequent embarrassment. Also, the use of secret photography to capture images of an unsuspecting person (undressed or not, and whether for personal use, or intended for posting on the Internet) creates additional personal privacy issues.

Children
There are differences of opinion as to whether, and if so to what extent, parents should appear naked in front of their children. Gordon and Schroeder report that parental nudity varies considerably from family to family. [11] They say that "there is nothing inherently wrong with bathing with children or otherwise appearing naked in front of them", noting that doing so may provide an opportunity for parents to provide important information. They note that by ages five to six, children begin to develop a sense of modesty, and recommend to parents who wish to be sensitive to their children's wishes that they limit such activities from that age onwards. Bonner recommends against nudity in the home if children exhibit sexual play of a type that is considered problematic. [12]
A U.S. study by Alfred Kinsey found that 75% of the participants stated that there was never nudity in the home when they were growing up, 5% of the participants said that there was "seldom" nudity in the home, 3% said "often", and 17% said that it was "usual". The study found that there was no significant difference between what was reported by men and by women with respect to frequency of nudity in the home. [13]
In a 1995 review of the literature, Paul Okami concluded that there was no reliable evidence linking exposure to parental nudity to any negative effect. [14] Three years later, his team finished an 18-year longitudinal study that showed that, if anything, such exposure was associated with slight beneficial effects, particularly for boys. [15]

Children seeing nudity
Attitudes toward children seeing nude people vary substantially, depending on the child's culture, age and the context of the nudity (see also the section Home above).
Television and radio regulations in many countries require broadcasters to avoid transmitting images or language considered inappropriate for children from 5:30 am to 9 pm (the so-called " watershed "). In the United Kingdom, the Broadcasting Code states, "Nudity before the watershed must be justified by the context." [16] In the U.S., the safe harbor rule forbids depictions of nudity between the hours of 6 am and 10 pm. Violators may be subject to civil legal action and sanctions if the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) determines the broadcaster did not meet its standards of "decency". "Material is indecent if, in context, it depicts or describes sexual or excretory organs or activities in terms patently offensive as measured by contemporary community standards for the broadcast medium." [17]
Attitudes to nudity vary substantially throughout Europe. Male and female nudity in Scandinavia is not uncommon. The region has a very open attitude about nudity, although it strictly prohibits children's access to pornography. [18]

Communal showering
Another issue has been the nudity of children in front of other children.
In continental Europe , students tend to shower communally after physical education classes, separated by gender. Fathers taking their young daughters or mothers taking their young sons into the gender-separated changing rooms is mostly viewed as non-controversial, although some public baths have introduced family changing rooms. Some private gymnasiums have instituted rules specifically banning family members of opposite genders taking their children into single-sex locker rooms. [ citation needed ]
In the U.S. and some of the English-speaking majority of Canada, students at public schools have historically been required to shower communally with classmates of the same sex after physical education classes. In the U.S., public objections and the threat of lawsuits have resulted in a number of school districts in recent years changing policy to make showers optional. Private boarding schools and military academies in the U.S. often have communal showers, since the focus there is on 24-hours-a-day education and rooming, rather than just acting as day schools. Students in these establishments need places to clean themselves daily. [19] A court case in Colorado noted that students have a reduced expectation of personal privacy in regards to "communal undress" while showering after physical education classes. [20] According to an interview with a middle school principal , most objections to showering at school that he had heard were actually from the students' parents rather than from the students. [21]

Children and naturism
Children who are within a naturist home will usually also be naked, together with their family, and may see and be seen by non-family members in the nude. They may also be taken to naturist venues and events where they, their families and others would also generally be nude.

Depictions of nudity

Nudity in film
Nudity in film has since the development of the medium been controversial, and most nude scenes in films have had to be justified as being part of the story, in the concept of "artistically justifiable nudity". In some cases nudity is itself the object of a film or is used in the development of the character of the subject. There are cases where nudity has been used to emphasize gender equality in the future. [22] [23] [24] In some cases, nudity has been criticized as "superfluous" or "gratuitous" to the plot, and some film producers have been accused of including nudity in a film to appeal to certain audiences. Many actors and actresses have appeared nude, or exposing parts of their bodies or dressed in ways considered provocative by contemporary standards at some point in their careers.
Erotic films usually contain nudity, and nudity in a sexual context is common in pornographic films . A film on naturism or about people for whom nudity is common may contain non-sexual nudity, and some other non-pornographic films may contain very brief nude scenes. The vast majority of nudity in film is found in pornographic films.

Visual media
Mainstream art generally reflects – with some exceptions – social standards of aesthetics and morality of a society at various periods of time. Beyond mainstream standards, artistic expression may be merely tolerated, or be considered as fringe. Since prehistoric time, humans, both male and female, have been depicted in all states of dress, including all states of undress. Nudity in all styles has been and continues to be found in art. Nudity is also a subject of many literary works and in film. All professionally produced works of art use stylised compositions to depict the nude body. This also applies to cinema, where even nude scenes are staged and rehearsed.
The erotic aspect of nudity in the arts has been an important factor in its attraction, and has come to be associated with certain states and emotions, such as innocence, playfulness, vulnerability, etc. Pornography does not necessarily involve a naked person, but it involves sexualized scenes, and usually it does not claim to have any artistic merit.
The visual arts were at times the only means available to the general public to view a nude body. Today, the opportunities available for the viewing of the nude body are very wide, and these include magazines, television, films, and the Internet.

Child nudity
Depictions of child nudity or children with nude adults appear in works of art in various cultures and historical periods. These attitudes have changed over time and have become increasingly frowned upon particularly in recent years, [25] especially in the case of photography. In recent years, there have been a few incidents in which snapshots taken by parents of their infant or toddler children bathing or otherwise naked were challenged as child pornography . [26]
In May 2008, police in Sydney, Australia, raided an exhibition by the photographer Bill Henson featuring images of naked children on allegations of child pornography. [27] [28] Comparable artworks by Henson had been exhibited without incident since 1975, perhaps indicating that this sensitivity has heightened in recent years.
In June 2008, it was reported in The Age that police would have no basis to prosecute Henson over his photographs of naked teenagers, after they were declared "mild and justified" and given a PG rating [29] by the Australian Classification Board , suggesting viewing by children under the age of 16 is suitable with parental guidance. [30] Out of protest, the Art Monthly Australia magazine published an image of the 6-year-old Olympia Nelson taken by her mother, Polixeni Papapetrou . According to the then-11-year-old Olympia, she did not believe the photograph amounted to abuse and was upset with Prime Minister Kevin Rudd 's remark that he hated it. Olympia's father, art critic Professor Robert Nelson , defended it, saying: "It has nothing to do with pedophilia . The connection between artistic pictures and pedophilia cannot be made and there is no evidence for it." [31] [32]

Uses of nudity

Full body scanner
A full-body scanner is a device that creates an image of a person's nude body through their clothing to look for hidden objects without physically removing their clothes or making physical contact. They are increasingly being deployed at airports and train stations in many countries.
One technology used under the name "full-body scanner" is the millimeter wave scanner , the active form of which reflects extremely high frequency radio waves off the body to make an image on which one can see some types of objects hidden under the clothes. Passive millimeter wave screening devices rely on only the raw energy that is naturally emitted from the human body or objects concealed on the body; passive devices do not transmit millimeter waves. [33] [34] Another technology in use is the backscatter X-ray .

Imposed nudity
In some situations, nudity is imposed on a person. For example, imposed nudity (full or partial) can be part of a corporal punishment or as humiliation , especially when administered in public. In fact, torture manuals have distinguished between the male and female psychological aversion to self-exposure versus being disrobed.
Nazis used forced nudity to attempt to humiliate inmates in concentration camps . This was depicted in the film Schindler's List . [35]
In 2003, Abu Ghraib prison in Baghdad ( Iraq ) gained international notoriety for accounts of torture and abuses by members of the United States Army Reserve during the post-invasion period . Photographic images were circulated that exposed the posing of prisoners naked, sometimes bound, and being intimidated and otherwise humiliated, resulting in widespread condemnation of the abuse.

Western culture

Functional nudity
Functional nudity for a short time, such as when changing clothes on a beach, is sometimes acceptable, while staying nude on the beach generally is not nor is it legal in some jurisdictions. On designated nude beaches , it is acceptable and legal to be nude.
Breastfeeding in public is forbidden in some jurisdictions , not legislated for in others, and a legal right in public and the workplace in yet others. Where it is a legal right, some mothers may be reluctant to breastfeed , [36] [37] and some people may object to the practice. [38]

Toplessness and "topfreedom"
In some cultures, toplessness is regarded as partial nudity, and the exposure of breasts or nipples may be regarded as indecent exposure. However, in many western societies and in appropriate settings, such as while suntanning, toplessness is not, of itself, normally regarded as indecent. [ citation needed ] In the United States, however, exposure of female nipples is a criminal offense in many states and not usually allowed in public (see indecent exposure ), while in the United Kingdom, nudity may not be used to "harass, alarm or distress" according to the Public Order Act of 1986. [39] Different standards apply to art, with one example being the dome of the US Capitol featuring a fresco depicting goddesses with their breasts exposed.
Prosecution of cases has given rise to a movement advocating " topfreedom ", promoting equal rights for women to have no clothing above the waist, on the same basis that would apply to men in the same circumstances. The term topfree rather than topless is advocated to avoid the latter term's perceived sexual connotations.

Naturism
Naturism (or nudism) is a cultural and political movement practising, advocating and defending private and public nudity . It is also a lifestyle based on personal, family and/or social preference. [40] [41]
Naturists reject contemporary standards of modesty , which discourage personal, family and social nudity. They instead seek to create a social environment where individuals feel comfortable in the company of nude people, and being seen nude, either just by other naturists, or also by the general public. [40] [41]

Water activities
The trend in some European countries (for instance Germany, Finland and the Netherlands ) is to allow both genders to bathe together naked. Many German spas allow mixed nude bathing. For example, the Friedrichsbad in Baden-Baden has designated times when mixed nude bathing is permitted. Most German (not to mention French, Spanish and Greek) beaches and swimming pools offer FKK (clothing-optional) areas. In general, continental Europeans have a more relaxed attitude about nudity than is seen in the British-influenced world. Some have attributed this difference to the influence of Queen Victoria 's husband Albert , who was raised in a very restricting religious sect (see Victorian morality ).
The sauna , originating from Finland , is attended nude in its source country [42] as well as in most Scandinavian and in the German-speaking countries of Europe. [43] This is true even when a swimsuit must be worn in the swimming pool area of the same complex. [42] Saunas are very common in modern Finland , where there is one sauna for every three people [44] and became very popular in the remainder of Europe in recent decades. German soldiers had got to know the Finnish saunas during their fight against the Soviet Union in the Continuation War , where Germany and Finland fought on the same side. Finnish hygiene depended so exclusively on saunas, that they had built saunas not only in mobile tents but even in bunkers. [43] . After the war, the German soldiers brought the habit back to Germany and Austria, where it became popular in the second half of the 20th century. [43] The German sauna culture also became popular in neighbouring contries such as Switzerland, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxemburg. [45] In contrast to Scandinavia, public sauna facilities in these countries commonly do not seggregate genders while still keeping the rule of general nudity. [46] [45]
In Russia , public banyas are also attended nude, however, they are always segregated by gender, either by having separate sections, or by days of the week. Shared areas (such as swimming pools), if present, can only be attended in bathing suits.

Non-Western attitudes
Attitudes in Western cultures are not all the same as explained above, and likewise attitudes in non-Western cultures are many and variant. In almost all cultures, acceptability of nudity depends on the situation.
Cultural and/or religious traditions usually dictate what is proper and what is not socially acceptable. Many non-Western cultures allow women to breastfeed in public, while some have very strict laws about showing any bare skin.

Africa

The curse of nakedness
In Africa, women have used stripping naked on purpose as a curse, both historically, and in modern times. The idea is that women give life and they can take it away. The curse initiates an extreme form of ostracism , which anthropologist Terisa Turner has likened to "social execution". The curse extends to foreign men as well, and is believed to cause impotence, madness or other similar harm. [47] The threat has been used successfully in mass protests against the petroleum industry in Nigeria, [48] by Leymah Gbowee during the Second Liberian Civil War , [49] and against President Laurent Gbagbo of the Ivory Coast . [50]

Clothing and nudity
Different traditions exist among, for example, sub-Saharan Africans , partly persisting in the post-colonial era. Whereas it is the norm among some ethnic and family groups including some Burkinabese and Nilo-Saharan (e.g. Nuba and Surma people ) in daily life or on particular occasions not to wear any clothes or without any covering below the waist – for example, at highly attended stick-fighting tournaments well-exposed young men use the occasion to catch the eye of a prospective bride.

Liberia
In modern Liberia , soldiers under General "Butt Naked" Joshua Blahyi fought naked in order to terrorize their opponents. [51] Nude except for lace-up leather shoes and a gun, the general led his fierce Butt Naked Battalion into battle on behalf of the warlord Roosevelt Johnson , who hired the unclothed warriors for their fearlessness and fighting skills.

Brazil
In Brazil , the Yawalapiti , an indigenous Xingu tribe in the Amazon Basin , practice a funeral ritual known as Quarup , to celebrate life, death and rebirth, and also involves the presentation of all young girls who have begun menstruating since the last Quarup and whose time has come to choose a partner.

Asia
In Japan, public baths are very common. Bathing nude with family members or friends in public bath houses, saunas, or natural hot springs ( Onsen ) is popular.
In Korea , public baths ( Jjimjilbang ) are widespread and communal nude bathing is normal, although nudity is not permitted in unisex areas.
Nudity is considered shamelessness in the conservative society of India , although nude beaches can be found in Goa and nude saints like those of the Digambara sect of Jainism and Hindu Sadhus are respected and worshipped.
In many Muslim countries , public nudity is illegal.

See also
WebPage index: 00063
Zoophilia
Zoophilia is a paraphilia involving a sexual fixation on non-human animals. Bestiality is cross-species sexual activity between human and non-human animals . The terms are often used interchangeably, but some researchers make a distinction between the attraction (zoophilia) and the act (bestiality). [1]
Although sex with animals is not outlawed in some countries , in most countries, bestiality is illegal under animal abuse laws or laws dealing with crimes against nature .

Terminology

General
Three key terms commonly used in regards to the subject — zoophilia , bestiality , and zoosexuality — are often used somewhat interchangeably. Some researchers distinguish between zoophilia (as a persistent sexual interest in animals) and bestiality (as sexual acts with animals), because bestiality is often not driven by a sexual preference for animals. [1] Some studies have found that a preference for animals is rare among people who engage in sexual contact with animals. [2] Furthermore, some zoophiles report that they have never had sexual contact with an animal. [3] People with zoophilia are known as "zoophiles", though also sometimes as "zoosexuals", or even very simply "zoos". [1] [4] Zooerasty, sodomy , and zooerastia [5] are other terms closely related to the subject but are less synonymous with the former terms, and are seldom used. "Bestiosexuality" was discussed briefly by Allen (1979), but never became widely established. [ citation needed ] Ernest Bornemann (1990, cited by Rosenbauer, 1997) coined the separate term zoosadism for those who derive pleasure – sexual or otherwise – from inflicting pain on animals. Zoosadism specifically is one member of the Macdonald triad of precursors to sociopathic behavior . [6]

Zoophilia
The term zoophilia was introduced into the field of research on sexuality in Psychopathia Sexualis (1886) by Krafft-Ebing , who described a number of cases of "violation of animals (bestiality)", [7] as well as "zoophilia erotica", [8] which he defined as a sexual attraction to animal skin or fur. The term zoophilia derives from the combination of two nouns in Greek : ζῷον ( zṓion , meaning "animal") and φιλία ( philia , meaning "(fraternal) love"). In general contemporary usage, the term zoophilia may refer to sexual activity between human and non-human animals, the desire to engage in such, or to the specific paraphilia ( i.e., the atypical arousal) which indicates a definite preference for non-human animals over humans as sexual partners. Although Krafft-Ebing also coined the term zooerasty for the paraphilia of exclusive sexual attraction to animals, [9] that term has fallen out of general use.

Zoosexuality
The term zoosexual was proposed by Hani Miletski in 2002 [4] as a value-neutral term. Usage of zoosexual as a noun (in reference to a person) is synonymous with zoophile, while the adjectival form of the word – as, for instance, in the phrase "zoosexual act" – may indicate sexual activity between a human and a non-human animal. The derivative noun "zoosexuality" is sometimes used by self-identified zoophiles in both support groups and on internet-based discussion forums to designate sexual orientation manifesting as romantic or emotional involvement with, or sexual attraction to, non-human animals. [4] [10]

Bestiality
The legal term bestiality has two common pronunciations: "ˌbɛs'tiæ'lə'ti" or "ˌbis'tiæ'lə'ti", the latter being more prevalent in the United States. [11] Some zoophiles and researchers draw a distinction between zoophilia and bestiality , using the former to describe the desire to form sexual relationships with animals, and the latter to describe the sex acts alone. [12] Confusing the matter yet further, writing in 1962, Masters used the term bestialist specifically in his discussion of zoosadism.
Stephanie LaFarge, an assistant professor of psychiatry at the New Jersey Medical School, and Director of Counseling at the ASPCA , writes that two groups can be distinguished: bestialists, who rape or abuse animals, and zoophiles, who form an emotional and sexual attachment to animals. [13] Colin J. Williams and Martin Weinberg studied self-defined zoophiles via the internet and reported them as understanding the term zoophilia to involve concern for the animal's welfare, pleasure, and consent, as distinct from the self-labelled zoophiles' concept of "bestialists", whom the zoophiles in their study defined as focused on their own gratification. Williams and Weinberg also quoted a British newspaper saying that zoophilia is a term used by "apologists" for bestiality . [14]

Extent of occurrence
The Kinsey reports rated the percentage of people who had sexual interaction with animals at some point in their lives as 8% for men and 3.6% for women, and claimed it was 40–50% in people living near farms, [9] but some later writers dispute the figures, because the study lacked a random sample in that it included a disproportionate number of prisoners, causing sampling bias . Martin Duberman has written that it is difficult to get a random sample in sexual research, and that even when Paul Gebhard , Kinsey's research successor, removed prison samples from the figures, he found the figures were not significantly changed. [15]
By 1974, the farm population in the USA had declined by 80 percent compared with 1940, reducing the opportunity to live with animals; Hunt's 1974 study suggests that these demographic changes led to a significant change in reported occurrences of bestiality. The percentage of males who reported sexual interactions with animals in 1974 was 4.9% (1948: 8.3%), and in females in 1974 was 1.9% (1953: 3.6%). Miletski believes this is not due to a reduction in interest but merely a reduction in opportunity. [16]
Nancy Friday 's 1973 book on female sexuality , My Secret Garden , comprised around 190 fantasies from different women; of these, 23 involve zoophilic activity. [17]
In one study, psychiatric patients were found to have a statistically significant higher prevalence rate (55 percent) of reported bestiality, both actual sexual contacts (45 percent) and sexual fantasy (30 percent) than the control groups of medical in-patients (10 percent) and psychiatric staff (15 percent). [18] Crépault and Couture (1980) reported that 5.3 percent of the men they surveyed had fantasized about sexual activity with an animal during heterosexual intercourse. [19] In a 2014 study, 3% of women and 2.2% of men reported fantasies about having sex with an animal. [20] A 1982 study suggested that 7.5 percent of 186 university students had interacted sexually with an animal. [21]
Sexual arousal from watching animals mate is known as faunoiphilia . [22] A frequent interest in and sexual excitement at watching animals mate is cited as an indicator of latent zoophilia by Massen (1994). Sexual fantasies about zoophilic acts can occur in people who do not have any wish to experience them in real life. Nancy Friday notes that zoophilia as a fantasy may provide an escape from cultural expectations, restrictions, and judgements in regard to sex. Masters (1962) says that some brothel madams used to stage exhibitions of animals mating, as they found it aroused potential clientele, and that this may have encouraged the clients to engage in bestiality. [23] [ not in citation given ] . Several studies have found that women show stronger vaginal responses to films depicting bonobo copulation than to non-sexual stimuli. [24] [25]

Perspectives on zoophilia

Research perspectives
Zoophilia has been partly discussed by several sciences: Psychology (the study of the human mind ), sexology (a relatively new discipline primarily studying human sexuality ), ethology (the study of animal behavior ), and anthrozoology (the study of human-animal interactions and bonds).
The nature of animal minds, animal mental processes and structures, and animal self-awareness , perception , emotion in animals , and "map of the world", are studied within animal cognition and also explored within various specialized branches of neuroscience such as neuroethology .
In the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), zoophilia is placed in the classification "other specified paraphilic disorder" [26] (" paraphilias not otherwise specified" in the DSM-III and IV [27] [28] [29] [30] ). The World Health Organization takes the same position, listing a sexual preference for animals in its ICD -10 as "other disorder of sexual preference". [31] In the DSM-5, it rises to the level of a diagnosable disorder only when accompanied by distress or interference with normal functioning. [26] [32]
Zoophilia may also be covered to some degree by other fields such as ethics, philosophy, law, animal rights and animal welfare . It may also be touched upon by sociology which looks both at zoosadism in examining patterns and issues related to sexual abuse and at non-sexual zoophilia in examining the role of animals as emotional support and companionship in human lives, and may fall within the scope of psychiatry if it becomes necessary to consider its significance in a clinical context. The Journal of Forensic and Legal Medicine (Vol. 18, February 2011) states that sexual contact with animals is almost never a clinically significant problem by itself; [33] it also states that there are several kinds of zoophiles: [33]
Additionally, zoophiles in categories 2, 3, and 8 (romantic zoophiles, zoophilic fantasizers, and regular zoophiles) are the most common, while zoophiles found in categories 6 and 7 (sadistic bestials and opportunistic zoophiles) are the least common. [33]
Zoophilia may reflect childhood experimentation, sexual abuse or lack of other avenues of sexual expression. Exclusive desire for animals rather than humans is considered a rare paraphilia, and sufferers often have other paraphilias [34] with which they present. Zoophiles will not usually seek help for their condition, and so do not come to the attention of psychiatrists for zoophilia itself. [35]
The first detailed studies of zoophilia date from prior to 1910. Peer reviewed research into zoophilia in its own right started around 1960. However, a number of the most oft-quoted studies, such as Miletski, were not published in peer-reviewed journals. There have been several significant modern books, from Masters (1962) to Beetz (2002); [36] their research arrived at the following conclusions:
Beetz also states the following:
More recently, research has engaged three further directions – the speculation that at least some animals seem to enjoy a zoophilic relationship assuming sadism is not present, and can form an affectionate bond. [40] Similar findings are also reported by Kinsey (cited by Masters), and others earlier in history. Miletski (1999) notes that information on sex with animals on the internet is often very emphatic as to what the zoophile believes gives pleasure and how to identify what is perceived as consent beforehand. For instance, Jonathan Balcombe says animals do things for pleasure. But he himself says pet owners will be unimpressed by this statement, as this is not news to them. [41]
Beetz described the phenomenon of zoophilia/bestiality as being somewhere between crime, paraphilia and love, although she says that most research has been based on criminological reports, so the cases have frequently involved violence and psychiatric illness. She says only a few recent studies have taken data from volunteers in the community. [42] As with all volunteer surveys and sexual ones in particular, these studies have a potential for self-selection bias. [43]
Medical research suggests that some zoophiles only become aroused by a specific species (such as horses), some zoophiles become aroused by multiple species (which may or may not include humans), and some zoophiles are not attracted to humans at all. [2] [44]

Historical and cultural perspectives
Instances of this behavior have been found in the Bible. [45] In a cave painting from at least 8000 BC in the Northern Italian Val Camonica a man is shown about to penetrate an animal. Raymond Christinger interprets that as a show of power of a tribal chief, [46] and so we do not know if this practice was then more acceptable, and if the scene depicted was usual or unusual or whether it was symbolic or imaginary. [47] The Cambridge Illustrated History of Prehistoric Art says the scene may be humorous, as the penetrating man seems to be waving cheerfully with his hand at the same time. Potters seem to have spent time depicting the practice, but this may be because they found the idea amusing. [48] Dr "Jacobus X", said to be a nom-de-plume for a French author, said this was clearly "before any known taboos against sex with animals existed." [49] Marc Epprecht states that authors such as Jacobus X do not deserve respect because their methodology is based on hearsay, and was designed for voyeuristic titillation of the reader. [50] Masters said that since pre-historic man is prehistoric it goes without saying that we know little of his sexual behaviour, [51] depictions in cave paintings may only show the artist's subjective preoccupations or thoughts.
Pindar, Herodotus, and Plutarch claimed the Egyptians engaged in ritual congress with goats. [52] Such claims about other cultures do not necessarily reflect anything about which the author had evidence, but be a form of propaganda or xenophobia , similar to blood libel . [ citation needed ]
Bestiality was accepted in some North American and Middle Eastern indigenous cultures. [53] Sexual intercourse between humans and non-human animals was not uncommon among certain Native American indigenous peoples, including the Hopi . [54] [55] Voget describes the sexual lives of young Native Americans as "rather inclusive," including bestiality. [54] In addition, the Copper Inuit people had "no aversion to intercourse with live animals". [54]
Several cultures built temples ( Khajuraho , India) or other structures ( Sagaholm , barrow , Sweden) with zoophilic carvings on the exterior, however at Khajuraho these depictions are not on the interior, perhaps depicting that these are things that belong to the profane world rather than the spiritual world, and thus are to be left outside. [ citation needed ]
In the Church-oriented culture of the Middle Ages zoophilic activity was met with execution, typically burning, and death to the animals involved either the same way or by hanging, as "both a violation of Biblical edicts and a degradation of man as a spiritual being rather than one that is purely animal and carnal." [56] Some witches were accused of having congress with the devil in the form of an animal. As with all accusations and confessions extracted under torture in the witch trials in Early Modern Europe , their validity cannot be ascertained. [52]

Religious perspectives
Passages in Leviticus 18 (Lev 18:23: "And you shall not lie with any beast and defile yourself with it, neither shall any woman give herself to a beast to lie with it: it is a perversion." RSV) and 20:15–16 ("If a man lies with a beast, he shall be put to death; and you shall kill the beast. If a woman approaches any beast and lies with it, you shall kill the woman and the beast; they shall be put to death, their blood is upon them." RSV) are cited by Jewish, Christian, and Muslim theologians as categorical denunciation of bestiality. However, the teachings of the New Testament have been interpreted by some as not expressly forbidding bestiality. [57]
In Part II of his Summa Theologica , medieval philosopher Thomas Aquinas ranked various "unnatural vices" (sex acts resulting in "venereal pleasure" rather than procreation) by degrees of sinfulness, concluding that "the most grievous is the sin of bestiality." [58] Some Christian theologians extend Matthew 's view that even having thoughts of adultery is sinful to imply that thoughts of committing bestial acts are likewise sinful.
There are a few references in Hindu scriptures to religious figures engaging in symbolic sexual activity with animals such as explicit depictions of people having sex with animals included amongst the thousands of sculptures of "Life events" on the exterior of the temple complex at Khajuraho . The depictions are largely symbolic depictions of the sexualization of some animals and are not meant to be taken literally. [59] According to the Hindu tradition of erotic painting and sculpture, having sex with an animal is believed to be actually a human having sex with a God incarnated in the form of an animal. [60] However, the Hindu scriptures like the Bhagavata Purana and the Devi Bhagavata Purana having sex with animals, especially the cow, leads one to Hell , where the person is tormented by rubbing their bodies on trees with razor-sharp thorns. [61]

Legal status
In many jurisdictions, all forms of zoophilic acts are prohibited; others outlaw only the mistreatment of animals, without specific mention of sexual activity. In the UK, Section 63 of the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 (also known as the Extreme Pornography Act) outlaws images of a person performing or appearing to perform an act of intercourse or oral sex with an animal (whether dead or alive). [62] Despite the Ministry of Justice 's explanatory note on extreme images saying "It is not a question of the intentions of those who produced the image. Nor is it a question of the sexual arousal of the defendant", [63] "it could be argued that a person might possess such an image for the purposes of satire, political commentary or simple grossness," according to The Independent . [64] Countries such as Belgium and Sweden are somewhere in between: they permit sexual activity with animals, but prohibit the promotion of animal-oriented pornography. [65]
Many new laws banning sex with animals have been made recently, such as in New Hampshire , [66] Ohio , [67] Germany , [68] Sweden , [69] Denmark , [70] Thailand , [71] Costa Rica , [72] Bolivia , [73] and Guatemala . [74] The number of jurisdictions around the world banning it has grown in the 2000s and 2010s .
Laws on zoophilia are sometimes triggered by specific incidents. [75] While some laws are very specific, others employ vague terms such as " sodomy " or "bestiality", which lack legal precision and leave it unclear exactly which acts are covered. In the past, some bestiality laws may have been made in the belief that sex with an animal could result in monstrous offspring, as well as offending the community. Current anti-cruelty laws focus more specifically on animal welfare while anti-bestiality laws are aimed only at offenses to community "standards". [76] Notable legal views include Sweden, where a 2005 report by the Swedish Animal Welfare Agency for the government expressed concern over the increase in reports of horse-ripping incidents. The agency believed current animal cruelty legislation was not sufficient in protecting animals from abuse and needed updating, but concluded that on balance it was not appropriate to call for a ban. [77] In New Zealand , the 1989 Crimes Bill considered abolishing bestiality as a criminal offense, and instead viewing it as a mental health issue, but they did not, and people can still be prosecuted for it. Under Section 143 of the Crimes Act 1961, individuals can serve a sentence of seven years duration for animal sexual abuse and the offence is considered 'complete' in the event of 'penetration'. [78] [79] In Canada a clarification of the anti-bestiality law was made in 2016 which legalizes most forms of sexual contact with animals other than penetration. [80]
Some countries once had laws against single males living with female animals, such as Alpacas. [ citation needed ] Copulating with a female alpaca is still specifically against the law in Peru. [81]
As of 2017, bestiality is illegal in 42 U.S. states. Most state bestiality laws were enacted between 1999 and 2017. [82] [83] Until 2005, there was a farm near Enumclaw, Washington that was described as an “animal brothel”, where people paid to have sex with animals. After an incident on 2 July 2005 , when a man was pronounced dead in the emergency room of the Enumclaw community hospital after his colon ruptured due to having been sodomized by a horse, the farm garnered police attention. The state legislature of the State of Washington , which had been one of the few states in the United States without a law against bestiality, within six months passed a bill making bestiality illegal. [84] [85] Arizona, [86] Alaska, [87] Florida, [88] Alabama, [89] New Jersey, [90] New Hampshire [66] and Ohio [91] have banned sex with animals between 2006 and the present. When such laws are proposed, they are never questioned or debated. [92] [93] Laws which prohibit non-abusive bestiality have been criticized for being discriminatory, unjust and unconstitutional. [94] [95]

Pornography
Pornography involving sex with animals is widely illegal, even in most countries where bestiality itself is not explicitly outlawed. [ citation needed ]
In the United States , zoophilic pornography would be considered obscene if it did not meet the standards of the Miller Test and therefore is not openly sold, mailed, distributed or imported across state boundaries or within states which prohibit it. Under U.S. law, 'distribution' includes transmission across the Internet. Production and mere possession appear to be legal, however. U.S. prohibitions on distribution of sexual or obscene materials are as of 2005 [update] in some doubt, having been ruled unconstitutional in United States v. Extreme Associates (a judgement which was overturned on appeal, December 2005).
Similar restrictions apply in Germany (see above ). In New Zealand the possession, making or distribution of material promoting bestiality is illegal.
The potential use of media for pornographic movies was seen from the start of the era of silent film . Polissons and Galipettes (re-released 2002 as " The Good Old Naughty Days ") is a collection of early French silent films for brothel use, including some animal pornography, dating from around 1905 – 1930.
Material featuring sex with animals is widely available on the Internet, due to their ease of production, and because production and sale is legal in countries such as Denmark . [ citation needed ] Prior to the advent of mass-market magazines such as Playboy , so-called Tijuana Bibles were a form of pornographic tract popular in America, sold as anonymous underground publications typically comprising a small number of stapled comic-strips representing characters and celebrities. [96] The promotion of "stars" began with the Danish Bodil Joensen , in the period of 1969–72, along with other porn actors such as the Americans Linda Lovelace ( Dogarama , 1969), Chessie Moore (multiple films, c. 1994), Kerri Downs (three films, 1998) and Calina Lynx (aka Kelly G'raffe) (two films, 1998). Another early film to attain great infamy was " Animal Farm ", smuggled into Great Britain around 1980 without details as to makers or provenance. [97] The film was later traced to a crude juxtaposition of smuggled cuts from many of Bodil Joensen's 1970s Danish movies.
Into the 1980s the Dutch took the lead, creating figures like "Wilma" and the "Dutch Sisters". In 1980s, "bestiality" was featured in Italian adult films with actresses like Denise Dior, Francesca Ray, and Marina Hedman , manifested early in the softcore flick Bestialità in 1976.
Today, in Hungary , where production faces no legal limitations, zoophilic materials have become a substantial industry that produces numerous films and magazines, particularly for Dutch companies such as Topscore and Book & Film International , and the genre has stars such as "Hector", a Great Dane starring in several films. Many Hungarian mainstream performers also appeared anonymously in animal pornography in their early careers. For example, Suzy Spark. [98]
In Japan, animal pornography is used to bypass censorship laws, often featuring Japanese and Swedish [ citation needed ] female models performing fellatio on animals, because oral penetration of a non-human penis is not in the scope of Japanese mosaic censor. Sakura Sakurada is an AV idol known to have appeared in animal pornography, specifically in the AV The Dog Game in 2006. While primarily underground, there are a number of animal pornography actresses who specialize in bestiality movies. A box-office success of the 1980s, 24 Horas de Sexo Explícito featured zoophilia.
In the UK Section 63 of the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 criminalises possession of realistic pornographic images depicting sex with animals (see extreme pornography ), including fake images and simulated acts, as well as images depicting sex with dead animals, where no crime has taken place in the production. The law provides for sentences of up to two years in prison; a sentence of 12 months was handed down in one case in 2011. [99]
Pornography of this sort has become the business of certain spammers such as Jeremy Jaynes and owners of some fake TGPs , who use the promise of "extreme" material as a bid for users' attention.

Health and safety
Infections that are transmitted from animals to humans are called zoonoses . Some zoonoses may be transferred through casual contact, but others are much more readily transferred by activities that expose humans to the semen , vaginal fluids, urine , saliva , feces and blood of animals. Examples of zoonoses are Brucellosis , Q fever , leptospirosis , and toxocariasis . Therefore, sexual activity with animals is, in some instances, a high risk activity. Allergic reactions to animal semen may occur, including anaphylaxis . Bites and other trauma from penetration or trampling may occur.

Zoophiles

Non-sexual zoophilia
The love of animals is not necessarily sexual in nature. In psychology and sociology the word "zoophilia" is sometimes used without sexual implications. Being fond of animals in general, or as pets, is accepted in Western society, and is usually respected or tolerated. However, the word zoophilia is used to mean a sexual preference towards animals, which makes it [100] a paraphilia . Some zoophiles may not act on their sexual attraction to animals. People who identify as zoophiles may feel their love for animals is romantic rather than purely sexual, and say this makes them different from those committing entirely sexually motivated acts of bestiality. [101]

Zoophile community
An online survey which recruited participants over the internet concluded that prior to the arrival of widespread computer networking , most zoophiles would not have known other zoophiles, and for the most part, zoophiles engaged in bestiality secretly, or told only trusted friends, family or partners. The internet and its predecessors made people able to search for information on topics which were not otherwise easily accessible and to communicate with relative safety and anonymity. Because of the diary-like intimacy of blogs and the anonymity of the internet, zoophiles had the ideal opportunity to "openly" express their sexuality. [102] As with many other alternate lifestyles , broader networks began forming in the 1980s when participating in networked social groups became more common at home and elsewhere. [103] Such developments in general were described by Markoff in 1990; the linking of computers meant that people thousands of miles apart could feel the intimacy akin to being in a small village together. [104] The popular newsgroup alt.sex.bestiality , said to be in the top 1% of newsgroup interest (i.e. number 50 out of around 5000), – and reputedly started in humor [105] – along with personal bulletin boards and talkers , chief among them Sleepy's multiple worlds , Lintilla , and Planes of Existence, were among the first group media of this kind in the late 1980s and early 1990s. These groups rapidly drew together zoophiles, some of whom also created personal and social websites and internet forums . By around 1992–1994, the wide social net had evolved. [106] This was initially centered around the above-mentioned newsgroup , alt.sex.bestiality, which during the six years following 1990 had matured into a discussion and support group. [107] [108] [109] [110] The newsgroup included information about health issues, laws governing zoophilia, bibliography relating to the subject, and community events. [111] Since the 1990s, other zoophile websites have been created and have grown in size; for example, the zoophile website and internet forum "beastforum.com" has more than one million members as of March 2012. [112] [113]
Weinberg and Williams observe that the internet can socially integrate an incredibly large number of people. In Kinsey’s day contacts between animal lovers were more localized and limited to male compatriots in a particular rural community. Further, while the farm boys Kinsey researched might have been part of a rural culture in which sex with animals was a part, the sex itself did not define the community. The zoophile community is not known to be particularly large compared to other subcultures which make use of the internet, so Weinberg and Williams surmised its aims and beliefs would likely change little as it grew. Those particularly active on the internet may not be aware of a wider subculture, as there is not much of a wider subculture [ clarification needed ] , Weinberg and Williams felt the virtual zoophile group would lead the development of the subculture. [103]
There also exist websites which aim to provide support and social assistance to zoophiles (including resources to help and rescue abused or mistreated animals), but these are not usually well publicized. Such work is often undertaken as needed by individuals and friends, within social networks, and by word of mouth. One notable early attempt at creating a zoophile support structure focused on social and psychological support was the newsgroup soc.support.zoophilia, which was proposed in 1994 but narrowly failed to meet the 2/3 majority needed to be created [ clarification needed ] . There was also a German support group called "Interessengemeinschaft Zoophiler Menschen ("Zoophile Interest Group"). [114]
Zoophiles tend to experience their first zoosexual feelings during adolescence, and tend to be secretive about it, hence limiting the ability for non-Internet communities to form: [115]

Debate over zoophilia or zoophilic relations
Because of its controversial nature, people have developed arguments both for [116] and against [117] zoophilia. Arguments for and against zoosexual activity from a variety of sources, including religious, moral, ethical, psychological, medical and social.

Arguments against bestiality
Bestiality is seen by the government of the United Kingdom as profoundly disturbed behavior (as indicated by the UK Home Office review on sexual offences in 2002). [118] Andrea Beetz states there is evidence that there can be violent zoosadistic approaches to sex with animals. Beetz argues that animals might be traumatized even by a non-violent, sexual approach from a human; [119] however, Beetz also says that in some cases, non-abusive bestiality can be reciprocally pleasurable for both the human and non-human animal. [119]
An argument from human dignity is given by Wesley J. Smith, a senior fellow and Intelligent Design proponent at the Center for Science and Culture of the conservative Christian Discovery Institute : – "such behavior is profoundly degrading and utterly subversive to the crucial understanding that human beings are unique, special, and of the highest moral worth in the known universe—a concept known as ' human exceptionalism ' ... one of the reasons bestiality is condemned through law is that such degrading conduct unacceptably subverts standards of basic human dignity and is an affront to humankind's inestimable importance and intrinsic moral worth." [120]
One of the primary critiques of bestiality is that it is harmful to animals and necessarily abusive, because animals are unable to give or withhold consent. [121]
The Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) has said that as animals do not have the same capacity for thinking as humans, they are unable to give full consent. The HSUS takes the position that all sexual activity between humans and animals is abusive, whether it involves physical injury or not. [122] In his 1993 article, Dr. Frank Ascione stated that "bestiality may be considered abusive even in cases when physical harm to an animal does not occur." In a 1997 article, Piers Beirne, Professor of Criminology at the University of Southern Maine, points out that 'for genuine consent to sexual relations to be present...both participants must be conscious, fully informed and positive in their desires.' [123] [124]

Arguments for bestiality
Some defenders of bestiality argue that the issue of sexual consent is irrelevant because many legal human practices (such as semen collection , artificial insemination , hunting, laboratory testing , and slaughtering animals for meat) do not involve the consent of the animal. [125] Brian Cutteridge states the following regarding this argument:
Miletski believes that "Animals are capable of sexual consent – and even initiation – in their own way." [126] It is not an uncommon practice for dogs to attempt to copulate with ("hump") the legs of people of both genders. [127] Rosenberger (1968) emphasizes that as far as cunnilingus is concerned, dogs require no training, and even Dekkers (1994) and Menninger (1951) admit that sometimes animals take the initiative and do so impulsively. [119] Those supporting zoophilic activity feel animals sometimes even seem to enjoy the sexual attention [128] or voluntarily initiate sexual activity with humans. [129] Animals such as dogs can be willing participants in sexual activity with humans, and "seem to enjoy the attention provided by the sexual interaction with a human." [94] Animal owners normally know what their own pets like or do not like. Most people can tell if an animal does not like how it is being petted, because it will move away. An animal that is liking being petted pushes against the hand, and seems to enjoy it. To those defending bestiality this is seen as a way in which animals give consent, or the fact that a dog might wag its tail. [130]
Utilitarian philosopher and animal liberation author Peter Singer argues that bestiality is not unethical so long as it involves no harm or cruelty to the animal [131] (see Harm principle ). In the article "Heavy Petting," [132] Singer argues that zoosexual activity need not be abusive, and that relationships could form which were mutually enjoyed. Singer and others have argued that people's dislike of bestiality is partly caused by irrational speciesism and anthropocentrism . [133] [134] Because interspecies sex occurs in nature, [135] and because humans are animals, [136] supporters argue that zoosexual activity is not "unnatural" and is not intrinsically wrong. [95] [137]
Research has proven that non-human animals can and do have sex for non-reproductive purposes (and for pleasure ). [138] In 2006, a Danish Animal Ethics Council report concluded that ethically performed zoosexual activity is capable of providing a positive experience for all participants, and that some non-human animals are sexually attracted to humans [139] (for example, dolphins ). [140]
Some zoophiles claim that they are not abusive towards animals: [93]

Mentions in the media
Because of its controversial nature, different countries vary in the discussion of bestiality. Often sexual matters are the subject of legal or regulatory requirement. In 2005 the UK broadcasting regulator ( OFCOM ) updated its code stating that freedom of expression is at the heart of any democratic state. Adult audiences should be informed as to what they will be viewing or hearing, and the young, who cannot make a fully informed choice for themselves, should be protected. Hence a watershed and other precautions were set up for explicit sexual material, to protect young people. Zoophile activity and other sexual matters may be discussed, but only in an appropriate context and manner. [141]
The IPT was replaced after the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act in 1993, replaced with bodies designed to allow both more debate and increased consistency, and possession and supply of material that it is decided are objectionable was made a criminal offence. [142]
Mention in the media is often comical in nature. References to bestiality are not uncommon in some media, especially adult cartoon series such as Family Guy and South Park , satirical comedy such as Borat , and films (especially shock exploitation films ), although a few broadcasters such as Howard Stern (who joked about bestiality dial-a-date on NBC) and Tom Binns (whose XFM London Breakfast Show resulted on one occasion in a live discussion about the ethics of zoophilic pornographic movies at peak child listening time) have been reprimanded by their stations for doing so. [ citation needed ]
In literature, American novelist Kurt Vonnegut refers to a photo of a woman attempting sexual intercourse with a Shetland Pony in The Sirens of Titan , Slaughterhouse Five , and God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater . Philip K. Dick also refers to a photo of a woman copulating with a Shetland Pony in Flow My Tears The Policeman Said . John Irving 's novel The Cider House Rules repeatedly mentions a pornographic photograph depicting oral sex on a pony. In Clerks II Randal orders a donkey show as a going away present for his best friend Dante, in which it is referred to as "interspecies erotica" by the male performer.
Pu Songling refers to zoophilia in the Strange Tales from a Chinese Studio short story " The Fornicating Dog ", which talks about sexual relations between a woman and her white dog.

Books, articles and documentaries about zoophilia

Academic and professional

Other books

Print and online media

Film, television and radio

See also

References and footnotes

External links
WebPage index: 00064
Band (rock and pop)
Rock band redirects here. For the video game series, see Rock Band . For the first game in the Rock Band series, see Rock Band (video game) . For the iOS version of same name, see Rock Band (iOS) .
A rock band or pop band is a small musical ensemble which performs rock music, pop music or a related genre. The four-piece band is the most common configuration in rock and pop music. Before the development of the electronic keyboard , the configuration was typically two guitarists (a lead guitarist and a rhythm guitarist, with one of them singing lead vocals), a bassist, and a drummer (e.g. the Beatles , KISS , Franz Ferdinand ). Another common formation is a vocalist who does not play an instrument, electric guitarist, bass guitarist, and a drummer (e.g. the Who , the Monkees , Led Zeppelin , Queen , and U2 ). Instrumentally, these bands can be considered as trios.
The smallest ensemble that is commonly used in rock music is the trio format. Two-member rock and pop bands are relatively rare, because of the difficulty in providing all of the musical elements which are part of the rock or pop sound (vocals, chords, bass lines , and percussion or drumming). In a hard rock or blues-rock band, or heavy metal rock group, a " power trio " format is often used, which consists of an electric guitar player, an electric bass guitar player and a drummer, and typically one or more of these musicians also sing (sometimes all three members will sing, e.g. Bee Gees or Alkaline Trio ). Some well-known power trios with the guitarist on lead vocals are the Jimi Hendrix Experience , Stevie Ray Vaughan and Double Trouble , Nirvana , the Jam , and ZZ Top .

Two members
Two-member rock and pop bands are relatively rare, because of the difficulty in providing all of the musical elements which are part of the rock or pop sound (vocals, chordal accompaniment , bass lines , and percussion or drumming). Two-member rock and pop bands typically omit one of these musical elements. In many cases, two-member bands will omit a drummer, since guitars, bass guitars, and keyboards can all be used to provide a rhythmic pulse.
Examples of two-member bands are Pet Shop Boys , Hella , Flight of the Conchords , the Ting Tings , and Hall & Oates .
When electronic sequencers became widely available in the 1980s, this made it easier for two-member bands to add in musical elements that the two band members were not able to perform. Sequencers allowed bands to pre-program some elements of their performance, such as an electronic drum part and a synth bass line. Two-member pop music bands such as Soft Cell , Blancmange and Yazoo used pre-programmed sequencers. Other pop bands from the 1980s which were ostensibly fronted by two performers, such as Wham! , Eurythmics and Tears for Fears , were not actually two-piece ensembles, because other instrumental musicians were used "behind the scenes" to fill out the sound.
Two-piece bands in rock music are quite rare. However, starting in the 2000s, blues-influenced rock bands such as the White Stripes and the Black Keys utilized a guitar and drums scheme. Death from Above 1979 featured a drummer and bass guitarist. Tenacious D is a two-guitar band; One Day as a Lion and the Dresden Dolls both feature a keyboardist and a drummer. Ratatat are a two-guitar band that utilize a drum machine for beats. W.A.S.P. guitarist Doug Blair is also known for his work in the two-piece progressive rock band signal2noise , where he acts as the lead guitarist and bassist at the same time, thanks to a special custom instrument he invented (an electric guitar with five regular guitar strings paired with three bass guitar strings). Heisenflei of Los Angeles duo the Pity Party plays drums, keyboards, and sings simultaneously. Royal Blood is a two-piece band that uses bass and drums along with electronic effects .

Three members
The smallest ensemble that is commonly used in rock music is the trio format. In a hard rock or blues-rock band, or heavy metal rock group, a " power trio " format is often used, which consists of an electric guitar player, an electric bass guitar player and a drummer, and typically one or more of these musicians also sing (sometimes all three members will sing, e.g. Bee Gees or Alkaline Trio ). Some well-known power trios with the guitarist on lead vocals are the Jimi Hendrix Experience , Stevie Ray Vaughan and Double Trouble and Nirvana .
A handful of others with the bassist on vocals include Primus , Motörhead , the Police and Cream .
Some power trios feature two lead vocalists. For example, in the band Blink-182 vocals are split between bassist Mark Hoppus and guitarist Tom DeLonge , or in the band Dinosaur Jr. , guitarist J. Mascis is the primary songwriter and vocalist, but bassist Lou Barlow writes some songs and sings as well.
An alternative to the power trio are organ trios formed with an electric guitarist, a drummer and a keyboardist. Although organ trios are most commonly associated with 1950s and 1960s jazz organ trio groups such as those led by organist Jimmy Smith , there are also organ trios in rock-oriented styles, such as jazz-rock fusion and Grateful Dead -influenced jam bands , for instance Medeski Martin & Wood . In organ trios, the keyboard player typically plays a Hammond organ or similar instrument, which permits the keyboard player to perform bass lines, chords, and lead lines. A variant of the organ trio are trios formed with an electric bassist, a drummer and an electronic keyboardist (playing synthesizers) such as the progressive rock band Emerson, Lake & Palmer .
A power trio with the guitarist on lead vocals is a popular record company lineup, as the guitarist and singer will usually be the songwriter. Therefore, the label only has to present one "face" to the public. The backing band may or may not be featured in publicity. If the backup band is not marketed as an integral part of the group, this gives the record company more flexibility to replace band members or use substitute musicians. This lineup often leads to songs that are fairly simple and accessible, as the frontman (or frontwoman) will have to sing and play guitar at the same time.

Four members
The four-piece band is the most common configuration in rock and pop music. Before the development of the electronic keyboard, the configuration was typically two guitarists, a bassist, and a drummer(e.g. the Beatles , KISS , Metallica , the Clash and the Smashing Pumpkins .
Another common formation is a vocalist, electric guitarist, bass guitarist, and a drummer (e.g. Tool , the Who , Led Zeppelin and Blur . Instrumentally, these bands can be considered as trios.
In some rock bands, keyboardists are used in place of bass, performing with a guitarist, singer and drummer, for instance the Doors . Some bands will have a guitarist, bassist, drummer, and keyboard player, for example the Talking Heads , the Small Faces and Pink Floyd .
Some bands will have the bassist on lead vocals, such as Thin Lizzy , Pink Floyd , Motörhead , or even the lead guitarist, such as Dire Straits , Megadeth and Creedence Clearwater Revival . Some bands, such as the Beatles , have a lead guitarist, a rhythm guitarist and a bassist that all sing lead and backing vocals, that also play keyboards regularly, as well as a drummer. Others, such as the Four Seasons , have a lead vocalist, a lead guitarist, a keyboard player, and a bassist, with the drummer not being a member of the band.

Five members
Five-piece bands have existed in rock music since the development of the genre. the Beach Boys , Aerosmith , AC/DC and Oasis are examples of the common lineup of vocalist, lead guitar, rhythm guitar, bass, and drums. An alternative lineup replaces the rhythm guitarist with a keyboard–synthesizer player (examples being the bands Journey , Dream Theater , Marilyn Manson and Deep Purple . Another alternative replaces the rhythm guitarist with a turntablist , such as in the Deftones , Incubus or Limp Bizkit .
Further alternatives include a keyboardist, guitarist, drummer, bassist, and saxophonist, such as the Sonics , the Dave Clark 5 , and Sam the Sham and the Pharaohs . Three guitarists may be present with a bassist and a drummer, such as in the bands Radiohead and the Byrds . Some five-person bands feature two guitarists, a keyboardist, a bassist and a drummer, with one or more of these musicians (typically one of the guitarists) handling lead vocals on top of their instrument (examples being Children of Bodom and Styx .
Other times, the vocalist will bring another musical "voice" to the table, most commonly a harmonica or percussion; Mick Jagger , for example, plays harmonica and percussion instruments like maracas and tambourine in the Rolling Stones. Ozzy Osbourne played the harmonica on some occasions with Black Sabbath . Flutes may also be used by vocalists, most notably Ian Anderson of Jethro Tull and Ray Thomas of the Moody Blues .

Larger rock ensembles
Larger bands have long been a part of rock and pop music, in part due to the influence of the "singer accompanied with orchestra" model inherited from popular big-band jazz and swing and popularized by Frank Sinatra and Ella Fitzgerald . To create larger ensembles, rock bands often add an additional guitarist, an additional keyboardist, additional percussionists or second drummer, an entire horn section , and even a flautist. An example of a six-member rock band is Toto with a lead vocalist, guitarist, bassist, two keyboard players, and drummer. Other examples include Australian band INXS and American Blondie ; both they consist in a lead vocalist, two guitarists, a keyboard player, a bassist and a drummer. The American heavy metal band Slipknot is composed of nine members, with a vocalist, two guitarists, a drummer, a bassist, two custom percussionists, a turntablist , and a sampler.
In larger groups (such as the Band ), instrumentalists could play multiple instruments, which enabled the ensemble to create a wider variety of instrument combinations. More modern examples of such a band are Arcade Fire and Edward Sharpe and the Magnetic Zeros . More rarely, rock or pop groups will be accompanied in concerts by a full or partial symphony orchestra, where lush string-orchestra arrangements are used to flesh out the sound of slow ballads. Rhys Chatham and Glenn Branca started doing performances in the late 1970s with orchestras consisting of ten to hundred (Branca) and even four hundred guitars. [1] Some groups have a large number of members that all play the same instrument, such as guitar, keyboard, horns or strings.

Role of women
Women have a high prominence in many popular music styles as singers. However, professional women instrumentalists are uncommon in popular music, especially in rock genres such as heavy metal . "[P]laying in a band is largely a male homosocial activity, that is, learning to play in a band is largely a peer-based... experience, shaped by existing sex-segregated friendship networks. [2] As well, rock music "...is often defined as a form of male rebellion vis-à-vis female bedroom culture." [3] In popular music, there has been a gendered "distinction between public (male) and private (female) participation" in music. [3] "[S]everal scholars have argued that men exclude women from bands or from the bands'rehearsals, recordings, performances, and other social activities." [4] "Women are mainly regarded as passive and private consumers of allegedly slick, prefabricated – hence, inferior – pop music..., excluding them from participating as high status rock musicians." [4] One of the reasons that there are rarely mixed gender bands is that "bands operate as tight-knit units in which homosocial solidarity – social bonds between people of the same sex... – plays a crucial role." [4] In the 1960s pop music scene, "[s]inging was sometimes an acceptable pastime for a girl, but playing an instrument...simply wasn't done." [5]
"The rebellion of rock music was largely a male rebellion; the women—often, in the 1950s and '60s, girls in their teens—in rock usually sang songs as personæ utterly dependent on their macho boyfriends...". Philip Auslander says that "Although there were many women in rock by the late 1960s, most performed only as singers, a traditionally feminine position in popular music". Though some women played instruments in American all-female garage rock bands , none of these bands achieved more than regional success. So they "did not provide viable templates for women's on-going participation in rock". [6] :2–3 In relation to the gender composition of heavy metal bands , it has been said that "[h]eavy metal performers are almost exclusively male" [7] "...[a]t least until the mid-1980s" [8] apart from "...exceptions such as Girlschool ." [7] However, "...now [in the 2010s] maybe more than ever–strong metal women have put up their dukes and got down to it", [9] "carv[ing] out a considerable place for [them]selves." [10] When Suzi Quatro emerged in 1973, "no other prominent female musician worked in rock simultaneously as a singer, instrumentalist, songwriter, and bandleader". [6] :2 According to Auslander, she was "kicking down the male door in rock and roll and proving that a female musician ... and this is a point I am extremely concerned about ... could play as well if not better than the boys". [6] :3
WebPage index: 00065
Wikimedia Commons
Wikimedia Commons (or simply Commons ) is an online repository of free-use images, sound, and other media files. [1] It is a project of the Wikimedia Foundation .
Files from Wikimedia Commons can be used across all Wikimedia projects [2] in all languages, including Wikipedia , Wikibooks , Wikivoyage , Wikispecies , Wikisource , and Wikinews , or downloaded for offsite use. The repository contains over 39 million media files. [3] In July 2013, the number of edits on Commons reached 100,000,000. [4]

History
The project was proposed by Erik Möller in March 2004 [5] and launched on September 7, 2004. [6] [7] A key motivation behind the setup of a central repository was the desire to reduce duplication of effort across the Wikimedia projects and languages, as the same file had to be uploaded to many different wikis separately before Commons was created.

Policies
The aim of Wikimedia Commons is to provide a media file repository "that makes available public domain and freely-licensed educational media content to all, and that acts as a common repository for the various projects of the Wikimedia Foundation." The expression "educational" is to be understood according to its broad meaning of "providing knowledge; instructional or informative". [8]
Most Wikimedia projects still allow local uploads which are not visible to other projects or languages, but this option is meant to be used primarily for material (such as fair use content) which local project policies allow, but which would not be permitted according to the copyright policy of Commons. Wikimedia Commons itself does not allow fair use or uploads under non-free licenses, including licenses which restrict commercial use of materials or disallow derivative works. For this reason, Wikimedia Commons always hosts freely licensed media and deletes copyright violations. Licenses that are acceptable include the GNU Free Documentation License , Creative Commons Attribution and Attribution/ShareAlike licenses, [9] other free content and free software licenses, and the public domain .
The default language for Commons is English, but registered users can customize their interface to use any other available user interface translations. Many content pages, in particular policy pages and portals, have also been translated into various languages. Files on Wikimedia Commons are categorized using MediaWiki's category system. In addition, they are often collected on individual topical gallery pages. While the project was originally proposed to also contain free text files, these continue to be hosted on a sister project, Wikisource .

Controversial content
The site has been criticized for hosting large amounts of amateur pornography, often uploaded by exhibitionists who exploit the site for personal gratification, and who are enabled by sympathetic administrators. [10] In 2012, BuzzFeed described Wikimedia Commons as "littered with dicks". [11]
In 2010, Wikipedia co-founder Larry Sanger reported Wikimedia Commons to the FBI for hosting sexualized images of children known as "lolicon". After this was reported in the media, Jimmy Wales , founder of the Wikimedia Foundation which hosts Commons, used his administrator status to delete several images without discussion from the Commons community. Wales responded to the backlash from the Commons community by voluntarily relinquishing some site privileges, including the ability to delete files. [12]

Utilities
Over time, additional functionality has been developed to interface Wikimedia Commons with the other Wikimedia projects. Daniel Kinzler wrote applications for finding appropriate categories for uploaded files ("CommonSense"), determining the usage of files across the Wikimedia projects ("CheckUsage"), locating images with missing copyright information ("UntaggedImages"), and relaying information about administrative actions such as deletions to the relevant wikis (" CommonsTicker ").
Specialized uploading tools and scripts such as " Commonist " have been created to simplify the process of uploading large numbers of files. In order to review free content photos uploaded to Flickr , users can participate in a defunct collaborative external review process (" FlickrLickr "), which has resulted in more than 10,000 uploads to Commons. [13] [ not in citation given ] [ dead link ]

Quality
The site has three mechanisms for recognizing quality works. One is known as " Featured pictures ", where works are nominated and other community members vote to accept or reject the nomination. This process began in November 2004. Another process known as " Quality images " began in June 2006, and has a simpler nomination process comparable to "Featured pictures". "Quality images" only accepts works created by Wikimedia users, whereas "Featured pictures" additionally accepts nominations of works by third parties such as NASA. A third image assessment project, known as " Valued images ", began on June 1, 2008 with the purpose of recognising "the most valued illustration of its kind", in contrast to the other two processes which assess images mainly on technical quality.
The three mentioned processes select a slight part (less than 0.1%) from the total number of files. However, Commons collects files of all quality levels, from the most professional level across simple documental and amateur files up to files of very poor quality. Generally, Commons is not a competition but a collection; a quality of the description and organization of files and their descriptive and informational benefits are often more relevant than technical or artistic perfection of the files. Files with specific defects can be tagged for improvement and warning or even proposed for deletion but there exists no process of systematic rating of all files.
The site held its inaugural "Picture of the Year" competition, for 2006. All images that were made a Featured picture during 2006 were eligible, and voted on by eligible Wikimedia users during two rounds of voting. The winning picture was a picture of the Aurora Borealis over snowlands, taken by an airman from the U.S. Air Force . The competition has become an annual event.

Content figures
Source: commons:Commons:Milestones

See also
WebPage index: 00066
Obscenity
An obscenity is any utterance or act that strongly offends the prevalent morality of the time. [1] It is derived from the Latin obscaena (offstage) a cognate of the Ancient Greek root skene , because some potentially offensive content, such as murder or sex , was depicted offstage in classical drama. The word can be used to indicate a strong moral repugnance, in expressions such as "obscene profits " or "the obscenity of war".

United States obscenity law
In the United States of America , issues of obscenity raise issues of limitations on the freedom of speech and of the press , which are otherwise protected by the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States .
Federal obscenity law in the U.S. is unusual in that there is no uniform national standard. Former Justice Potter Stewart of the Supreme Court of the United States , in attempting to classify what material constituted exactly "what is obscene," famously wrote, "I shall not today attempt further to define the kinds of material I understand to be embraced ... [b]ut I know it when I see it ...." [2] In the United States, the 1973 ruling of the Supreme Court of the United States in Miller v. California established a three-tiered test to determine what was obscene—and thus not protected, versus what was merely erotic and thus protected by the First Amendment .
Delivering the opinion of the court, Chief Justice Warren Burger wrote:

Non image-based obscenity cases in the U.S.
While most recent (2016) obscenity cases in the United States have revolved around images and films, the first obscenity cases dealt with textual works.
The classification of "obscene" and thus illegal for production and distribution has been judged on printed text-only stories starting with "Dunlop v. U.S., 165 U.S. 486 (1897)", which upheld a conviction for mailing and delivery of a newspaper called the 'Chicago Dispatch,' containing "obscene, lewd, lascivious, and indecent materials", which was later upheld in several cases. One of these was "A Book Named John Cleland's Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure " v. Attorney General of Com. of Massachusetts, " 383 U.S. 413 (1966) " wherein the book " Fanny Hill ", written by John Cleland c. 1760, was judged to be obscene in a proceeding that put the book itself on trial rather than its publisher. Another was "Kaplan v. California, 413 U.S. 115 (1973)" whereby the court most famously determined that "Obscene material in book form is not entitled to any First Amendment protection merely because it has no pictorial content."
In 2005, the U.S. Department of Justice formed the Obscenity Prosecution Task Force in a push to prosecute obscenity cases. [4] [5] Red Rose Stories, a site dedicated to text-only fantasy stories, became one of many sites targeted by the FBI for shutdown. [6] The government alleged that Red Rose Stories contained depictions of child rape. The publisher pleaded guilty. [7] Extreme pornographer Max Hardcore served 30 months of a 46-month prison sentence for obscenity.
Many U.S. states have had bans on the sale of sex toys , regulating them as obscene devices. Some states have seen their sex toy bans ruled unconstitutional in the courts. [8] That ruling leaves only Mississippi, Alabama, and Virginia with current bans on the sale of obscene devices. [9]
Literature (non-fiction) communicating contraceptive information was prohibited by several states. The last such prohibition, in Connecticut, was overturned judicially in 1965.

Key U.S. court cases on obscenity
Standards superseded by the Miller Test include:
FCC rules and federal law govern obscenity in broadcast media. Many historically important works have been described as obscene or prosecuted under obscenity laws, including the works of Charles Baudelaire , Lenny Bruce , William S. Burroughs , Allen Ginsberg , James Joyce , D. H. Lawrence , Henry Miller , Samuel Beckett , and the Marquis de Sade .

Criticism
Obscenity law has been criticized in the following areas: [11]
Obscenity laws remain enforceable under Miller despite these criticisms. Some states have passed laws mandating censorship in schools, universities, and libraries even if they are not receiving government aid that would require censorship in these institutions . These include Arizona, Kentucky, Michigan, Minnesota, South Carolina, and Tennessee. Twenty more states were considering such legislation in 2001–2002. [13]

Child pornography
Child pornography refers to images or films (also known as child abuse images [14] [15] [16] )—or in some cases, writings [16] [17] [18] —that depict sexually explicit activities involving a child ; as such, child pornography is a record of child sexual abuse . [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] Abuse of the child occurs during the sexual acts that are recorded in the production of child pornography, [19] [20] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] and several professors of psychology state that memories of the abuse are maintained as long as visual records exist, are accessed, and are "exploited perversely." [24] [25]
In New York v. Ferber , 458 U.S. 747 (1982), the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that child pornography need not be legally obscene in order to be outlawed. The Court ruled that in contrast to the types of images considered in Miller , images that depicted underlying harm to children need not appeal to "the prurient interest of the average person," portray sexual conduct in "a patently offensive manner," nor be considered holistically, in order to be proscribed. Another difference between U.S. constitutional law concerning obscenity and that governing child pornography is that the Supreme Court ruled in Stanley v. Georgia , 394 U.S. 557 (1969), that possession of obscene material could not be criminalized, while in Osborne v. Ohio , 495 U.S. 103 (1990), the high court ruled that possession of child pornography could be criminalized. The reason was that the motive for criminalizing child pornography possession was "to destroy a market for the exploitative use of children" rather than to prevent the material from poisoning the minds of its viewers. The three dissenting justices in that case argued, "While the sexual exploitation of children is undoubtedly a serious problem, Ohio may employ other weapons to combat it."

Censorship in film
This is most notably shown with the "X" rating under which some films are categorized. The most notable films given an "X" rating were Deep Throat (1972) and The Devil in Miss Jones (1973). These films show explicit, non-simulated, penetrative sex that was presented as part of a reasonable plot with respectable production values. Some state authorities issued injunctions against such films to protect "local community standards"; in New York the print of Deep Throat was seized mid-run, and the film's exhibitors were found guilty of promoting obscenity. [27] According to the documentary This Film Is Not Yet Rated , films that include gay sex (even if implied) or female pleasure have been more harshly censored than their heterosexual, male counterparts. [28] MPAA through CARA now has NC-17 rating instead of X. MPAA is the Motion Pictures of America Association . [29] The Classification and Rating Administration (CARA) issues ratings for motion pictures exhibited and distributed commercially to the public in the United States, with the intent to provide parents information concerning the content of those motion pictures, to aid them in determining the suitability of individual motion pictures for viewing by their children. CARA will rate any motion picture at any time before or after it is exhibited or distributed in the United States." See carafilmratings.com for more information on the ratings. The chart of fees and the ratings may be seen by scrolling down through. [30]

United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom, the Obscene Publications Acts sets the criteria for what material is allowed to be publicly accessed and distributed.
Stanley Kauffmann 's novel The Philanderer was published by Penguin Books in 1957 and was unsuccessfully prosecuted for obscenity. [31]
Sex crime has generated particular concern. In 1976 the BBFC claimed that, in that year, it had viewed 58 films depicting "explicit rape", declaring scenes that glorified it as "obscene". As opposed to questions of "indecency", which have been applied to sexual explicitness, films charged with being obscene have been viewed as having "a tendency to deprave and corrupt" and been liable to prosecution. [27]
In 2008, the UK prosecuted a man for writing a fictional sex story ( R v Walker ). [32] [33] In 2009, the crown prosecution service (CPS) dropped the case. [34]
Obscenity law in England and Wales is currently governed by the Obscene Publications Act , but obscenity law goes back much further into the English common law . The conviction in 1727 of Edmund Curll for the publication of Venus in the Cloister or the Nun in her Smock under the common law offence of disturbing the peace appears to be the first conviction for obscenity in the United Kingdom, and set a legal precedent for other convictions. These common law ideas of obscenity formed the original basis of obscenity law in other common law countries, such as the United States.
For visual works of art the main obscenity law in England and Wales was, until the 1960s, the Vagrancy Act 1838 which was successfully used in prosecutions against D.H. Lawrence for an exhibition of his paintings at the Warren Gallery, London, in 1929, [35] and in 1966 against the British artist Stass Paraskos for an exhibition of his paintings held that year in the northern English city of Leeds . [36] Parts of the Act were repealed shortly after the Paraskos trial and it has rarely been used since in relation to visual art.
The Obscene Publications act is notoriously vague, defining obscenity as material likely to "deprave and corrupt". The 1959 act was passed just as most Western countries were about to enter a new phase of sexual freedom . The trial of Penguin Books over Lady Chatterley's Lover in 1960 failed to secure a conviction and the conviction in the 1971 trial of Oz magazine was overturned on appeal. An attempt to prosecute the University of Central England in 1997 over a copy of a library book by Robert Mapplethorpe was abandoned amidst derision from academics and the media . [37]
During the 1960s and 1970s most Western countries legalised hardcore pornography . By the 1980s the UK was almost the only liberal democracy where the sale of hardcore pornography was still completely illegal, although ownership was not a criminal offence (except child pornography ). Home videotape was a booming market and it was relatively simple for individuals to smuggle hardcore material in from Europe or the United States, where it had been purchased legally, either for personal use or to copy it for distribution. This resulted in a considerable black market of poor quality videotapes. Meanwhile, people attempting to buy pornography legally would often be stuck with heavily censored R18 certificate material.
While the authorities did their best to stay on top of illegal pornography they found that juries , while not particularly liking the material, were reluctant to convict defendants where the material was intended for private use among consenting adults. During the 1990s the advent of the internet made it easier than ever before for British citizens to access hardcore material. Finally, in 2000, following the dismissal of a test case brought by the BBFC , hardcore pornography was effectively legalised, subject to certain conditions and licensing restrictions. [38] It is still an offence to sell obscene material by mail order . [39]
After 1984 videotape sellers were more likely to be prosecuted under the Video Recordings Act rather than the OPA. The VRA requires that all videos must have a certificate from the BBFC. If the BBFC refuses a certificate a video is effectively banned for home viewing, but not necessarily in the cinema . Four films that were originally refused a certificate, The Exorcist , Straw Dogs , The Evil Dead and The Texas Chainsaw Massacre were granted a certificate in the late 1990s and have subsequently been screened on mainstream television .

New Zealand
In New Zealand, screening of Deep Throat (1972) was only cleared in 1986. However, the film has not been screened because the only cinema that has tried to organize a screening was thwarted by the city council that owned the building's lease. [27]

Canada
Section 163 of the Canadian Criminal Code provides the country's legal definition of "obscenity". Officially termed as "Offences Tending to Corrupt Morals", [40] the Canadian prohibited class of articles that are to be legally included as "obscene things" is very broad, including text-only written material, pictures, models (including statues), records or "any other thing whatsoever"—that according to Section 163(8)—has "a dominant characteristic of the publication is the undue exploitation of sex, or the combination of sex and at least one of crime, horror, cruelty or violence" is deemed to be "obscene" under the current law.
The current law states
163. (1) Every one commits an offense who
"Crime comics" are stated to be books that glorify criminal activities and have at least one depiction of such criminal actions of the book's text.
The Canada Border Services Agency seizes items it labels obscene.
In 1993, Canadian police arrested the 19-year-old writer of a fictional sex story "The Forestwood Kids" [41] however the case was dismissed in 1995. [42]
In February 2009, citing its Policy On The Classification Of Obscene Material , the CBSA banned two Lucas Entertainment films because they show the "ingestion of someone else's urine... with a sexual purpose". [43] [44]

Brazil
Ever since 1940, in the Title VI of the Penal Code, naming crimes against sexual dignity (until 2009 crimes against [social] conventions), the fourth chapter is dedicated to a crime named "public outrage [related] to modesty" ( Portuguese : ultraje público ao pudor , pronounced: [uwˈtɾaʒi ˈpublikw aw puˈdoʁ] ).
It is composed of two articles, Art. 233 "Obscene Act", "to practice an obscene act in a public place, or open or exposed to the public", punished with arrest of 3 months to 1 year or a fine; and Art. 234 "Obscene Written Piece or Object", to do, import, export, purchase or have in one's property, to ends of trade, distribution or public display, any written, drew, painted, stamped or object piece of obscenity, punished with arrest of 6 months to 1 years or a fine. [45]
Criticism to the legislation have included: [46]
It is often used against people who expose their nude bodies in public environments that were not warranted a license to cater to the demographic interested in such practice (the first such place was the Praia do Abricó in Rio de Janeiro, in 1994), even if no sexual action took place, and it may include for example a double standard for the chest area of women and men in which only women are penalized. Such a thing took place in FEMEN protests in São Paulo, in 2012. [47]

Other countries
Various countries have different standings on the types of materials that they as legal bodies permit their citizens to have access to and disseminate among their local populations. The set of these countries' permissible content vary widely accordingly with some having extreme punishment up to and including execution for members who violate their restrictions, as in the case of Iran where the current laws against pornography now include death sentences for those convicted of producing pornography. [48]
In India the Obscenity law is the same as had been framed by the British Government. Charges of obscenity have been levelled against various writers and poets till date; the law has not yet been revised. The famous trials relate to the Hungryalists who were arrested and prosecuted in the 1960s.

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00067
Real life
Real life is a phrase used originally in literature to distinguish between actual and fictional or idealized worlds, and in acting to distinguish between performers and the characters they portray. More recently it has become a popular term on the Internet to describe events, people, activities and interactions occurring offline, or otherwise, not primarily through the medium of the internet.

As distinct from fiction
When used to distinguish from fictional worlds or universes against the consensus reality of the reader, the term has a long history:
In her 1788 work, Original Stories from Real Life; with Conversations Calculated to Regulate the Affections, and Form the Mind to Truth and Goodness , author Mary Wollstonecraft employs the term in her title, representing the work's focus on a middle-class ethos which she viewed as superior to the court culture represented by fairy tales and the values of chance and luck found in chapbook stories for the poor. [2] As phrased by Gary Kelly, writing about the work, "The phrase ‘real life’ strengthens ‘original’, excluding both the artificial and the fictional or imaginary." [3]
Similarly, the phrase can be used to distinguish an actor from a character, e.g. "In real life, he has a British accent" or "In real life, he lives in Los Angeles."
There is a related but slightly distinct usage among role-players and historical reenactors , to distinguish the fantasy or historical context from the actual world and the role-player or actor from the character, e.g. "What do you do in real life?" or "Where do you live in real life?"

As distinct from the Internet
On the Internet, "real life" refers to life offline . Online, the acronym "IRL" stands for "in real life", with the meaning "not on the Internet". [4] For example, while Internet users may speak of having "met" someone that they have contacted via online chat or in an online gaming context, to say that they met someone "in real life" is to say that they literally encountered them in a common physical location. Some, arguing that the Internet is part of real life, prefer to use "away from the keyboard" ( AFK ), e.g. the documentary TPB AFK .
Some sociologists engaged in the study of the Internet have predicted that someday, a distinction between online and real-life worlds may seem "quaint", noting that certain types of online activity, such as sexual intrigues, have already made a full transition to complete legitimacy and "reality". [5]

Related terminology
The initialism "RL" stands for "real life" and "IRL" for "in real life." For example, one can speak of "meeting IRL" (LMIRL) someone whom one has met online. It may also be used to express an inability to use the Internet for a time due to "RL problems." Some Internet users use the idioms " face time ", "meatspace" or "meat world", which contrast with the term " cyberspace ". [6] [7] "Meatspace" has appeared in the Financial Times [8] and in science fiction literature. [9] Some early uses of the term include a post to the Usenet newsgroup austin.public-net in 1993 [10] and an article in The Seattle Times about John Perry Barlow in 1995. [11] The term entered the Oxford English Dictionary in 2000. [12]

Other uses
The phrase is also used to distinguish academic life from work in other sectors, in a manner similar to the term "real world". A person with experience in "real life" or the "real world" has experience beyond book-learning. It may also be used, often pejoratively, to distinguish other insular subcultures , work environments, or lifestyles from more traditional social and professional activities. The terms "real life" and "the real world" may also be used to describe adulthood and the adult world as distinct from childhood and adolescence .

See also
WebPage index: 00068
Sexism
Sexism or gender discrimination is prejudice or discrimination based on a person's sex or gender . Sexism can affect either gender, but it is particularly documented as affecting women and girls. [1] It has been linked to stereotypes and gender roles , [2] [3] and may include the belief that one sex or gender is intrinsically superior to another. [4] Extreme sexism may foster sexual harassment , rape , and other forms of sexual violence . [5]

Etymology and definitions
According to Fred R. Shapiro , the term "sexism" was most likely coined on November 18, 1965, by Pauline M. Leet during a "Student-Faculty Forum" at Franklin and Marshall College . [6] [7] Specifically, the word sexism appears in Leet's forum contribution "Women and the Undergraduate", and she defines it by comparing it to racism, stating in part (on page 3): "When you argue ... that since fewer women write good poetry this justifies their total exclusion, you are taking a position analogous to that of the racist—I might call you in this case a 'sexist' ... Both the racist and the sexist are acting as if all that has happened had never happened, and both of them are making decisions and coming to conclusions about someone’s value by referring to factors which are in both cases irrelevant." [6]
Also according to Shapiro, the first time the term "sexism" appeared in print was in Caroline Bird 's speech "On Being Born Female", which was published on November 15, 1968, in Vital Speeches of the Day (p. 6). [6] In this speech she said in part: "There is recognition abroad that we are in many ways a sexist country. Sexism is judging people by their sex when sex doesn't matter. Sexism is intended to rhyme with racism." [6]
Sexism is discrimination, prejudice, or stereotyping on the basis of gender. Sexism is most often expressed toward girls and women. [1] It has been characterized as the "hatred of women" and "entrenched prejudice against women." [8]

 History

 Ancient world
The status of women in Ancient Egypt depended on their fathers or husbands, but they had property rights and were allowed to attend court, including as plaintiffs. [9] Women of the Anglo-Saxon era were also commonly afforded equal status. [10] Evidence, however, is lacking to support the idea that many pre-agricultural societies afforded women a higher status than women today. [11] [12] After the adoption of agriculture and sedentary cultures, the concept that one gender was inferior to the other was established; most often this was imposed upon women and girls. [13] Examples of sexism in the ancient world include written laws preventing women from participating in the political process; women in ancient Rome could not vote or hold political office . [14] Another example is scholarly texts that indoctrinate children in female inferiority; women in ancient China were taught the Confucian principles that a woman should obey her father in childhood, husband in marriage, and son in widowhood. [15]

Witch hunts and trials
Sexism may have been the impetus that fueled the witch trials between the 15th and 18th centuries. [17] In early modern Europe , and in the European colonies in North America, claims were made that witches were a threat to Christendom . The misogyny of that period played a role in the persecution of these women. [18] [19]
In Malleus Malificarum , the book which played a major role in the witch hunts and trials, the authors argue that women are more likely to practice witchcraft than men, and write that:
Witchcraft remains illegal in several countries, including Saudi Arabia , where it is punishable by death . In 2011, a woman was beheaded in that country for 'witchcraft and sorcery'. [21] Murders of women after being accused of witchcraft remain common in some parts of the world; for example, in Tanzania , about 500 elderly women are murdered each year following such accusations. [22]
When women are targeted for accusations of witchcraft and subsequent violence, it is often the case that several forms of discrimination interact - for example, discrimination based on gender with discrimination based on caste , as is the case in India and Nepal, where such crimes are relatively common. [23] [24]

Coverture and other marriage regulations
Until the 20th century, U.S. and English law observed the system of coverture , where "by marriage, the husband and wife are one person in law; that is the very being or legal existence of the woman is suspended during the marriage". [26] U.S. women were not legally defined as "persons" until 1875 ( Minor v. Happersett , 88 U.S. 162). [27] A similar legal doctrine, named marital power , existed under Roman Dutch law (and is still partially in force in present-day Swaziland ).
Restrictions on married women's rights were common in Western countries until a few decades ago: for instance, French married women obtained the right to work without their husband's permission in 1965, [28] [29] [30] and in West Germany women obtained this right in 1977. [31] [32] During the Franco era, in Spain, a married woman required her husband's consent (called permiso marital ) for employment, ownership of property and traveling away from home; the permiso marital was abolished in 1975. [33] In Australia, until 1983, the passport application of a married woman had to be authorized by her husband. [34]
Women in parts of the world continue to lose legal rights at marriage. For example, Yemeni marriage regulations state that a wife must obey her husband and must not leave home without his permission. [35] In Iraq , the law allows husbands to legally "punish" their wives. [36] In the Democratic Republic of Congo , the Family Code states that the husband is the head of the household; the wife owes her obedience to her husband; a wife has to live with her husband wherever he chooses to live; and wives must have their husbands' authorization to bring a case in court or to initiate other legal proceedings. [37]
Abuses and discriminatory practices against women in marriage are often rooted in financial payments such as dowry , bride price , and dower . [38] These transactions often serve as legitimizing coercive control of the wife by her husband and in giving him authority over her; for instance Article 13 of the Code of Personal Status (Tunisia) states that "The husband shall not, in default of payment of the dower , force the woman to consummate the marriage", [39] [40] implying that, if the dower is paid, marital rape is permitted (in this regard, critics have questioned the alleged gains of women in Tunisia , and its image as a progressive country in the region, arguing that discrimination against women remains very strong in that country). [41] [42] [43]
The OMCT has recognized the "independence and ability to leave an abusive husband" as crucial in stopping mistreatment of women. [44] However, in some parts of the world, once married, women have very little chance of leaving a violent husband: obtaining a divorce is very difficult in many jurisdictions because of the need to prove fault in court; while attempting a de facto separation (moving away from the marital home) is also not possible due to laws preventing this. For instance, in Afghanistan , a wife who leaves her marital home risks being imprisoned for "running away". [45] [46] In addition, many former British colonies, including India , maintain the concept of restitution of conjugal rights , [47] under which a wife may be ordered by court to return to her husband; if she fails to do so she may be held in contempt of court . [48] [49] Other problems have to do with the payment of the bride price : if the wife wants to leave, her husband may demand back the bride price that he had paid to the woman's family; and the woman's family often cannot or does not want to pay it back. [50] [51] [52]
Laws, regulations, and traditions related to marriage continue to discriminate against women in many parts of the world, and to contribute to the mistreatment of women, in particular in areas related to sexual violence and to self-determination in regard to sexuality , the violation of the latter now being acknowledged as a violation of women's rights ; in 2012, Navi Pillay , then High Commissioner for Human Rights , has stated that:

Suffrage and politics
Gender has been used, at times, as a tool for discrimination against women in the political sphere. Women's suffrage was not achieved until 1893, when New Zealand was the first country to grant women the right to vote. Saudi Arabia was the most recent country, as of August 2015, to extend the right to vote to women in 2011. [54] Some Western countries allowed women the right to vote only relatively recently: Swiss women gained the right to vote in federal elections in 1971, [55] and Appenzell Innerrhoden became the last canton to grant women the right to vote on local issues (in 1991, when it was forced to do so by the Federal Supreme Court of Switzerland ). [56] French women were granted the right to vote in 1944. [57] [58] In Greece, women obtained the right to vote in 1952. [59] In Liechtenstein , women obtained the right to vote in 1984, through the women's suffrage referendum of 1984 . [60] [61]
While almost every woman today has the right to vote, there is still progress to be made for women in politics. Studies have shown that in several democracies including Australia, Canada and the United States, women are still represented using gender stereotypes in the press. [62] Multiple authors have shown that gender differences in the media are less evident today than they used to be in the 1980s, but are nonetheless still present. Certain issues (e.g., education) are likely to be linked with female candidates, while other issues (e.g., taxes) are likely to be linked with male candidates. [62] In addition, there is more emphasis on female candidates' personal qualities, such as their appearance and their personality, as females are portrayed as emotional and dependent. [62]
Sexism in politics can also be shown in the imbalance of law making power between men and women. Lanyan Chen asserts that men hold more political power than women, serving as the gatekeepers of policy making. It is possible that this leads to women's needs not being properly represented. In this sense, the inequality of law making power also causes the gender discrimination in politics. [63] The ratio of women to men in legislatures is used as a measure of gender equality in the UN created Gender Empowerment Measure and its newer incarnation the Gender Inequality Index .

Gender stereotypes
Gender stereotypes are widely held beliefs about the characteristics and behavior of women and men. [64] Empirical studies have found widely shared cultural beliefs that men are more socially valued and more competent than women in a number of activities. [65] [66] Dustin B. Thoman and others (2008) hypothesize that "[t]he socio-cultural salience of ability versus other components of the gender-math stereotype may impact women pursuing math". Through the experiment comparing the math outcomes of women under two various gender-math stereotype components, which are the ability of math and the effort on math respectively, Thoman and others found that women’s math performance is more likely to be affected by the negative ability stereotype, which is influenced by sociocultural beliefs in the United States, rather than the effort component. As a result of this experiment and the sociocultural beliefs in the United States, Thoman and others concluded that individuals' academic outcomes can be affected by the gender-math stereotype component that is influenced by the sociocultural beliefs. [67]
In the World Values Survey , responders were asked if they thought that wage work should be restricted to only men in the case of shortage in jobs. While in Iceland the proportion that agreed was 3.6%, in Egypt it was 94.9%. [68]

In language
Sexism in language exists when language devalues members of a certain gender. [69] Sexist language, in many instances, promotes male superiority. [70] Sexism in language affects consciousness, perceptions of reality, encoding and transmitting cultural meanings and socialization. [69] Researchers have pointed to the semantic rule in operation in language of the male-as-norm . [71] This results in sexism as the male becomes the standard and those who are not male are relegated to the inferior. [71] Sexism in language is considered a form of indirect sexism, in that it is not always overt. [72]
Examples include:

Sexist and gender-neutral language
Various feminist movements in the 20th century, from liberal feminism and radical feminism to standpoint feminism , postmodern feminism and queer theory have all considered language in their theorizing. [74] Most of these theories have maintained a critical stance on language that calls for a change in the way speakers use their language.
One of the most common calls is for gender-neutral language. Many have called attention, however, to the fact that the English language isn't inherently sexist in its linguistic system, but rather the way it is used becomes sexist and gender-neutral language could thus be employed. [75] At the same time, other opposed critiques of sexism in language with explanations that language is a descriptive, rather than prescriptive, and attempts to control it can be fruitless. [76]

Sexism in languages other than English
Romanic languages such as French [77] and Spanish [78] may be seen as reinforcing sexism, in that the masculine form is the default form. The word 'mademoiselle', meaning miss was declared banished from French administrative forms in 2012 by Prime Minister François Fillon . [77] Current pressure calls for the use of the masculine plural pronoun as the default in a mixed-sex group to change. [79] As to Spanish, Mexico's Ministry of the Interior published a guide on how to reduce the use of sexist language. [78]
German speakers have also raised questions about how sexism intersects with grammar. [80] The German language is heavily inflected for gender, number, and case; nearly all nouns denoting the occupations or statuses of human beings are gender-differentiated. For more gender-neutral constructions, gerund nouns are sometimes used instead, as this completely eliminates the grammatical gender distinction in the plural, and significantly reduces it in the singular. For example, instead of die Studenten ("the men students") or die Studentinnen ("the women students"), one writes die Studierenden ("the [people who are] studying"). [81] However, this approach introduces an element of ambiguity, because gerund nouns more precisely denote one currently engaged in the activity, rather than one who routinely engages in it as their primary occupation. [82]
In Chinese , some writers have pointed to sexism inherent in the structure of written characters. For example, the character for man is linked to those for positive qualities like courage and effect while the character for wife is composed of a female part and a broom, considered of low worth. [83]

Gender-specific pejorative terms
Gender-specific pejorative terms intimidate or harm another person because of their gender. Sexism can be expressed in language with negative gender-oriented implications, [84] such as condescension . For example, one may refer to a female as a "girl" rather than a "woman", implying that they are subordinate or not fully mature. Other examples include obscene language. Some words are offensive to transgender people, including "tranny", "she-male", or "he-she". Intentional misgendering (assigning the wrong gender to someone) and the pronoun "it" are also considered pejorative. [85] [86]

Occupational sexism
Occupational sexism refers to discriminatory practices, statements or actions, based on a person's sex , occurring in the workplace. One form of occupational sexism is wage discrimination . In 2008, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) found that while female employment rates have expanded and gender employment and wage gaps have narrowed nearly everywhere, on average women still have 20% less chance to have a job and are paid 17% less than men. [88] The report stated:
It also found that despite the fact that almost all OECD countries, including the U.S., [90] have established anti-discrimination laws, these laws are difficult to enforce. [88]
Women who enter predominantly male work groups can experience the negative consequences of tokenism : performance pressures, social isolation, and role encapsulation. [91] Tokenism could be used to camouflage sexism, to preserve male worker's advantage in the workplace. [91] No link exists between the proportion of women working in an organization/company and the improvement of their working conditions. Ignoring sexist issues may exacerbate women’s occupational problems. [92]

Gap in hiring
One 2014 study by Wendy M. Williams and Stephen J. Ceci found that female applicants are preferred 2:1 over identically qualified male applicants in academic hiring. However, its results have been met with skepticism from other researchers, since it contradicts most other studies on the issues. [ citation needed ] Joan C. Williams, a distinguished professor at the University of California's Hastings College of Law, raised issues with its methodology, pointing out that the fictional female candidates it used were unusually well-qualified. Studies using more moderately-qualified graduate students have found that male students are much more likely to be hired, offered better salaries, and offered mentorship. [93] [94]
In Europe, studies based on field experiments in the labour market, provide evidence for no severe levels of discrimination based on female gender. However, unequal treatment is still measured in particular situations, for instance when candidates apply for positions at a higher functional level in Belgium, [95] [ not in citation given ] when they apply at their fertiles ages in France, [96] [ not in citation given ] and when they apply for male-dominated occupations in Austria. [97]

Earnings gap
Studies have concluded that on average women earn lower wages than men worldwide. Some people argue that this is the result of widespread gender discrimination in the workplace. Others argue that the wage gap is a result of different choices by men and women, such as women placing more value than men on having children, and men being more likely than women to choose careers in high paying fields such as business, engineering and technology.
Eurostat found a persistent, average gender pay gap of 27.5% in the 27 EU member states in 2008. [98] Similarly, the OECD found that female full-time employees earned 27% less than their male counterparts in OECD countries in 2009. [88] [89]
In the United States, the female-to-male earnings ratio was 0.77 in 2009; female full-time, year-round (FTYR) workers earned 77% as much as male FTYR workers. Women's earnings relative to men's fell from 1960 to 1980 (56.7–54.2%), rose rapidly from 1980 to 1990 (54.2–67.6%), leveled off from 1990 to 2000 (67.6–71.2%) and rose from 2000 to 2009 (71.2–77.0%). [99] [100] When the first Equal Pay Act was passed in 1963, female full-time workers earned 48.9% as much as male full-time workers. [99]
Research conducted in the Czech and Slovak Republics shows that, even after the governments passed anti-discrimination legislation, two thirds of the gender gap in wages remained unexplained and segregation continued to "represent a major source of the gap". [101]
The gender gap can also vary across-occupation and within occupation. In Taiwan, for example, studies show how the bulk of gender wage discrepancies occur within-occupation. [102] In Russia, research shows that the gender wage gap is distributed unevenly across income levels, and that it mainly occurs at the lower end of income distribution. [103] The research also found that "wage arrears and payment in-kind attenuated wage discrimination, particularly amongst the lowest paid workers, suggesting that Russian enterprise managers assigned lowest importance to equity considerations when allocating these forms of payment". [103]
The gender pay gap has been attributed to differences in personal and workplace characteristics between men and women (such as education, hours worked and occupation), innate behavioral and biological differences between men and women and discrimination in the labor market (such as gender stereotypes and customer and employer bias). Women currently take significantly more time off to raise children than men. [104] In certain countries such as South Korea, it has also been a long-established practice to lay-off female employees upon marriage. [105] A study by professor Linda Babcock in her book Women Don't Ask shows that men are eight times more likely to ask for a pay raise, suggesting that pay inequality may be partly a result of behavioral differences between the sexes. [106] However, studies generally find that a portion of the gender pay gap remains unexplained after accounting for factors assumed to influence earnings; the unexplained portion of the wage gap is attributed to gender discrimination. [107]
Estimates of the discriminatory component of the gender pay gap vary. The OECD estimated that approximately 30% of the gender pay gap across OECD countries is due to discrimination. [88] Australian research shows that discrimination accounts for approximately 60% of the wage differential between men and women. [108] [109] Studies examining the gender pay gap in the United States show that a large portion of the wage differential remains unexplained, after controlling for factors affecting pay. One study of college graduates found that the portion of the pay gap unexplained after all other factors are taken into account is 5% one year after graduating and 12% a decade after graduation. [110] [111] [112] [113] A study by the American Association of University Women found that women graduates in the United States are paid less than men doing the same work and majoring in the same field. [114]
Wage discrimination is theorized as contradicting the economic concept of supply and demand , which states that if a good or service (in this case, labor) is in demand and has value it will find its price in the market. If a worker offered equal value for less pay, supply and demand would indicate a greater demand for lower-paid workers. If a business hired lower-wage workers for the same work, it would lower its costs and enjoy a competitive advantage . According to supply and demand, if women offered equal value demand (and wages) should rise since they offer a better price (lower wages) for their service than men do. [116]
Research at Cornell University and elsewhere indicates that mothers in the United States are less likely to be hired than equally-qualified fathers and, if hired, receive a lower salary than male applicants with children. [117] [118] [119] [120] [121] [122] The OECD found that "a significant impact of children on women’s pay is generally found in the United Kingdom and the United States". [123] Fathers earn $ 7,500 more, on average, than men without children do. [124]
There is research to suggest that the gender wage gap leads to big losses for the economy as a whole. [125]

 Possible causes for wage discrimination
According to Denise Venable at the National Center for Policy Analysis , the "wage gap" in the United States is not the result of discrimination but of differences in lifestyle choices. Venable's report found that women are less likely than men to sacrifice personal happiness for increases in income or to choose full-time work. She found that among American adults working between one and thirty-five hours a week and part-time workers who have never been married, women earn more than men. Venable also found that among people aged 27 to 33 who have never had a child, women's earnings approach 98% of men's and "women who hold positions and have skills and experience similar to those of men face wage disparities of less than 10 percent, and many are within a couple of points". [126] Venable concluded that women and men with equal skills and opportunities in the same positions face little or no wage discrimination: "Claims of unequal pay almost always involve comparing apples and oranges".
There is considerable agreement that gender wage discrimination exists, however, when it comes to estimating its magnitude, significant discrepancies are visible. A meta-regression analysis concludes that "the estimated gender gap has been steadily declining" and that the wage rate calculation is proven to be crucial in estimating the wage gap. [127] The analysis further notes that excluding experience and failing to correct for selection bias from analysis might also lead to incorrect conclusions.

Glass ceiling effect
"The popular notion of glass ceiling effects implies that gender (or other) disadvantages are stronger at the top of the hierarchy than at lower levels and that these disadvantages become worse later in a person's career." [128]
In the United States, women account for 52% of the overall labor force, but only make up 3% of corporate CEOs and top executives. [129] Some researchers see the root cause of this situation in the tacit discrimination based on gender, conducted by current top executives and corporate directors (primarily male), as well as "the historic absence of women in top positions", which "may lead to hysteresis, preventing women from accessing powerful, male-dominated professional networks, or same-sex mentors". [129] The glass ceiling effect is noted as being especially persistent for women of color (according to a report, "women of colour perceive a 'concrete ceiling' and not simply a glass ceiling"). [129]
In the economics profession, it has been observed that women are more inclined than men to dedicate their time to teaching and service. Since continuous research work is crucial for promotion, "the cumulative effect of small, contemporaneous differences in research orientation could generate the observed significant gender difference in promotion". [130] In the high-tech industry, research shows that, regardless of the intra-firm changes, "extra-organizational pressures will likely contribute to continued gender stratification as firms upgrade, leading to the potential masculinization of skilled high-tech work". [131]
The United Nations asserts that "progress in bringing women into leadership and decision making positions around the world remains far too slow". [132]

Potential remedies
Research by David Matsa and Amalia Miller suggests that a possible remedy to the glass ceiling could be increasing the number of women on corporate boards, which could subsequently lead to increases in the number of women working in top management positions. [129] The same research suggests that this could also result in a "feedback cycle in which the presence of more female managers increases the qualified pool of potential female board members (for the companies they manage, as well as other companies), leading to greater female board membership and then further increases in female executives". [132]

Weight based sexism
A 2009 study found that being overweight harms women's career advancement, but presents no barrier for men. Overweight women were significantly underrepresented among company bosses, making up between 5% and 22% of female CEOs. However, the proportion of overweight male CEOs was between 45% and 61%, over-representing overweight men. On the other hand, approximately 5% of CEOs were obese among both genders. The author of the study stated that the results suggest that "the ' glass ceiling effect' on women's advancement may reflect not only general negative stereotypes about the competencies of women, but also weight bias that results in the application of stricter appearance standards to women." [133] [134]

Transgender discrimination
Transgender people also experience significant workplace discrimination and harassment. [135] Unlike sex-based discrimination, refusing to hire (or firing) a worker for their gender identity or expression is not explicitly illegal in most U.S. states. [136]
In August 1995, Kimberly Nixon filed a complaint with the British Columbia Human Rights Tribunal against Vancouver Rape Relief & Women's Shelter. Nixon, a trans woman , had been interested in volunteering as a counselor with the shelter. When the shelter learned that she was transsexual , they told Nixon that she would not be allowed to volunteer with the organization. Nixon argued that this constituted illegal discrimination under Section 41 of the British Columbia Human Rights Code . Vancouver Rape Relief countered that individuals are shaped by the socialization and experiences of their formative years, and that Nixon had been socialized as a male growing up, and that, therefore, Nixon would not be able to provide sufficiently effective counseling to the female born women that the shelter served. [137]

Objectification
In social philosophy , objectification is the act of treating a person as an object or thing. Objectification plays a central role in feminist theory, especially sexual objectification . [138] Feminist writer and gender equality activist Joy Goh-Mah argues that by being objectified, a person is denied agency. [139] According to the philosopher Martha Nussbaum , a person might be objectified if one or more of the following properties are applied to them: [140]
Rae Helen Langton , in Sexual Solipsism: Philosophical Essays on Pornography and Objectification , proposed three more properties to be added to Nussbaum's list: [138] [141]
According to objectification theory, objectification can have important repercussions on women, particularly young women, as it can negatively impact their psychological health and lead to the development of mental disorders, such as unipolar depression , sexual dysfunction , and eating disorders . [142]

In advertising
While advertising used to portray women and men in obviously stereotypical roles (e.g., as a housewife, breadwinner), in modern advertisements they are no longer solely confined to their traditional roles. However, advertising today nonetheless still stereotypes both sexes, albeit in more subtle ways, including by sexually objectifying them. [143]
Today, some countries (for example Norway and Denmark ) have laws against sexual objectification in advertising . [144] Nudity is not banned, and nude people can be used to advertise a product if they are relevant to the product advertised. Sol Olving, head of Norway's Kreativt Forum (an association of the country's top advertising agencies) explained, "You could have a naked person advertising shower gel or a cream, but not a woman in a bikini draped across a car". [144]
Other countries continue to ban nudity (on traditional obscenity grounds), but also make explicit reference to sexual objectification, such as Israel 's ban of billboards that "depicts sexual humiliation or abasement, or presents a human being as an object available for sexual use". [145]

Pornography
Anti-pornography feminist Catharine MacKinnon argues that pornography contributes to sexism by objectifying women and portraying them in submissive roles. [146] MacKinnon, along with Andrea Dworkin, argues that pornography reduces women to mere tools, and is a form of sex discrimination. [147] The two scholars highlight the link between objectification and pornography by stating:
"We define pornography as the graphic sexually explicit subordination of women through pictures and words that also includes (i) women are presented dehumanized as sexual objects, things, or commodities; or (ii) women are presented as sexual objects who enjoy humiliation or pain; or (iii) women are presented as sexual objects experiencing sexual pleasure in rape, incest or other sexual assault; or (iv) women are presented as sexual objects tied up, cut up or mutilated or bruised or physically hurt; or (v) women are presented in postures or positions of sexual submission, servility, or display; or (vi) women's body parts—including but not limited to vaginas, breasts, or buttocks—are exhibited such that women are reduced to those parts; or (vii) women are presented being penetrated by objects or animals; or (viii) women are presented in scenarios of degradation, humiliation, injury, torture, shown as filthy or inferior, bleeding, bruised, or hurt in a context that makes these conditions sexual." [148]
Robin Morgan and Catharine MacKinnon suggest that certain types of pornography also contribute to violence against women by eroticizing scenes in which women are dominated, coerced, humiliated or sexually assaulted . [149] [150]
Some people opposed to pornography, including MacKinnon, charge that the production of pornography entails physical, psychological, and economic coercion of the women who perform and model in it. [151] [152] [153] Opponents of pornography charge that it presents a distorted image of sexual relations and reinforces sexual myths; it shows women as continually available and willing to engage in sex at any time, with any person, on their terms, responding positively to any requests.
MacKinnon writes:
Defenders of pornography and anti-censorship activists (including sex-positive feminists ) argue that pornography does not seriously impact a mentally healthy individual, since the viewer can distinguish between fantasy and reality. [155] They contend that both sexes are objectified in pornography (particularly sadistic or masochistic pornography, in which men are objectified and sexually used by women). [156]

Prostitution
Prostitution is the business or practice of engaging in sexual relations in exchange for payment . [157] [158] Sex workers are often objectified and are seen as existing only to serve clients, thus calling their sense of agency into question. There is a prevailing notion that because they sell sex professionally, prostitutes automatically consent to all sexual contact. [159] As a result, sex workers face higher rates of violence and sexual assault. This is often dismissed, ignored and not taken seriously by authorities. [159]
In many countries, prostitution is dominated by brothels or pimps, who often claim ownership over sex workers. This sense of ownership furthers the concept that sex workers are void of agency. [160] This is literally the case in instances of sexual slavery .
Various authors have argued that female prostitution is based on male sexism that condones the idea that unwanted sex with a woman is acceptable, that men's desires must be satisfied, and that women are coerced into and exist to serve men sexually. [161] [162] [163] [164] The European Women's Lobby condemned prostitution as "an intolerable form of male violence". [165]
Carole Pateman writes that: [166]

Media portrayals
Some scholars believe that media portrayals of demographic groups can both maintain and disrupt attitudes and behaviors toward those groups. [167] [ page needed ] [168] [169] [ page needed ] According to Susan Douglas: "Since the early 1990s, much of the media have come to overrepresent women as having made it-completely-in the professions, as having gained sexual equality with men, and having achieved a level of financial success and comfort enjoyed primarily by Tiffany's-encrusted doyennes of Laguna Beach." [170] These images may be harmful, particularly to women and racial and ethnic minority groups. For example, a study of African American women found they feel that media portrayals of African American women often reinforce stereotypes of this group as overly sexual and idealize images of lighter-skinned, thinner African American women (images African American women describe as objectifying). [171] In a recent analysis of images of Haitian women in the Associated Press photo archive from 1994 to 2009, several themes emerged emphasizing the "otherness" of Haitian women and characterizing them as victims in need of rescue. [172]
In an attempt to study the effect of media consumption on males, Samantha and Bridges found an effect on body shame, though not through self-objectification as it was found in comparable studies of women. The authors conclude that the current measures of objectification were designed for women and do not measure men accurately. [173] Another study also found a negative effect on eating attitudes and body satisfaction of consumption of beauty and fitness magazines for women and men respectively, but again with different mechanisms, namely self-objectification for women and internalization for men. [174]

Sexist jokes
Frederick Attenborough argues that sexist jokes can be a form of sexual objectification, which reduce the butt of the joke to an object. They not only objectify women, but can also condone violence or prejudice against women. [175] "Sexist humor—the denigration of women through humor—for instance, trivializes sex discrimination under the veil of benign amusement, thus precluding challenges or opposition that nonhumorous sexist communication would likely incur." [176] A study of 73 male undergraduate students by Ford found that "sexist humor can promote the behavioral expression of prejudice against women amongst sexist men". [176] According to the study, when sexism is presented in a humorous manner it is viewed as tolerable and socially acceptable: "Disparagement of women through humor 'freed' sexist participants from having to conform to the more general and more restrictive norms regarding discrimination against women." [176]

Gender (identity) discrimination
Gender discrimination is discrimination on the basis of actual or perceived gender identity . [177] Gender identity is "the gender-related identity, appearance, or mannerisms or other gender-related characteristics of an individual, with or without regard to the individual's designated sex at birth". [178] Gender discrimination is theoretically different from sexism. [179] Whereas sexism is prejudice based on biological sex, gender discrimination specifically addresses discrimination towards identity based orientations, including third gender , genderqueer , and other non-binary identified people. [180] Banning discrimination on the basis of gender identity and expression has emerged as a subject of contention in the American legal system. [181]
According to a recent report by the Congressional Research Service, "although the majority of federal courts to consider the issue have concluded that discrimination on the basis of gender identity is not sex discrimination, there have been several courts that have reached the opposite conclusion". [178] Hurst states that "[c]ourts often confuse sex, gender and sexual orientation, and confuse them in a way that results in denying the rights not only of gays and lesbians, but also of those who do not present themselves or act in a manner traditionally expected of their sex". [182]

Oppositional sexism
Oppositional sexism is a term coined by transfeminist author Julia Serano , who defined oppositional sexism as "the belief that male and female are rigid, mutually exclusive categories." [183] Oppositional sexism plays a vital role in a number of social norms Viz. cissexism , heteronormativity , and traditional sexism.
Oppositional sexism normalizes masculine expression in males and feminine expression in females while simultaneously demonizing femininity in males and masculinity in females. This concept plays a crucial role in supporting cissexism, the social norm that views cisgender people as both natural and privileged as opposed to transgender people. [184]
The idea of having two, totally opposite genders is tied to sexuality through what gender theorist Judith Butler calls a "compulsory practice of heterosexuality." [184] Because oppositional sexism is tied to heteronormativity in this way, non-heterosexuals are seen as breaking gender norms. [184]
The concept of opposite genders sets a "dangerous precedent", according to Serano, where "if men are big then women must be small; and if men are strong then women must be weak." [183] The gender binary and oppositional norms work together to support "traditional sexism," the belief that femininity is inferior to and serves masculinity. [184]
Serano states that oppositional sexism works in tandem with "traditional sexism." This ensures that "those who are masculine have power over those who are feminine, and that only those that are born male will be seen as authentically masculine." [183]

Transgender discrimination
Transgender discrimination is discrimination towards peoples whose gender identity differs from the social expectations of the biological sex they were born with. [185] Forms of discrimination include but are not limited to identity documents not reflecting one's gender, sex-segregated public restrooms and other facilities, dress codes according to binary gender codes, and lack of access to and existence of appropriate health care services. [186] In a recent adjudication, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) concluded that discrimination against a transgender person is sex discrimination. [186]
The National Transgender Discrimination Survey, the most extensive survey of transgender discrimination, in collaboration with the National Black Justice Coalition recently showed that Black transgender people in the United States suffer "the combination of anti-transgender bias and persistent, structural and individual racism" and that "black transgender people live in extreme poverty that is more than twice the rate for transgender people of all races (15%), four times the general Black population rate 9% and over eight times the general US population rate (4%)". [187] In another study conducted in collaboration with the League of United Latin American Citizens, Latino/a transgender people who were non-citizens were most vulnerable to harassment, abuse and violence. [188]
Further discrimination is faced by gender nonconforming individuals, whether transitioning or not, due to displacement from societally acceptable gender binaries and visible stigmatization. According to the NTDS, transgender gender nonconforming (TGNC) individuals face between 8% and 15% high rates of self and social discrimination and violence than binary transgender individuals. Lisa R. Miller and Eric Anthony Grollman found in their 2015 study that "gender nonconformity may heighten trans people's exposure to discrimination and health-harming behaviors. Gender nonconforming trans adults reported more events of major and everyday transphobic discrimination than their gender conforming counterparts." [189]

Examples

Health

Domestic violence
Although the exact rates are widely disputed, there is a large body of cross-cultural evidence that women are subjected to domestic violence mostly committed by men. [190] [191] [192] In addition, there is broad consensus that women are more often subjected to severe forms of abuse and are more likely to be injured by an abusive partner. [191] [192] The United Nations recognizes domestic violence as a form of gender-based violence , which it describes as a human rights violation, and the result of sexism. [193]
Domestic violence is tolerated and even legally accepted in many parts of the world. For instance, in 2010, the United Arab Emirates (UAE)'s Supreme Court ruled that a man has the right to physically discipline his wife and children if he does not leave visible marks. [194] In 2015, Equality Now drew attention a section of the Penal Code of Northern Nigeria, titled Correction of Child, Pupil, Servant or Wife which reads: "(1) Nothing is an offence which does not amount to the infliction of grievous hurt upon any persons which is done: (...) (d) by a husband for the purpose of correcting his wife, such husband and wife being subject to any native law or custom in which such correction is recognized as lawful." [195]
Honor killings are another form of domestic violence practiced in several parts of the world, and their victims are predominantly women. [196] Honor killings can occur because of refusal to enter into an arranged marriage, maintaining a relationship relatives disapprove of, extramarital sex, becoming the victim of rape, dress seen as inappropriate, or homosexuality. [197] [198] [199] The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime states that, "[h]onour crimes, including killing, are one of history’s oldest forms of gender-based violence". [200]
According to a report of the Special Rapporteur submitted to the 58th session of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights concerning cultural practices in the family that reflect violence against women:
Practices such as honor killings and stoning continue to be supported by mainstream politicians and other officials in some countries. In Pakistan, after the 2008 Balochistan honour killings in which five women were killed by tribesmen of the Umrani Tribe of Balochistan , Pakistani Federal Minister for Postal Services Israr Ullah Zehri defended the practice: [202] "These are centuries-old traditions, and I will continue to defend them. Only those who indulge in immoral acts should be afraid." [203] Following the 2006 case of Sakineh Mohammadi Ashtiani (which has placed Iran under international pressure for its stoning sentences), Mohammad-Javad Larijani (a senior envoy and chief of Iran’s Human Rights Council) defended the practice of stoning; he claimed it was a "lesser punishment" than execution , because it allowed those convicted a chance at survival. [204]
Dowry deaths are the result of the killing women who are unable to pay the high dowry price for their marriage. According to Amnesty International, "the ongoing reality of dowry-related violence is an example of what can happen when women are treated as property". [205]

Gendercide and forced sterilization
Female infanticide is the killing of newborn female children or the termination of a female fetus through selective abortion . It is a form of gendercide , and is an extreme form of gender-based violence. [206] [207] [208] Female infanticide is more common than male infanticide, and is especially prevalent in Southeast Asia, such as parts of India and China. [207] [209] [210] Recent studies suggest that over 90 million girls and women are missing in China and India as a result of infanticide. [211] [212]
Sex-selective abortion involves terminating a pregnancy based upon the predicted sex of the baby. The abortion of female fetuses is most common in areas where the culture values male children over females, [213] such as parts of the China, India, Pakistan, Korea, Taiwan, and the Caucasus . [214] [215] One reason for this preference is that males are seen as generating more income than females. The trend has grown steadily over the previous decade, and may result in a future shortage of women. [216]
Forced sterilization and forced abortion are also forms of gender-based violence. [206] Forced sterilization was practiced during the first half of the 20th century by many Western countries and there are reports of this practice being currently employed in some countries, such as Uzbekistan and China. [217] [218] [219] [220]

Female genital mutilation
Female genital mutilation is defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) as "all procedures that involve partial or total removal of the external female genitalia, or other injury to the female genital organs for non-medical reasons". WHO further state that, "the procedure has no health benefits for girls and women" and "[p]rocedures can cause severe bleeding and problems urinating, and later cysts, infections, infertility as well as complications in childbirth increased risk of newborn death," [221] and "is recognized internationally as a violation of the human rights of girls and women" and "constitutes an extreme form of discrimination against women". [221] The European Parliament stated in a resolution that the practice "clearly goes against the European founding value of equality between women and men and maintains traditional values according to which women are seen as the objects and properties of men". [222]

Sexual assault and treatment of victims
Research by Lisak and Roth into factors motivating perpetrators of sexual assault, including rape, against women revealed a pattern of hatred towards women and pleasure in inflicting psychological and physical trauma, rather than sexual interest. [223] Mary Odem and Peggy Reeves Sanday posit that rape is the result not of pathology but of systems of male dominance, cultural practices and beliefs. [224]
Mary Odem, Jody Clay-Warner, and Susan Brownmiller argue that sexist attitudes are propagated by a series of myths about rape and rapists. [225] :130–140 [226] They state that in contrast to those myths, rapists often plan a rape before they choose a victim [225] and acquaintance rape (not assault by a stranger) is the most common form of rape. [225] :xiv [227] Odem also asserts that these rape myths propagate sexist attitudes about men, by perpetuating the belief that men cannot control their sexuality. [225]
Sexism can promote the stigmatization of women and girls who have been raped and inhibit recovery. [228] In many parts of the world, women who have been raped are ostracized , rejected by their families, subjected to violence, and—in extreme cases—may become victims of honor killings because they are deemed to have brought shame upon their families. [228] [229]
The criminalization of marital rape is very recent, having occurred during the past few decades; and in many countries it is still legal. Several countries in Eastern Europe and Scandinavia made spousal rape illegal before 1970; other European countries and some of the English-speaking countries outside Europe outlawed it later, mostly in the 1980s and 1990s; [230] some countries outlawed it in the 2000s. [231] The WHO wrote that: "Marriage is often used to legitimize a range of forms of sexual violence against women. The custom of marrying off young children, particularly girls, is found in many parts of the world. This practice—legal in many countries—is a form of sexual violence, since the children involved are unable to give or withhold their consent". [228]
In countries where fornication or adultery are illegal, victims of rape can be charged criminally. [232]

War rape
Sexism is manifested by the crime of rape targeting women civilians and soldiers, committed by soldiers, combatants or civilians during armed conflict, war or military occupation. This arises from the long tradition of women being seen as sexual booty and from the misogynistic culture of military training. [233] [234]
Sexual violence and rape are also committed against men during war and are often under-reported. Sexism plays a significant part in the difficulty that the survivors face coping with their victimization, especially in patriarchal cultures, and in the lack of support provided to men who have been raped. [235]

Reproductive rights
The United Nations Population Fund writes that "Family planning is central to gender equality and women’s empowerment". [236] Women in many countries around the world are denied medical and informational services related to reproductive health , including access to pregnancy care, family planning, and contraception. [236] [237] In countries with very strict abortion laws (particularly in Latin America ) women who suffer miscarriages are often investigated by the police under suspicion of having deliberately provoked the miscarriage, and are sometimes jailed, [238] a practice which Amnesty International called a "ruthless campaign against women's rights". [239] Doctors may be reluctant to treat pregnant women who are very ill, because they are afraid the treatment may result in fetal loss. [240] According to Amnesty Intentional, "Discriminatory attitudes towards women and girls also means access to sex education and contraceptives are near impossible [in El Salvador]". [241] The organization has also criticized laws and policies which require the husband's consent for a woman to use reproductive health services as being discriminatory and dangerous to women's health and life: "[F]or the woman who needs her husband’s consent to get contraception, the consequences of discrimination can be serious – even fatal". [242]

Child and forced marriage
A child marriage is a marriage where one or both spouses are under 18, a practice that disproportionately affects women. [243] [243] [244] Child marriages are most common in South Asia , the Middle East and Sub-Saharan Africa , but occur in other parts of the world, too. The practice of marrying young girls is rooted in patriarchal ideologies of control of female behavior, and is also sustained by traditional practices such as dowry and bride price . [245] Child marriage is strongly connected with the protection of female virginity . [246] UNICEF states that: [243]
Consequences of child marriage include restricted education and employment prospects, increased risk of domestic violence , child sexual abuse , pregnancy and birth complications, and social isolation . [244] [246] Early and forced marriage are defined as forms of modern-day slavery by the International Labour Organisation. [247]
In some cases a woman or girl who has been raped may be forced to marry her rapist, in order to restore the honor of her family; [228] [248] or marriage by abduction , a practice in which a man abducts the woman or girl whom he wishes to marry and rapes her, in order to force the marriage (common in Ethiopia ). [249] [250] [251]

 Legal justice and regulations
In several OIC countries the legal testimony of a woman is worth legally half of that of a man (see Status of women's testimony in Islam ). Such countries include: [252] [253] Algeria (in criminal cases), Bahrain (in Sharia courts), Egypt (in family courts), Iran (in most cases), Iraq (in some cases), Jordan (in Sharia courts), Kuwait (in family courts), Libya (in some cases), Morocco (in family cases), Palestine (in cases related to marriage, divorce and child custody), Qatar (in family law matters), Syria (in Sharia courts), United Arab Emirates (in some civil matters), Yemen (not allowed to testify at all in cases of adultery and retribution), and Saudi Arabia. Such laws have been criticized by Human Rights Watch and Equality Now as being discriminatory towards women. [254] [255]
The criminal justice system in many common law countries has also been accused of discriminating against women. Provocation is, in many common law countries, a partial defense to murder , which converts what would have been murder into manslaughter . It is meant to be applied when a person kills in the "heat of passion" upon being "provoked" by the behavior of the victim. This defense has been criticized as being gendered, favoring men, due to it being used disproportionately in cases of adultery , and other domestic disputes when women are killed by their partners. As a result of the defense exhibiting a strong gender bias, and being a form of legitimization of male violence against women and minimization of the harm caused by violence against women, it has been abolished or restricted in several jurisdictions. [256] [257]
The traditional leniently towards crimes of passion in Latin American countries has been deemed to have its origin in the view that women are property. [258] In 2002, Widney Brown, advocacy director for Human Rights Watch, stated that, "[S]o-called crimes of passion have a similar dynamic [to honor killings] in that the women are killed by male family members and the crimes are perceived as excusable or understandable." [258] The OHCHR has called for "the elimination of discriminatory provisions in the legislation, including mitigating factors for 'crimes of passion'". [259]
In the United States, some studies have shown that for identical crimes, men are given harsher sentences than women. Controlling for arrest offense, criminal history, and other pre-charge variables, sentences are over 60% heavier for men. Women are more likely to avoid charges entirely, and to avoid imprisonment if convicted. [260] [261] The gender disparity varies according to the nature of the case. For example, the gender gap is less pronounced in fraud cases than in drug trafficking and firearms. This disparity occurs in US federal courts, despite guidelines designed to avoid differential sentencing. [262] The death penalty in may also suffer from gender bias. According to Shatz and Shatz, "[t]he present study confirms what earlier studies have shown: that the death penalty is imposed on women relatively infrequently and that it is disproportionately imposed for the killing of women". [263]
There have been several reasons postulated for the gender criminal justice disparity in the United States. One of the most common is expectation that women are predominantly care-givers. [260] [261] [262] Other possible reasons include the "girlfriend theory" (whereby women are seen as tools of their boyfriends), [261] the theory that female defendants are more likely to cooperate with authorities, [261] and that women are often successful at turning their violent crime into victimhood by citing defenses such as postpartum depression or battered wife syndrome . [264] However, none of these theories account for the total disparity, [261] and sexism has also been suggested as an underlying cause. [265]
Gender discrimination also helps explain the differences between trial outcomes in which some female defendants are sentenced to death and other female defendants are sentenced to lesser punishments. Phillip Barron argues that female defendants are more likely to be sentenced to death for crimes that violate gender norms, such as killing children or killing strangers. [266]
Transgender people face widespread discrimination while incarcerated. They are generally housed according to their legal birth sex, rather than their gender identity . Studies have shown that transgender people are at an increased risk for harassment and sexual assault in this environment. They may also be denied access to medical procedures related to their reassignment. [267]
Some countries use stoning as a form of capital punishment. According to Amnesty International , the majority of those stoned are women and women are disproportionately affected by stoning because of sexism in the legal system. [268]
One study found that "on average, women receive lighter sentences in comparison with men... roughly 30% of the gender differences in incarceration cannot be explained by the observed criminal characteristics of offense and offender. We also find evidence of considerable heterogeneity across judges in their treatment of female and male offenders. There is little evidence, however, that tastes for gender discrimination are driving the mean gender disparity or the variance in treatment between judges." [269]

Education
Women have traditionally had limited access to higher education. [270] In the past, when women were admitted to higher education, they were encouraged to major in less-scientific subjects; the study of English literature in American and British colleges and universities was instituted as a field considered suitable to women's "lesser intellects". [271]
Educational specialties in higher education produce and perpetuate inequality between men and women. [272] Disparity persists particularly in computer and information science , where in the US women received only 21% of the undergraduate degrees, and in engineering, where women obtained only 19% of the degrees in 2008. [273] Only one out of five of physics doctorates in the US are awarded to women, and only about half of those women are American. [274] Of all the physics professors in the country, only 14% are women. [274]
World literacy is lower for females than for males. Data from The World Factbook shows that 79.7% of women are literate, compared to 88.6% of men (aged 15 and over). [275] In some parts of the world, girls continue to be excluded from proper public or private education. In parts of Afghanistan, girls who go to school face serious violence from some local community members and religious groups. [276] According to 2010 UN estimates, only Afghanistan, Pakistan and Yemen had less than 90 girls per 100 boys at school. [277] Jayachandran and Lleras-Muney's study of Sri Lankan economic development has suggested that increases in the life expectancy for women encourages educational investment because a longer time horizon increases the value of investments that pay out over time. [278]
Educational opportunities and outcomes for women have greatly improved in the West. Since 1991, the proportion of women enrolled in college in the United States has exceeded the enrollment rate for men, and the gap has widened over time. [279] As of 2007 [update] , women made up the majority—54%—of the 10.8 million college students enrolled in the United States. [280] However, research by Diane Halpern has indicated that boys receive more attention, praise, blame and punishment in the grammar-school classroom, [281] and "this pattern of more active teacher attention directed at male students continues at the postsecondary level". [282] Over time, female students speak less in a classroom setting. [283]
Writer Gerry Garibaldi has argued that the educational system has become "feminized", allowing girls more of a chance at success with a more "girl-friendly" environment in the classroom; [284] this is seen to hinder boys by punishing "masculine" behavior and diagnosing boys with behavioral disorders . [285] A recent study by the OECD in over 60 countries found that teachers give boys lower grades for the same work. The researchers attribute this to stereotypical ideas about boys and recommend teachers to be aware of this gender bias. [286] One study found that students give female professors worse evaluation scores than male professors, even though the students appear to do as well under female professors as male professors. [287]

Fashion
Feminists argue that some fashion trends have been oppressive to women; they restrict women's movements, increase their vulnerability and endanger their health. [288] The fashion industry has experienced various criticism, as their association of thin models and beauty is seen as encouraging bulimia and anorexia nervosa within women, as well as locking female consumers into false feminine identities. [289]
The assignment of gender specific baby clothes from young ages can be seen as sexist as it can instill in children from young ages a belief in negative gender stereotypes. [290] An example of this is the assignment in some countries of the color pink to girls and blue to boys. This fashion, however, is a recent one; at the beginning of the 20th century the trend was the opposite: blue for girls and pink for boys. [291] In the early 1900s, The Women's Journal wrote "[t]hat pink being a more decided and stronger colour, is more suitable for the boy, while blue, which is more delicate and dainty, is prettier for the girl." DressMaker magazine also explained that "[t]he preferred colour to dress young boys in is pink. Blue is reserved for girls as it is considered paler, and the more dainty of the two colours, and pink is thought to be stronger (akin to red)". [292]
Today, in most countries, it is considered inappropriate for boys to wear dresses and skirts, but this is also a relatively modern worldview. From the mid-16th century [293] until the late 19th or early 20th century, young boys in the Western world were unbreeched and wore gowns or dresses until an age that varied between two and eight. [294]
Laws that dictate how women must dress are seen by many international human rights organizations, such as Amnesty International , as a form of gender discrimination. [295] Amnesty International states that: [295]
In many places, women who do not dress in socially and legally proscribed ways are often subjected to violence—in particular, by the authorities (such as the religious police ), by family members, or by the community. [296] [297]
The production process also faces huge problems and negative criticisms relating to gender. In the garment industry, approximately 80% of the workers are female. [298] The main reason that majority of garment production is located in Asia is because of the low labor cost. The female was usually treated poorly in factories. They are sexually harassed by managers or other male workers, low paid wages, violating trade unions rights and discrimination against pregnant women. Whether female are pregnant, single, young or old, they are poorly treated in different ways. Plenty of the workers will remain quiet in order to keep their contract and continue working in the factory. [299]

Conscription
Conscription , or compulsory military service, has been criticized as sexist. [300] :102 [301] Prior to the late 20th century, only men were subjected to conscription, [300] :255 [302] [303] [304] [305] and most countries still require only men to serve in the military.
In his book The Second Sexism: Discrimination Against Men and Boys (2012), philosopher David Benatar states that "[t]he prevailing assumption is that where conscription is necessary, it is only men who should be conscripted and, similarly, that only males should be forced into combat". This, he believes, "is a sexist assumption". [300] :102 Anthropologist Ayse Gül Altinay has commented that "given equal suffrage rights, there is no other citizenship practice that differentiates as radically between men and women as compulsory male conscription". [306] :34
Currently, only nine countries conscript women into their armed forces: China, Eritrea, Israel, Libya, Malaysia, North Korea, Norway, Peru, and Taiwan. [307] [308] Other countries—such as Finland , Turkey , and Singapore —still use a system of conscription which requires military service from only men, although women are permitted to serve voluntarily. In 2014, Norway became the first NATO country to introduce obligatory military service for women as an act of gender equality [308] [309] and in 2015, the Dutch government started preparing a gender-neutral draft law. [310] The gender selective draft has been challenged in the United States. [311]

See also
WebPage index: 00069
Wikimedia Foundation
The Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. ( WMF ) is an American non-profit and charitable organization headquartered in San Francisco , California . It is mostly known for participating in the Wikimedia movement . It owns the internet domain names of most movement projects and hosts sites like Wikipedia . The foundation was founded in 2003 by Jimmy Wales as a way to fund Wikipedia and its sister projects through non-profit means. [5] [6]
As of 2015 [update] , the foundation employs over 280 people, with annual revenues in excess of US$ 75 million . [7] Christophe Henner is chair of the board . [8] Katherine Maher is the executive director since March 2016.

Goal
The Wikimedia Foundation has stated its goal is to develop and maintain open content , wiki -based projects and to provide the full contents of those projects to the public free of charge . [9] Another main objective of the Wikimedia Foundation is political advocacy . [10]
The Wikimedia Foundation was granted section 501(c)(3) status by the U.S. Internal Revenue Code as a public charity in 2005. [11] Its National Taxonomy of Exempt Entities (NTEE) code is B60 ( Adult , Continuing education ). [12] [13] The foundation's by-laws declare a statement of purpose of collecting and developing educational content and to disseminate it effectively and globally. [14]

History
In 2001, Jimmy Wales , an Internet entrepreneur , and Larry Sanger , an online community organizer and philosophy professor, founded Wikipedia as an Internet encyclopedia to supplement Nupedia . The project was originally funded by Bomis , Wales' for-profit business. As Wikipedia's popularity skyrocketed, revenues to fund the project stalled. [5] Since Wikipedia was depleting Bomis' resources, Wales and Sanger thought of a charity model to fund the project. [5] The Wikimedia Foundation was incorporated in Florida on June 20, 2003. [6] [15] It applied to the United States Patent and Trademark Office to trademark Wikipedia on September 17, 2004. The mark was granted registration status on January 10, 2006. Trademark protection was accorded by Japan on December 16, 2004, and, in the European Union , on January 20, 2005. There were plans to license the use of the Wikipedia trademark for some products, such as books or DVDs. [16]
In April 2005, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service approved the foundation as an educational foundation in the category " Adult , Continuing education ", meaning all contributions to the foundation are tax-deductible for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
On December 11, 2006, the Foundation's board noted that the corporation could not become the membership organization initially planned but never implemented due to an inability to meet the registration requirements of Florida statutory law. Accordingly, [ according to whom? ] the by-laws were amended to remove all reference to membership rights and activities. The decision to change the bylaws was passed by the board unanimously. [17]
On September 25, 2007, the foundation's board gave notice that the operations would be moving to the San Francisco Bay Area . Major considerations cited for choosing San Francisco were proximity to like-minded organizations and potential partners, a better talent pool, as well as cheaper and more convenient international travel than is available from St. Petersburg, Florida . [18] [19] [20]
Lila Tretikov was appointed executive director of the Wikimedia Foundation in May 2014. She resigned in March 2016. Former chief communications officer Katherine Maher was appointed the interim executive director, a position made permanent in June 2016.

Projects and initiatives

 Wikimedia projects
In addition to Wikipedia, the foundation operates other wikis that follow the free content model with their main goal being the dissemination of knowledge. These include:
Several additional projects exist to provide infrastructure or coordination of the free knowledge projects. For instance, a wiki helps coordinate work on MediaWiki software and Outreach gives guidelines for best practices on encouraging the use of Wikimedia sites.

Movement affiliates
Wikimedia movement affiliates are independent, but formally recognized, groups of people intended to work together to support and contribute to the Wikimedia movement. The Wikimedia Foundation's Board of Trustees has approved three active models for movement affiliates: chapters, thematic organizations, and user groups. Movement affiliates are intended to organize and engage in activities to support and contribute to the Wikimedia movement, such as regional conferences, outreach, edit-a-thons , hackathons , public relations , public policy advocacy, GLAM engagement, and Wikimania . [21] [22] [23]
Recognition of a chapter and thematic organization is approved by the foundation's board. Recommendations on recognition of chapters and thematic organizations are made to the foundation's board by an Affiliations Committee , composed of Wikimedia community volunteers. The Affiliations Committee approves the recognition of individual user groups. While movement affiliates are formally recognized by the Wikimedia Foundation, they are independent of the Wikimedia Foundation, with no legal control of nor responsibility for the Wikimedia projects. [22] [23] [24]
The foundation began recognizing chapters in 2004. [25] In 2010, development on additional models began. In 2012, the foundation approved, finalized, and adopted the thematic organization and user group recognition models. An additional model, movement partners, was also approved but as of 27 October 2015 [update] has not yet been finalized or adopted. [21] [23] [26]

Wikimania
Each year, an international conference called Wikimania brings the people together who are involved in the Wikimedia organizations and projects. The first Wikimania was held in Frankfurt , Germany, in 2005. Nowadays, Wikimania is organized by a committee supported usually by the national chapter, in collaboration with the Wikimedia Foundation. Wikimania has been held in cities such as Buenos Aires , [27] Cambridge , [28] Haifa , [29] Hong Kong , [30] and London . [31] In 2015, Wikimania took place in Mexico City . [32] In 2016, Wikimania was held in Esino Lario , Italy . [33]

Strategic plan
In response to the growing size and popularity of Wikipedia, the Wikimedia Foundation announced a Strategic Plan to improve and sustain the Wikimedia movement. The plan was announced in July 2009, followed by a process of interviews and surveys with people from across the Wikimedia movement, including board of trustees, members of staff and volunteer editors. [34] The ongoing plan was intended to be the basis of a five-year plan to further outreach, improve content quality and quality control, and optimising operational areas such as finance and infrastructure. [35]

Wikipedia Usability Initiative
In December 2008, the Wikimedia Foundation announced a restricted donation grant of US$890,000 from the Stanton Foundation , to improve Wikipedia's accessibility. [36] Later named the Wikipedia Usability Initiative, the grant was used by the Wikimedia Foundation to appoint project-specific staff to the technology department. [37]
A series of surveys were conducted throughout 2009. This began with a qualitative environment survey on MediaWiki extensions, followed by a Qualitative Statistical Survey focusing on volume of edits, number of new users, and related statistics. In March 2009, a usability and experience study was carried out on new and non-editors of the English Wikipedia. The aim was to discover what obstacles participants encountered while editing Wikipedia, ranging from small changes to more complicated syntax such as templates. The study recruited 2500 people for in-person laboratory testing via the Wikipedia website, which was filtered down to ten participants. The results were collated and used by the technology team to improve Wikipedia's usability. [38] The Usability and Experience Study was followed up by the Usability, Experience and Progress Study in September 2009. This study recruited different new and non-editors for in-person trials on a new Wikipedia skin. [39]
The initiative ultimately culminated in a new Wikipedia skin named Vector, constructed based on the results of the usability studies. This was introduced by default in stages, beginning in May 2010. [40]

Public Policy Initiative
In May 2010, the Wikimedia Foundation announced the Public Policy Initiative, following a US$1.2 million donation by the Stanton Foundation. The Initiative was set up to improve articles relating to public policy–related issues. [41] As part of the initiative, Wikipedia collaborated with ten universities to help students and professors create and maintain articles relating to public policy. [42] Volunteer editors of Wikipedia, known as "ambassadors", provided assistance to students and professors. This was either done on campus sites or online. [43]
In April 2017, the Foundation was one of the founding partners in the Initiative for Open Citations . [44]

Technology
The foundation employs technology including hardware and software to run its projects.

Hardware
Wikipedia employed a single server until 2004, when the server setup was expanded into a distributed multitier architecture . [45]
In January 2005, the project ran on 39 dedicated servers in Florida. [ citation needed ] This configuration included a single master database server running MySQL , multiple database servers, 21 web servers running the Apache HTTP Server , and seven Squid cache servers. [ citation needed ]
Wikimedia currently runs on dedicated clusters of Linux servers (mainly Ubuntu ). [46] [47] As of December 2009 [update] , there were 300 in Florida and 44 in Amsterdam . [48] The number of servers needed to run the infrastructure has been mostly stable since then: 520 servers are used in the main cluster (eqiad) as of November 2015. [49]
As of 2015, the system still runs on central master database and application servers, but there are several cache layers with various ever-changing technologies, as well as a multitude of subsystems for DNS resolution, load balancing, metrics, monitoring, other system administration etc. [50]

Softwаrе
The operation of Wikimedia depends on MediaWiki , a custom-made, free and open-source wiki software platform written in PHP and built upon the MySQL database. [51] The software incorporates programming features such as a macro language , variables , a transclusion system for templates , and URL redirection . MediaWiki is licensed under the GNU General Public License and it is used by all Wikimedia projects, as well as many other wiki projects. Originally, Wikipedia ran on UseModWiki written in Perl by Clifford Adams (Phase I), which initially required CamelCase for article hyperlinks; the present double bracket style was incorporated later. Starting in January 2002 (Phase II), Wikipedia began running on a PHP wiki engine with a MySQL database; this software was custom-made for Wikipedia by Magnus Manske . The Phase II software was repeatedly modified to accommodate the exponentially increasing demand. In July 2002 (Phase III), Wikipedia shifted to the third-generation software, MediaWiki, originally written by Lee Daniel Crocker . Several MediaWiki extensions are installed to extend the functionality of MediaWiki software. In April 2005, a Lucene extension [52] [53] was added to MediaWiki's built-in search and Wikipedia switched from MySQL to Lucene for searching. Currently Lucene Search 2.1, [54] which is written in Java and based on Lucene library 2.3, [55] is used. Wikimedia Foundation also uses CiviCRM [56] and WordPress . [57]
The Foundation published official Wikipedia mobile apps for Android and iOS devices and in March 2015, the apps were updated to include mobile user friendly features. [58]

Finances

In general
The Wikimedia Foundation relies on public contributions and grants to fund its mission. [59] It is exempt from federal income tax [59] [60] and from state income tax. [59] [61] It is not a private foundation, and contributions to it qualify as tax-deductible charitable contributions. [59]
The continued technical and economic growth of each of the Wikimedia projects is dependent mostly on donations but the Wikimedia Foundation also increases its revenue by alternative means of funding such as grants , sponsorship, services and brand merchandising. The Wikimedia OAI-PMH update feed service, targeted primarily at search engines and similar bulk analysis and republishing, has been a source of revenue for several years, [59] but is no longer open to new customers. [62] DBpedia was given access to this feed free of charge. [63] In July 2014, the Foundation announced it would be accepting Bitcoin donations. [64]
Since the end of fiscal year ended 2004, the Foundation's net assets have grown from US$57,000 [65] to US$53.5 million at the end of fiscal year ended June 30, 2014. [66] Under the leadership of Sue Gardner, who joined the Wikimedia Foundation in 2007, the Foundation's staff levels, number of donors and revenue have seen very significant growth. [67]
In 2007, Charity Navigator gave Wikimedia an overall rating of three out of four possible stars [68] Charity Navigator gave three out of four possible stars in overall rating for fiscal years 2008 and 2009 which improved to four-stars in 2010. [69] As of December 2016, the current overall rating was four stars. [70]

Grants
In March 2008, the Foundation announced a large donation, at the time its largest donation yet: a three-year, US$3 million grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation . [71]
In 2009, the Foundation received four grants – the first grant was a US$890,000 Stanton Foundation grant which was aimed to help study and simplify user interface for first-time authors of Wikipedia. [72] The second was a US$300,000 Ford Foundation Grant, given in July 2009, for Wikimedia Commons that aimed to improve the interfaces and workflows for multimedia uploading on Wikimedia websites. [73] In August 2009, the Foundation received a US$500,000 grant from The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation . [74] Lastly, in August 2009, the Omidyar Network issued a potential [ clarification needed ] US$2 million in "grant" funding to Wikimedia. [75]
In 2010, the Google corporation donated US$2 million to the Foundation. [76] The Stanton Foundation granted $1.2 million to fund the Public Policy Initiative, a pilot program for what would later become the Wikipedia Education Program (and the spinoff Wiki Education Foundation ). [77] [78] [79] Also in 2010, the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation pledged a US$800,000 grant and all was funded during 2011. [ citation needed ]
In March 2011, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation authorized another US$3 million grant to continue to develop and maintain the Foundation's mission. The grant was to be funded over three years with the first US$1 million funded in July 2011 and the remaining US$2 million was scheduled to be funded in August 2012 and 2013. In August 2011, the Stanton Foundation pledged to fund a US$3.6 million grant of which US$1.8 million was funded and the remaining was due to be funded in September 2012. As of 2011, this was the largest grant received by the Wikimedia Foundation to-date. [80] In November 2011, the Foundation received a US$500,000 donation from Google co-founder Sergey Brin and his wife. [81] [82]
In 2012, the Foundation was awarded a grant of US$1.25 million from the historians Lisbet Rausing [81] and Peter Baldwin through Charities Aid Foundation , scheduled to be funded in five equal installments. The first installment of US$250,000 was received in April 2012 and the remaining were to be funded in December 2012 through 2015. In 2014, the Foundation received the largest single gift in its history, a $5 million unrestricted donation from an anonymous donor supporting $1 million worth of expenses annually for the next five years. [83]
In 2015, a grant agreement was reached with the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation to build a search engine called the " Knowledge Engine ". [84] [85]

Financial summary

Governance

Board of Trustees
The Board of Trustees has ultimate authority of all the businesses and affairs of the Foundation. It is composed of ten members:
Three permanent entities support the board on its mission and responsibilities: an executive director, who leads and oversees the operational arm of the foundation; an advisory board composed of individuals selected by the board itself that advise the board on different matters; and standing committees to which the board delegates certain matters while retaining ultimate authority. The board has also at times created other orthodox entities [ clarification needed ] to support itself, such as executive secretaries and ad-hoc committees established for specific tasks.
The current board comprises Christophe Henner as chairman and María Sefidari as vice-chairman, together with Alice Wiegand, Nataliia Tymkiv, Kelly Battles , Dariusz Jemielniak as members at-large, and Jimmy Wales as founder's seat (installed as "Community Founder Trustee Position" to the WMF bylaws in August 2008). [95] [96] There are three vacant seats, most recently occupied by Arnnon Geshuri , Denny Vrandečić and Guy Kawasaki .
In a high-profile decision of 2015, James Heilman was removed from the board, [97] [98] with little explanation. [97] In January 2016, Arnnon Geshuri stepped down from the board following a controversy about an agreement he executed when at Google , violating United States antitrust law . The participating companies paid US$415 million in a class action suit on behalf of affected employees. [99] [100]

Advisory board
The Advisory Board, according to the Wikimedia Foundation, is an international network of experts who have agreed to give the foundation meaningful help on a regular basis in many different areas, including law, organizational development, technology, policy, and outreach. [101]

Staff

First appointments
In 2004, the foundation appointed Tim Starling as developer liaison to help improve the MediaWiki software, Daniel Mayer as chief financial officer ( finance , budgeting , and coordination of fund drives), and Erik Möller as content partnership coordinator. In May 2005, the foundation announced seven more official appointments. [102]
In January 2006, the foundation created several committees, including the Communication Committee, in an attempt to further organize activities essentially handled by volunteers at that time. [103] Starling resigned that month to spend more time on his PhD program.

Employees
The foundation's functions were, for the first few years, executed almost entirely by volunteers. In 2005, it had only two employees, Danny Wool, a coordinator, and Brion Vibber, a software manager.
As of October 4, 2006 [update] , the foundation had five paid employees: [104] two programmers, an administrative assistant, a coordinator handling fundraising and grants, and an interim executive director , [105] Brad Patrick, previously the foundation's general counsel . Patrick ceased his activity as interim director in January 2007, and then resigned from his position as legal counsel, effective April 1, 2007. He was replaced by Mike Godwin , who served as general counsel and legal coordinator from July 2007 [106] until 2010.
In January 2007, Carolyn Doran was named chief operating officer and Sandy Ordonez joined as head of communications . [107] Doran began working as a part-time bookkeeper in 2006 after being sent by a temporary agency . Doran, found to have had a long criminal record, [108] left the foundation in July 2007, and Sue Gardner was hired as consultant and special advisor (later CEO). Doran's departure from the organization was cited by Florence Devouard as one of the reasons the foundation took about seven months to release its fiscal 2007 financial audit. [109]
Danny Wool, officially the grant coordinator but also largely involved in fundraising and business development, resigned in March 2007. He accused Wales of misusing the foundation's funds for recreational purposes, and said that Wales had his Wikimedia credit card taken away in part because of his spending habits, a claim Wales denied. [110] In February 2007, the foundation added a new position, chapters coordinator, and hired Delphine Ménard, [111] who had been occupying the position as a volunteer since August 2005. Cary Bass was hired in March 2007 in the position of volunteer coordinator. Oleta McHenry was brought in as accountant in May 2007, through a temporary placement agency and made the official full-time accountant in August 2007. In January 2008, the foundation appointed Veronique Kessler as the new chief financial and operating officer, Kul Wadhwa as head of business development, and Jay Walsh as head of communications.
By early 2015, the foundation had well over 200 employees.

Disputes and lawsuits
Many disputes have resulted in litigation [112] [113] [114] [115] while others have not. [116] Attorney Matt Zimmerman stated, "Without strong liability protection, it would be difficult for Wikipedia to continue to provide a platform for user-created encyclopedia content." [117]
In December 2011, the Foundation hired Washington, DC lobbyist Dow Lohnes Government Strategies LLC to lobby the United States Congress with regard to "Civil Rights/Civil Liberties" and "Copyright/Patent/Trademark." [118] At the time of the hire the Foundation was concerned specifically about a bill known as the Stop Online Piracy Act . [119]
In October 2013, a German Court ruled that the Wikimedia Foundation can be held liable for content added to Wikipedia – however, this applies only when there has been a specific complaint; otherwise, the Wikimedia Foundation does not check any of the content published on Wikipedia and has no duty to do so. [120]
In June 2014, a copyright infringement lawsuit was filed by Bildkonst Upphovsrätt i Sverige against Wikimedia Sweden. [121]
On June 20, 2014, a defamation lawsuit (Law Division civil case No. L-1400-14) involving Wikipedia editors was filed with the Mercer County Superior Court in New Jersey seeking, inter alia, compensatory and punitive damages. [122] [123]
In a March 10, 2015, op-ed for The New York Times , Wales and Tretikov announced the Foundation was filing a lawsuit against the National Security Agency , calling into question its practice of mass surveillance , which they argued infringed the constitutional rights of the Foundation's readers, editors and staff. [124] [125] [126] On October 23, 2015, the United States District Court for the District of Maryland dismissed the suit Wikimedia Foundation v. NSA on grounds of standing . US District Judge T. S. Ellis III ruled that the plaintiffs could not plausibly prove they were subject to upstream surveillance , and that their argument is riddled with assumptions, speculations and mathematical gymnastics. [127] [128] The plaintiffs filed an appeal with the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit on February 17, 2016. [129]
In February 2016, Lila Tretikov announced her resignation as executive director, as a result of the WMF's controversial Knowledge Engine project and disagreements with the staff. [130] [131]
WebPage index: 00070
Open-source software
Open-source software ( OSS ) is computer software with its source code made available with a license in which the copyright holder provides the rights to study, change, and distribute the software to anyone and for any purpose. [1] Open-source software may be developed in a collaborative public manner . According to scientists who studied it, open-source software is a prominent example of open collaboration . [2]
The open-source software development , or collaborative development from multiple independent sources, generates an increasingly more diverse scope of design perspective than any one company is capable of developing and sustaining long term. A 2008 report by the Standish Group states that adoption of open-source software models has resulted in savings of about $60 billion (£48 billion) per year to consumers. [3] [4]

History

End of 1990s: Foundation of the Open Source Initiative
In the early days of computing, programmers and developers shared software in order to learn from each other and evolve the field of computing. Eventually the open source notion moved to the way side of commercialization of software in the years 1970-1980. In 1997, Eric Raymond published The Cathedral and the Bazaar , a reflective analysis of the hacker community and free software principles. The paper received significant attention in early 1998, and was one factor in motivating Netscape Communications Corporation to release their popular Netscape Communicator Internet suite as free software . This source code subsequently became the basis behind SeaMonkey , Mozilla Firefox , Thunderbird and KompoZer .
Netscape's act prompted Raymond and others to look into how to bring the Free Software Foundation 's free software ideas and perceived benefits to the commercial software industry. They concluded that FSF's social activism was not appealing to companies like Netscape, and looked for a way to rebrand the free software movement to emphasize the business potential of sharing and collaborating on software source code. [5] The new term they chose was "open source", which was soon adopted by Bruce Perens , publisher Tim O'Reilly , Linus Torvalds , and others. The Open Source Initiative was founded in February 1998 to encourage use of the new term and evangelize open-source principles. [6]
While the Open Source Initiative sought to encourage the use of the new term and evangelize the principles it adhered to, commercial software vendors found themselves increasingly threatened by the concept of freely distributed software and universal access to an application's source code . A Microsoft executive publicly stated in 2001 that "open source is an intellectual property destroyer. I can't imagine something that could be worse than this for the software business and the intellectual-property business." [7] However, while FOSS has historically played a role outside of the mainstream of private software development, companies as large as Microsoft have begun to develop official open-source presences on the Internet. IBM, Oracle, Google and State Farm are just a few of the companies with a serious public stake in today's competitive open-source market. There has been a significant shift in the corporate philosophy concerning the development of FOSS. [8]
The free software movement was launched in 1983. In 1998, a group of individuals advocated that the term free software should be replaced by open-source software (OSS) as an expression which is less ambiguous [9] [10] [11] and more comfortable for the corporate world. [12] Software developers may want to publish their software with an open-source license , so that anybody may also develop the same software or understand its internal functioning. With open-source software, generally anyone is allowed to create modifications of it, port it to new operating systems and instruction set architectures , share it with others or, in some cases, market it. Scholars Casson and Ryan have pointed out several policy-based reasons for adoption of open source – in particular, the heightened value proposition from open source (when compared to most proprietary formats) in the following categories:
The Open Source Definition , notably, presents an open-source philosophy, and further defines the terms of usage, modification and redistribution of open-source software. Software licenses grant rights to users which would otherwise be reserved by copyright law to the copyright holder. Several open-source software licenses have qualified within the boundaries of the Open Source Definition . The most prominent and popular example is the GNU General Public License (GPL), which "allows free distribution under the condition that further developments and applications are put under the same licence", thus also free. [14]
The open source label came out of a strategy session held on April 7, 1998 in Palo Alto in reaction to Netscape's January 1998 announcement of a source code release for Navigator (as Mozilla ). A group of individuals at the session included Tim O'Reilly , Linus Torvalds , Tom Paquin, Jamie Zawinski , Larry Wall , Brian Behlendorf , Sameer Parekh , Eric Allman , Greg Olson, Paul Vixie , John Ousterhout , Guido van Rossum , Philip Zimmermann , John Gilmore and Eric S. Raymond . [15] They used the opportunity before the release of Navigator's source code to clarify a potential confusion caused by the ambiguity of the word "free" in English .
Many people claimed that the birth of the Internet , since 1969, started the open source movement, while others do not distinguish between open-source and free software movements. [16]
The Free Software Foundation (FSF), started in 1985, intended the word "free" to mean freedom to distribute (or "free as in free speech") and not freedom from cost (or "free as in free beer"). Since a great deal of free software already was (and still is) free of charge, such free software became associated with zero cost, which seemed anti-commercial. [5]
The Open Source Initiative (OSI) was formed in February 1998 by Eric Raymond and Bruce Perens. With at least 20 years of evidence from case histories of closed software development versus open development already provided by the Internet developer community, the OSI presented the "open source" case to commercial businesses, like Netscape. The OSI hoped that the usage of the label "open source", a term suggested by Peterson of the Foresight Institute at the strategy session, would eliminate ambiguity, particularly for individuals who perceive "free software" as anti-commercial. They sought to bring a higher profile to the practical benefits of freely available source code, and they wanted to bring major software businesses and other high-tech industries into open source. Perens attempted to register "open source" as a service mark for the OSI, but that attempt was impractical by trademark standards. Meanwhile, due to the presentation of Raymond's paper to the upper management at Netscape—Raymond only discovered when he read the Press Release , [17] and was called by Netscape CEO Jim Barksdale 's PA later in the day—Netscape released its Navigator source code as open source, with favorable results. [18]

Definitions
The Open Source Initiative 's (OSI) definition is recognized by governments internationally [19] as the standard or de facto definition. In addition, many of the world's largest open source software projects and contributors, including Debian, Drupal Association, FreeBSD Foundation, Linux Foundation, Mozilla Foundation, Wikimedia Foundation, Wordpress Foundation have committed [20] to upholding the OSI's mission and Open Source Definition through the OSI Affiliate Agreement. [21]
OSI uses The Open Source Definition to determine whether it considers a software license open source. The definition was based on the Debian Free Software Guidelines , written and adapted primarily by Perens. [22] [23] [24] Perens did not base his writing on the "four freedoms" from the Free Software Foundation (FSF), which were only widely available later. [25]
Under Perens' definition, open source describes a broad general type of software license that makes source code available to the general public with relaxed or non-existent restrictions on the use and modification of the code. It is an explicit "feature" of open source that it puts very few restrictions on the use or distribution by any organization or user, in order to enable the rapid evolution of the software. [26]
Despite initially accepting it, [27] Richard Stallman of the FSF now flatly opposes the term "Open Source" being applied to what they refer to as "free software". Although he agrees that the two terms describe "almost the same category of software", Stallman considers equating the terms incorrect and misleading. [28] Stallman also opposes the professed pragmatism of the Open Source Initiative , as he fears that the free software ideals of freedom and community are threatened by compromising on the FSF's idealistic standards for software freedom. [29] The FSF considers free software to be a subset of open source software, and Richard Stallman explained that DRM software, for example, can be developed as open source, despite that it does not give its users freedom (it restricts them), and thus doesn't qualify as free software. [30]

Open-source software licensing
When an author contributes code to an open-source project (e.g., Apache.org) they do so under an explicit license (e.g., the Apache Contributor License Agreement) or an implicit license (e.g. the open-source license under which the project is already licensing code). Some open-source projects do not take contributed code under a license, but actually require joint assignment of the author's copyright in order to accept code contributions into the project. [31]
Examples of free software license / open-source licenses include Apache License , BSD license , GNU General Public License , GNU Lesser General Public License , MIT License , Eclipse Public License and Mozilla Public License .
The proliferation of open-source licenses is a negative aspect of the open-source movement because it is often difficult to understand the legal implications of the differences between licenses. With more than 180,000 open-source projects available and more than 1400 unique licenses, the complexity of deciding how to manage open-source usage within "closed-source" commercial enterprises has dramatically increased. Some are home-grown, while others are modeled after mainstream FOSS licenses such as Berkeley Software Distribution ("BSD"), Apache, MIT-style (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), or GNU General Public License ("GPL"). In view of this, open-source practitioners are starting to use classification schemes in which FOSS licenses are grouped (typically based on the existence and obligations imposed by the copyleft provision; the strength of the copyleft provision). [32]
An important legal milestone for the open source / free software movement was passed in 2008, when the US federal appeals court ruled that free software licenses definitely do set legally binding conditions on the use of copyrighted work, and they are therefore enforceable under existing copyright law. As a result, if end-users violate the licensing conditions, their license disappears, meaning they are infringing copyright. [33] Despite this licensing risk, most commercial software vendors are using open source software in commercial products while fulfilling the license terms, e.g. leveraging the Apache license. [34]

Certifications
Certification can help to build user confidence. Certification could be applied to the simplest component, to a whole software system. The United Nations University International Institute for Software Technology , [35] initiated a project known as "The Global Desktop Project". This project aims to build a desktop interface that every end-user is able to understand and interact with, thus crossing the language and cultural barriers. The project would improve developing nations' access to information systems. UNU/IIST hopes to achieve this without any compromise in the quality of the software by introducing certifications. [36]

Open-source software development

Development model
In his 1997 essay The Cathedral and the Bazaar , [37] open-source evangelist Eric S. Raymond suggests a model for developing OSS known as the bazaar model. Raymond likens the development of software by traditional methodologies to building a cathedral, "carefully crafted by individual wizards or small bands of mages working in splendid isolation". [37] He suggests that all software should be developed using the bazaar style, which he described as "a great babbling bazaar of differing agendas and approaches." [37]
In the traditional model of development, which he called the cathedral model, development takes place in a centralized way. Roles are clearly defined. Roles include people dedicated to designing (the architects), people responsible for managing the project, and people responsible for implementation. Traditional software engineering follows the cathedral model.
The bazaar model, however, is different. In this model, roles are not clearly defined. Gregorio Robles [38] suggests that software developed using the bazaar model should exhibit the following patterns:
Data suggests, however, that OSS is not quite as democratic as the bazaar model suggests. An analysis of five billion bytes of free/open source code by 31,999 developers shows that 74% of the code was written by the most active 10% of authors. The average number of authors involved in a project was 5.1, with the median at 2. [39]

Advantages and disadvantages
Open source software is usually easier to obtain than proprietary software, often resulting in increased usage. Additionally, the availability of an open source implementation of a standard can increase adoption of that standard. [40] It has also helped to build developer loyalty as developers feel empowered and have a sense of ownership of the end product. [41]
Moreover, lower costs of marketing and logistical services are needed for OSS. OSS also helps companies keep abreast of technology developments. It is a good tool to promote a company's image, including its commercial products. [42] The OSS development approach has helped produce reliable, high quality software quickly and inexpensively. [43]
Open source development offers the potential for a more flexible technology and quicker innovation. It is said to be more reliable since it typically has thousands of independent programmers testing and fixing bugs of the software. It is flexible because modular systems allow programmers to build custom interfaces, or add new abilities to it and it is innovative since open source programs are the product of collaboration among a large number of different programmers. The mix of divergent perspectives, corporate objectives, and personal goals speeds up innovation. [44]
Moreover, free software can be developed in accord with purely technical requirements. It does not require thinking about commercial pressure that often degrades the quality of the software. Commercial pressures make traditional software developers pay more attention to customers' requirements than to security requirements, since such features are somewhat invisible to the customer. [45]
It is sometimes said that the open source development process may not be well defined and the stages in the development process, such as system testing and documentation may be ignored. However this is only true for small (mostly single programmer) projects. Larger, successful projects do define and enforce at least some rules as they need them to make the teamwork possible. [46] [47] In the most complex projects these rules may be as strict as reviewing even minor change by two independent developers. [48]
Not all OSS initiatives have been successful, for example SourceXchange and Eazel . [41] Software experts and researchers who are not convinced by open source's ability to produce quality systems identify the unclear process, the late defect discovery and the lack of any empirical evidence as the most important problems (collected data concerning productivity and quality). [49] It is also difficult to design a commercially sound business model around the open source paradigm. Consequently, only technical requirements may be satisfied and not the ones of the market. [49] In terms of security, open source may allow hackers to know about the weaknesses or loopholes of the software more easily than closed-source software.It depends on control mechanisms in order to create effective performance of autonomous agents who participate in virtual organizations. [50]

Development tools
In OSS development, tools are used to support the development of the product and the development process itself. [51]
Revision control systems such as Concurrent Versions System (CVS) and later Subversion (SVN) and Git are examples of tools, often themselves open source, help manage the source code files and the changes to those files for a software project. [52] The projects are frequently hosted and published on sites like Launchpad , Bitbucket , and GitHub . [53]
Open source projects are often loosely organized with "little formalised process modelling or support", but utilities such as issue trackers are often used to organize open source software development. [51] Commonly used bugtrackers include Bugzilla and Redmine . [54]
Tools such as mailing lists and IRC provide means of coordination among developers. [51] Centralized code hosting sites also have social features that allow developers to communicate. [53]

Organizations
Some of the "more prominent organizations" involved in OSS development include the Apache Software Foundation , creators of the Apache web server; the Linux Foundation , a nonprofit which as of 2012 [update] employed Linus Torvalds, the creator of the Linux operating system kernel ; the Eclipse Foundation , home of the Eclipse software development platform; the Debian Project, creators of the influential Debian GNU/Linux distribution; the Mozilla Foundation , home of the Firefox web browser; and OW2 , European-born community developing open source middleware. New organizations tend to have a more sophisticated governance model and their membership is often formed by legal entity members. [55]
Open Source Software Institute is a membership-based, non-profit (501 (c)(6)) organization established in 2001 that promotes the development and implementation of open source software solutions within US Federal, state and local government agencies. OSSI's efforts have focused on promoting adoption of open source software programs and policies within Federal Government and Defense and Homeland Security communities. [56]
Open Source for America is a group created to raise awareness in the United States Federal Government about the benefits of open source software. Their stated goals are to encourage the government's use of open source software, participation in open source software projects, and incorporation of open source community dynamics to increase government transparency. [57]
Mil-OSS is a group dedicated to the advancement of OSS use and creation in the military. [58]

Funding
Open-source software is widely used both as independent applications and as components in non-open-source applications. Many independent software vendors (ISVs), value-added resellers (VARs), and hardware vendors ( OEMs or ODMs ) use open-source frameworks , modules, and libraries inside their proprietary, for-profit products and services. [59] From a customer's perspective, the ability to use open technology under standard commercial terms and support is valuable. They are willing to pay for the legal protection (e.g., indemnification from copyright or patent infringement), "commercial-grade QA", and professional support/training/consulting that are typical of commercial software, while also receiving the benefits of fine-grained control and lack of lock-in that comes with open-source.

Comparisons with other software licensing/development models

Closed source / proprietary software
The debate over open source vs. closed source (alternatively called proprietary software ) is sometimes heated.
The top four reasons (as provided by Open Source Business Conference survey [60] ) individuals or organizations choose open source software are:
Since innovative companies no longer rely heavily on software sales, proprietary software has become less of a necessity. [61] As such, things like open source content management system —or CMS—deployments are becoming more commonplace. In 2009, [62] the US White House switched its CMS system from a proprietary system to Drupal open source CMS. Further, companies like Novell (who traditionally sold software the old-fashioned way) continually debate the benefits of switching to open source availability, having already switched part of the product offering to open source code. [63] In this way, open source software provides solutions to unique or specific problems. As such, it is reported [64] that 98% of enterprise-level companies use open source software offerings in some capacity.
With this market shift, more critical systems are beginning to rely on open source offerings, [65] allowing greater funding (such as US Department of Homeland Security grants [65] ) to help "hunt for security bugs." According to a pilot study of organisations adopting (or not adopting) OSS; several factors of statistical significance were observed in the manager's beliefs in relation to (a) attitudes toward outcomes, (b) the influences and behaviours of others and (c) their ability to act. [66]
Proprietary source distributors have started to develop and contribute to the open source community due to the market share shift, doing so by the need to reinvent their models in order to remain competitive. [67]
Many advocates argue that open source software is inherently safer because any person can view, edit, and change code. [68] A study of the Linux source code has 0.17 bugs per 1000 lines of code while proprietary software generally scores 20–30 bugs per 1000 lines. [69]

Free software
According to the Free software movement 's leader, Richard Stallman , the main difference is that by choosing one term over the other (i.e. either "open source" or " free software ") one lets others know about what one's goals are: "Open source is a development methodology; free software is a social movement." [29] Nevertheless, there is significant overlap between open source software and free software. [30]
The FSF [70] said that the term "open source" fosters an ambiguity of a different kind such that it confuses the mere availability of the source with the freedom to use, modify, and redistribute it. On the other hand, the "free software" term was criticized for the ambiguity of the word "free" as "available at no cost", which was seen as discouraging for business adoption, [71] and for the historical ambiguous usage of the term. [5] [72] [73]
Developers have used the alternative terms Free and Open Source Software ( FOSS ), or Free/Libre and Open Source Software (FLOSS), consequently, to describe open source software that is also free software . [74] While the definition of open source software is very similar to the FSF's free software definition [75] it was based on the Debian Free Software Guidelines , written and adapted primarily by Bruce Perens with input from Eric S. Raymond and others. [76]
The term "open source" was originally intended to be trademarkable; however, the term was deemed too descriptive, so no trademark exists. [77] The OSI would prefer that people treat open source as if it were a trademark, and use it only to describe software licensed under an OSI approved license. [78]
OSI Certified is a trademark licensed only to people who are distributing software licensed under a license listed on the Open Source Initiative's list. [79]

Open-source versus source-available
Although the OSI definition of "open source software" is widely accepted, a small number of people and organizations use the term to refer to software where the source is available for viewing, but which may not legally be modified or redistributed. Such software is more often referred to as source-available , or as shared source , a term coined by Microsoft in 2001. [80] While in 2007 two shared source licenses were certified by the OSI , most of the shared source licenses are still source-available only . [81]
In 2007 Michael Tiemann , president of OSI, had criticized [82] companies such as SugarCRM for promoting their software as "open source" when in fact it did not have an OSI-approved license. In SugarCRM's case, it was because the software is so-called " badgeware " [83] since it specified a "badge" that must be displayed in the user interface (SugarCRM has since switched to GPLv3 [84] ). Another example was Scilab prior to version 5, which called itself "the open source platform for numerical computation" [85] but had a license [86] that forbade commercial redistribution of modified versions.

Open-sourcing
Open-sourcing is the act of propagating the open source movement , most often referring to releasing previously proprietary software under an open source / free software license, [87] but it may also refer programing Open Source software or installing Open Source software.
Notable software packages, previously proprietary, which have been open sourced include:
Before changing the license of software, distributors usually audit the source code for third party licensed code which they would have to remove or obtain permission for its relicense. Backdoors and other malware should also be removed as they may easily be discovered after release of the code.

Current applications and adoption

Widely used open-source software
Open source software projects are built and maintained by a network of volunteer programmers and are widely used in free as well as commercial products. [34] Prime examples of open-source products are the Apache HTTP Server , the e-commerce platform osCommerce , internet browsers Mozilla Firefox and Chromium (the project where the vast majority of development of the freeware Google Chrome is done) and the full office suite LibreOffice . One of the most successful open-source products is the GNU/Linux operating system, an open-source Unix-like operating system, and its derivative Android , an operating system for mobile devices. [90] [91] In some industries, open source software is the norm. [92]

Extensions for non-software usage
While the term "open source" applied originally only to the source code of software, [93] it is now being applied to many other areas [94] such as Open source ecology , [95] a movement to decentralize technologies so that any human can use them. However, it is often misapplied to other areas which have different and competing principles, which overlap only partially.
The same principles that underlie open source software can be found in many other ventures, such as open-source hardware , Wikipedia , and open-access publishing. Collectively, these principles are known as open source , open content , and open collaboration : [96] "any system of innovation or production that relies on goal-oriented yet loosely coordinated participants, who interact to create a product (or service) of economic value, which they make available to contributors and non-contributors alike." [2]
This "culture" or ideology takes the view that the principles apply more generally to facilitate concurrent input of different agendas, approaches and priorities, in contrast with more centralized models of development such as those typically used in commercial companies. [97]

See also
WebPage index: 00071
Transclusion
In computer science , transclusion is the inclusion of part or all of an electronic document into one or more other documents by hypertext reference . Transclusion is usually performed when the referencing document is displayed, and is normally automatic and transparent to the end user. [1] The result of transclusion is a single integrated document made of parts assembled on the fly from separate sources, possibly stored on different computers in disparate places.
Transclusion facilitates modular design : a resource is stored once and distributed for reuse in multiple documents. Updates or corrections to a resource are then reflected in any referencing documents. Ted Nelson coined the term for his 1980 nonlinear book Literary Machines .

Technical considerations

Context neutrality
Transclusion works better when transcluded sections of text are self-contained, so that the meaning and validity of the text is independent of context. For example, formulations like "as explained in the previous section" are problematic, because the transcluded section may appear in a different context, causing confusion. What constitutes "context neutral" text varies, but often includes things like company information or boilerplate .

Parameterization
Under some circumstances, and in some technical contexts, transcluded sections of text may not require strict adherence to the "context neutrality" principle, because the transcluded sections are capable of parameterization . Parameterization implies the ability to modify certain portions or subsections of a transcluded text depending on exogenous variables that can be changed independently. This is customarily done by supplying a transcluded text with one or more substitution placeholders . These placeholders are then replaced with the corresponding variable values prior to rendering the final transcluded output in context.

History and implementation by Project Xanadu
Ted Nelson, who also originated the words "hypertext" and " hypermedia ", coined the term "transclusion" in his 1980 book Literary Machines . Part of his proposal was the idea that micropayments could be automatically exacted from the reader for all the text, no matter how many snippets of content are taken from various places.
However, according to Nelson, the concept of transclusion had already formed part of his 1965 description of hypertext . [2] Nelson defines transclusion as, "...the same content knowably in more than one place," setting it apart from more special cases, such as the inclusion of content from a different location (which he calls transdelivery ) or an explicit quotation that remains connected to its origins, (which he calls transquotation ).
Some hypertext systems, including Ted Nelson's own Xanadu Project , support transclusion. [3]
Nelson has delivered a demonstration of Web transclusion, the Little Transquoter (programmed to Nelson's specification by Andrew Pam in 2004-2005). [4] It creates a new format built on portion addresses from Web pages; when dereferenced, each portion on the resulting page remains click-connected to its original context.

Implementation on the Web
HTTP , as a transmission protocol, has rudimentary support for transclusion via byte serving : specifying a byte range in an HTTP request message.
Transclusion can occur either before (server-side) or after (client-side) transmission. For example:
Publishers of web content may object to the transclusion of material from their own web sites into other web sites, or they may require an agreement to do so. Critics of the practice may refer to various forms of inline linking as bandwidth theft or leeching .
Other publishers may seek specifically to have their materials transcluded into other web sites, as in the form of web advertising , or as widgets like a hit counter or web bug .
Mashups make use of transclusion to assemble resources or data into a new application, as by placing geo-tagged photos on an interactive map, or by displaying business metrics in an interactive dashboard .

Client-side HTML
HTML defines elements for client-side transclusion of images , scripts , stylesheets , other documents , and other types of media . HTML has relied heavily on client-side transclusion from the earliest days of the Web (so web pages could be displayed more quickly before multimedia elements finished loading), rather than embedding the raw data for such objects inline into a web page's markup.
Through techniques such as Ajax , scripts associated with an HTML document can instruct a web browser to modify the document in-place, as opposed to the earlier technique of having to pull an entirely new version of the page from the web server. Such scripts may transclude elements or documents from a server after the web browser has rendered the page, in response to user input or changing conditions, for example.
Future versions of HTML may support deeper transclusion of portions of documents using XML technologies such as entities , XPointer document referencing, and XSLT manipulations. (XPointer is patent-encumbered. [6] )
An interesting use of Transclusion is found in the single-page application TiddlyWiki , http://tiddlywiki.com/#Transclusion .
Proxy servers may employ transclusion to reduce redundant transmissions of commonly requested resources.
A popular Front End Framework known as AngularJS developed and maintained by Google has a directive callend ng-transclude that marks the insertion point for the transcluded DOM of the nearest parent directive that uses transclusion.

Server-side transclusion
Transclusion can be accomplished on the server side, as through Server Side Includes and markup entity references resolved by the server software. It is a feature of substitution templates .

Transclusion of source code
Transclusion of source code into software design or reference materials lets source code be presented within the document, but not interpreted as part of the document, preserving the semantic consistency of the inserted code in relation to its source codebase.

See also
WebPage index: 00072
Perl
Perl is a family of high-level , general-purpose , interpreted , dynamic programming languages . The languages in this family include Perl 5 and Perl 6 . [7]
Though Perl is not officially an acronym, [8] there are various backronyms in use, the best-known being "Practical Extraction and Reporting Language". [9] Perl was originally developed by Larry Wall in 1987 as a general-purpose Unix scripting language to make report processing easier. [10] Since then, it has undergone many changes and revisions. Perl 6 , which began as a redesign of Perl 5 in 2000, eventually evolved into a separate language. Both languages continue to be developed independently by different development teams and liberally borrow ideas from one another.
The Perl languages borrow features from other programming languages including C , shell script ( sh ), AWK , and sed . [11] They provide powerful text processing facilities without the arbitrary data-length limits of many contemporary Unix commandline tools , [12] facilitating easy manipulation of text files . Perl 5 gained widespread popularity in the late 1990s as a CGI scripting language, in part due to its (then) unsurpassed [13] [14] [15] regular expression and string parsing abilities. [16]
In addition to CGI, Perl 5 is used for system administration , network programming , finance, bioinformatics , and other applications, such as for GUIs . It has been nicknamed "the Swiss Army chainsaw of scripting languages" because of its flexibility and power, [17] and possibly also because of its "ugliness". [18] In 1998, it was also referred to as the " duct tape that holds the Internet together", in reference to both its ubiquitous use as a glue language and its perceived inelegance. [19]

History

Early versions
Larry Wall began work on Perl in 1987, while working as a programmer at Unisys , [12] and released version 1.0 to the comp.sources.misc newsgroup on December 18, 1987. [20] The language expanded rapidly over the next few years.
Perl 2, released in 1988, featured a better regular expression engine. Perl 3, released in 1989, added support for binary data streams.
Originally, the only documentation for Perl was a single (increasingly lengthy) man page . In 1991, Programming Perl , known to many Perl programmers as the "Camel Book" because of its cover, was published and became the de facto reference for the language. At the same time, the Perl version number was bumped to 4, not to mark a major change in the language but to identify the version that was well documented by the book.

Early Perl 5
Perl 4 went through a series of maintenance releases , culminating in Perl 4.036 in 1993. At that point, Wall abandoned Perl 4 to begin work on Perl 5. Initial design of Perl 5 continued into 1994. The perl5-porters mailing list was established in May 1994 to coordinate work on porting Perl 5 to different platforms. It remains the primary forum for development, maintenance, and porting of Perl 5. [21]
Perl 5.000 was released on October 17, 1994. [22] It was a nearly complete rewrite of the interpreter , and it added many new features to the language, including objects , references , lexical (my) variables , and modules . Importantly, modules provided a mechanism for extending the language without modifying the interpreter. This allowed the core interpreter to stabilize, even as it enabled ordinary Perl programmers to add new language features. Perl 5 has been in active development since then.
Perl 5.001 was released on March 13, 1995. Perl 5.002 was released on February 29, 1996 with the new prototypes feature. This allowed module authors to make subroutines that behaved like Perl builtins . Perl 5.003 was released June 25, 1996, as a security release.
One of the most important events in Perl 5 history took place outside of the language proper and was a consequence of its module support. On October 26, 1995, the Comprehensive Perl Archive Network (CPAN) was established as a repository for Perl modules and Perl itself; as of May 2017, it carries over 185,178 modules in 35,190 distributions, written by more than 13,071 authors, and is mirrored worldwide at more than 245 locations. [23]
Perl 5.004 was released on May 15, 1997, and included among other things the UNIVERSAL package, giving Perl a base object to which all classes were automatically derived and the ability to require versions of modules. Another significant development was the inclusion of the CGI.pm module, [24] which contributed to Perl's popularity as a CGI scripting language . [25]
Perl is also now supported running under Microsoft Windows and several other operating systems. [24]
Perl 5.005 was released on July 22, 1998. This release included several enhancements to the regex engine, new hooks into the backend through the B::* modules, the qr// regex quote operator, a large selection of other new core modules, and added support for several more operating systems, including BeOS . [26]

2000–present
Perl 5.6 was released on March 22, 2000. Major changes included 64-bit support, Unicode string representation, large file support (i.e. files over 2 GiB) and the "our" keyword. [28] [29] When developing Perl 5.6, the decision was made to switch the versioning scheme to one more similar to other open source projects; after 5.005_63, the next version became 5.5.640, with plans for development versions to have odd numbers and stable versions to have even numbers.
In 2000, Wall put forth a call for suggestions for a new version of Perl from the community. The process resulted in 361 RFC (request for comments) documents that were to be used in guiding development of Perl 6. In 2001, [30] work began on the "Apocalypses" for Perl 6 , a series of documents meant to summarize the change requests and present the design of the next generation of Perl. They were presented as a digest of the RFCs, rather than a formal document. At this point, Perl 6 existed only as a description of a language.
Perl 5.8 was first released on July 18, 2002, and had nearly yearly updates since then. Perl 5.8 improved Unicode support, added a new I/O implementation, added a new thread implementation, improved numeric accuracy, and added several new modules. [31] As of 2013 this version still remains the most popular version of Perl and is used by Red Hat 5, Suse 10, Solaris 10, HP-UX 11.31 and AIX 5.
In 2004, work began on the "Synopses" – documents that originally summarized the Apocalypses, but which became the specification for the Perl 6 language. In February 2005, Audrey Tang began work on Pugs , a Perl 6 interpreter written in Haskell . [32] This was the first concerted effort towards making Perl 6 a reality. This effort stalled in 2006. [33]
On December 18, 2007, the 20th anniversary of Perl 1.0, Perl 5.10.0 was released. Perl 5.10.0 included notable new features, which brought it closer to Perl 6 . These included a switch statement (called "given"/"when"), regular expressions updates, and the smart match operator, "~~". [34] [35] Around this same time, development began in earnest on another implementation of Perl 6 known as Rakudo Perl , developed in tandem with the Parrot virtual machine . As of November 2009, Rakudo Perl has had regular monthly releases and now is the most complete implementation of Perl 6 .
A major change in the development process of Perl 5 occurred with Perl 5.11; the development community has switched to a monthly release cycle of development releases, with a yearly schedule of stable releases. By that plan, bugfix point releases will follow the stable releases every three months.
On April 12, 2010, Perl 5.12.0 was released. Notable core enhancements include new package NAME VERSION syntax, the Yada Yada operator (intended to mark placeholder code that is not yet implemented), implicit strictures, full Y2038 compliance, regex conversion overloading, DTrace support, and Unicode 5.2. [36] On January 21, 2011, Perl 5.12.3 was released; it contains updated modules and some documentation changes. [37] Version 5.12.4 was released on June 20, 2011. The latest version of that branch, 5.12.5, was released on November 10, 2012.
On May 14, 2011, Perl 5.14 was released. JSON support is built-in as of 5.14.2. The latest version of that branch, 5.14.4, was released on March 10, 2013.
On May 20, 2012, Perl 5.16 was released. Notable new features include the ability to specify a given version of Perl that one wishes to emulate, allowing users to upgrade their version of Perl, but still run old scripts that would normally be incompatible. [38] Perl 5.16 also updates the core to support Unicode 6.1. [38]
On May 18, 2013, Perl 5.18 was released. Notable new features include the new dtrace hooks, lexical subs, more CORE:: subs, overhaul of the hash for security reasons, support for Unicode 6.2. [39]
On May 27, 2014, Perl 5.20 was released. Notable new features include subroutine signatures, hash slices/new slice syntax, postfix dereferencing (experimental), Unicode 6.3, rand() using consistent random number generator. [40]
Some observers credit the release of Perl 5.10 with the start of the Modern Perl movement. [41] In particular, this phrase describes a style of development that embraces the use of the CPAN, takes advantage of recent developments in the language, and is rigorous about creating high quality code. [42] While the book "Modern Perl" [43] may be the most visible standard-bearer of this idea, other groups such as the Enlightened Perl Organization [44] have taken up the cause.
In late 2012 and 2013, several projects for alternative implementations for Perl 5 started: Perl5 in Perl6 by the Rakudo Perl team, [45] moe by Stevan Little and friends, [46] p2 [47] by the Perl11 team under Reini Urban, gperl by goccy, [48] and rperl a kickstarter project led by Will Braswell and affiliated with the Perll11 project. [49]

PONIE
PONIE is an acronym for Perl On New Internal Engine. The PONIE Project existed from 2003 until 2006 and was to be a bridge between Perl 5 and Perl 6 . It was an effort to rewrite the Perl 5 interpreter to run on Parrot , the Perl 6 virtual machine. The goal was to ensure the future of the millions of lines of Perl 5 code at thousands of companies around the world. [50]
The PONIE project ended in 2006 and is no longer being actively developed. Some of the improvements made to the Perl 5 interpreter as part of PONIE were folded into that project. [51]

Name
Perl was originally named "Pearl". Wall wanted to give the language a short name with positive connotations; he claims that he considered (and rejected) every three- and four-letter word in the dictionary. He also considered naming it after his wife Gloria. Wall discovered the existing PEARL programming language before Perl's official release and changed the spelling of the name. [52]
When referring to the language, the name is normally capitalized ( Perl ) as a proper noun. When referring to the interpreter program itself, the name is often uncapitalized ( perl ) because most Unix-like file systems are case-sensitive. Before the release of the first edition of Programming Perl , it was common to refer to the language as perl ; Randal L. Schwartz , however, capitalized the language's name in the book to make it stand out better when typeset. This case distinction was subsequently documented as canonical. [53]
The name is occasionally expanded as Practical Extraction and Report Language , but this is a backronym . [54] Other expansions have been suggested as equally canonical, including Wall's own humorous Pathologically Eclectic Rubbish Lister which is in the manual page for perl. [55] Indeed, Wall claims that the name was intended to inspire many different expansions. [56]

Camel symbol
Programming Perl , published by O'Reilly Media , features a picture of a dromedary camel on the cover and is commonly called the "Camel Book". [57] This image of a camel has become an unofficial symbol of Perl as well as a general hacker emblem, appearing on T-shirts and other clothing items.
O'Reilly owns the image as a trademark but licenses it for non-commercial use, requiring only an acknowledgement and a link to www.perl.com. Licensing for commercial use is decided on a case by case basis. [58] O'Reilly also provides "Programming Republic of Perl" logos for non-commercial sites and "Powered by Perl" buttons for any site that uses Perl. [58]

Onion symbol
The Perl Foundation owns an alternative symbol, an onion, which it licenses to its subsidiaries, Perl Mongers , PerlMonks , Perl.org, and others. [59] The symbol is a visual pun on pearl onion . [60]

Overview
According to Wall, Perl has two slogans. The first is " There's more than one way to do it ", commonly known as TMTOWTDI. The second slogan is "Easy things should be easy and hard things should be possible". [12]

Features
The overall structure of Perl derives broadly from C. Perl is procedural in nature, with variables , expressions , assignment statements , brace -delimited blocks , control structures , and subroutines .
Perl also takes features from shell programming. All variables are marked with leading sigils , which allow variables to be interpolated directly into strings . However, unlike the shell, Perl uses sigils on all accesses to variables, and unlike most other programming languages that use sigils, the sigil doesn't denote the type of the variable but the type of the expression. So for example, to access a list of values in a hash , the sigil for an array ("@") is used, not the sigil for a hash ("%"). Perl also has many built-in functions that provide tools often used in shell programming (although many of these tools are implemented by programs external to the shell) such as sorting , and calling operating system facilities.
Perl takes lists from Lisp , hashes ("associative arrays") from AWK , and regular expressions from sed . These simplify and facilitate many parsing, text-handling, and data-management tasks. Also shared with Lisp are the implicit return of the last value in a block, and the fact that all statements have a value, and thus are also expressions and can be used in larger expressions themselves.
Perl 5 added features that support complex data structures , first-class functions (that is, closures as values), and an object-oriented programming model. These include references , packages, class-based method dispatch , and lexically scoped variables , along with compiler directives (for example, the strict pragma). A major additional feature introduced with Perl 5 was the ability to package code as reusable modules. Wall later stated that "The whole intent of Perl 5's module system was to encourage the growth of Perl culture rather than the Perl core." [61]
All versions of Perl do automatic data-typing and automatic memory management . The interpreter knows the type and storage requirements of every data object in the program; it allocates and frees storage for them as necessary using reference counting (so it cannot deallocate circular data structures without manual intervention). Legal type conversions — for example, conversions from number to string — are done automatically at run time ; illegal type conversions are fatal errors.

Design
The design of Perl can be understood as a response to three broad trends in the computer industry: falling hardware costs, rising labor costs, and improvements in compiler technology. Many earlier computer languages, such as Fortran and C, aimed to make efficient use of expensive computer hardware. In contrast, Perl was designed so that computer programmers could write programs more quickly and easily.
Perl has many features that ease the task of the programmer at the expense of greater CPU and memory requirements. These include automatic memory management; dynamic typing ; strings, lists, and hashes; regular expressions; introspection; and an eval() function. Perl follows the theory of "no built-in limits", [57] an idea similar to the Zero One Infinity rule.
Wall was trained as a linguist, and the design of Perl is very much informed by linguistic principles. Examples include Huffman coding (common constructions should be short), good end-weighting (the important information should come first), and a large collection of language primitives . Perl favors language constructs that are concise and natural for humans to write, even where they complicate the Perl interpreter.
Perl's syntax reflects the idea that "things that are different should look different." [62] For example, scalars, arrays, and hashes have different leading sigils. Array indices and hash keys use different kinds of braces. Strings and regular expressions have different standard delimiters. This approach can be contrasted with a language such as Lisp , where the same basic syntax, composed of simple and universal symbolic expressions , is used for all purposes.
Perl does not enforce any particular programming paradigm ( procedural , object-oriented , functional , or others) or even require the programmer to choose among them.
There is a broad practical bent to both the Perl language and the community and culture that surround it. The preface to Programming Perl begins: "Perl is a language for getting your job done." [12] One consequence of this is that Perl is not a tidy language. It includes many features, tolerates exceptions to its rules, and employs heuristics to resolve syntactical ambiguities. Because of the forgiving nature of the compiler, bugs can sometimes be hard to find. Perl's function documentation remarks on the variant behavior of built-in functions in list and scalar contexts by saying, "In general, they do what you want, unless you want consistency." [63]
No written specification or standard for the Perl language exists for Perl versions through Perl 5, and there are no plans to create one for the current version of Perl. There has been only one implementation of the interpreter, and the language has evolved along with it. That interpreter, together with its functional tests, stands as a de facto specification of the language. Perl 6 , however, started with a specification, [64] and several projects [65] aim to implement some or all of the specification.

Applications
Perl has many and varied applications, compounded by the availability of many standard and third-party modules.
Perl has chiefly been used to write CGI scripts: large projects written in Perl include cPanel , Slash , Bugzilla , RT , TWiki , and Movable Type ; high-traffic websites that use Perl extensively include Priceline.com , Craigslist , [66] IMDb , [67] LiveJournal , DuckDuckGo , [68] [69] Slashdot and Ticketmaster . It is also an optional component of the popular LAMP technology stack for Web development , in lieu of PHP or Python .
Perl is often used as a glue language , tying together systems and interfaces that were not specifically designed to interoperate, and for " data munging ", [70] that is, converting or processing large amounts of data for tasks such as creating reports. In fact, these strengths are intimately linked. The combination makes Perl a popular all-purpose language for system administrators , particularly because short programs, often called " one-liner programs ", can be entered and run on a single command line .
Perl code can be made portable across Windows and Unix; such code is often used by suppliers of software (both COTS and bespoke) to simplify packaging and maintenance of software build- and deployment-scripts.
Graphical user interfaces (GUIs) may be developed using Perl. For example, Perl/Tk and WxPerl are commonly used to enable user interaction with Perl scripts. Such interaction may be synchronous or asynchronous, using callbacks to update the GUI.

Implementation
Perl is implemented as a core interpreter, written in C, together with a large collection of modules, written in Perl and C. As of 2010 [update] , the interpreter is 150,000 lines of C code and compiles to a 1 MB executable on typical machine architectures. Alternatively, the interpreter can be compiled to a link library and embedded in other programs. There are nearly 500 modules in the distribution, comprising 200,000 lines of Perl and an additional 350,000 lines of C code (much of the C code in the modules consists of character encoding tables).
The interpreter has an object-oriented architecture. All of the elements of the Perl language—scalars, arrays, hashes, coderefs, file handles —are represented in the interpreter by C structs . Operations on these structs are defined by a large collection of macros , typedefs , and functions; these constitute the Perl C API . The Perl API can be bewildering to the uninitiated, but its entry points follow a consistent naming scheme , which provides guidance to those who use it.
The life of a Perl interpreter divides broadly into a compile phase and a run phase. [71] In Perl, the phases are the major stages in the interpreter's life-cycle. Each interpreter goes through each phase only once, and the phases follow in a fixed sequence.
Most of what happens in Perl's compile phase is compilation, and most of what happens in Perl's run phase is execution, but there are significant exceptions. Perl makes important use of its capability to execute Perl code during the compile phase. Perl will also delay compilation into the run phase. The terms that indicate the kind of processing that is actually occurring at any moment are compile time and run time . Perl is in compile time at most points during the compile phase, but compile time may also be entered during the run phase. The compile time for code in a string argument passed to the eval built-in occurs during the run phase. Perl is often in run time during the compile phase and spends most of the run phase in run time. Code in BEGIN blocks executes at run time but in the compile phase.
At compile time, the interpreter parses Perl code into a syntax tree . At run time, it executes the program by walking the tree . Text is parsed only once, and the syntax tree is subject to optimization before it is executed, so that execution is relatively efficient. Compile-time optimizations on the syntax tree include constant folding and context propagation, but peephole optimization is also performed.
Perl has a Turing-complete grammar because parsing can be affected by run-time code executed during the compile phase. [72] Therefore, Perl cannot be parsed by a straight Lex / Yacc lexer / parser combination. Instead, the interpreter implements its own lexer, which coordinates with a modified GNU bison parser to resolve ambiguities in the language.
It is often said that "Only perl can parse Perl", [73] meaning that only the Perl interpreter ( perl ) can parse the Perl language ( Perl ), but even this is not, in general, true. Because the Perl interpreter can simulate a Turing machine during its compile phase, it would need to decide the halting problem in order to complete parsing in every case. It is a long-standing result that the halting problem is undecidable, and therefore not even perl can always parse Perl. Perl makes the unusual choice of giving the user access to its full programming power in its own compile phase. The cost in terms of theoretical purity is high, but practical inconvenience seems to be rare.
Other programs that undertake to parse Perl, such as source-code analyzers and auto-indenters , have to contend not only with ambiguous syntactic constructs but also with the undecidability of Perl parsing in the general case. Adam Kennedy's PPI project focused on parsing Perl code as a document (retaining its integrity as a document), instead of parsing Perl as executable code (that not even Perl itself can always do). It was Kennedy who first conjectured that "parsing Perl suffers from the ' halting problem '", [74] which was later proved. [75]
Perl is distributed with over 250,000 functional tests for core Perl language and over 250,000 functional tests for core modules. These run as part of the normal build process and extensively exercise the interpreter and its core modules. Perl developers rely on the functional tests to ensure that changes to the interpreter do not introduce software bugs ; additionally, Perl users who see that the interpreter passes its functional tests on their system can have a high degree of confidence that it is working properly.

Availability
Perl is dual licensed under both the Artistic License 1.0 [4] [5] and the GNU General Public License . [6] Distributions are available for most operating systems . It is particularly prevalent on Unix and Unix-like systems, but it has been ported to most modern (and many obsolete) platforms. With only six reported exceptions, Perl can be compiled from source code on all POSIX -compliant, or otherwise-Unix-compatible platforms. [76]
Because of unusual changes required for the classic Mac OS environment, a special port called MacPerl was shipped independently. [77]
The Comprehensive Perl Archive Network carries a complete list of supported platforms with links to the distributions available on each. [78] CPAN is also the source for publicly available Perl modules that are not part of the core Perl distribution.

Windows
Users of Microsoft Windows typically install one of the native binary distributions of Perl for Win32, most commonly Strawberry Perl or ActivePerl . Compiling Perl from source code under Windows is possible, but most installations lack the requisite C compiler and build tools. This also makes it difficult to install modules from the CPAN, particularly those that are partially written in C.
ActivePerl is a closed source distribution from ActiveState that has regular releases that track the core Perl releases. [79] The distribution also includes the Perl package manager (PPM), [80] a popular tool for installing, removing, upgrading, and managing the use of common Perl modules. Included also is PerlScript , a Windows Script Host (WSH) engine implementing the Perl language. Visual Perl is an ActiveState tool that adds Perl to the Visual Studio .NET development suite.
Strawberry Perl is an open source distribution for Windows. It has had regular, quarterly releases since January 2008, including new modules as feedback and requests come in. Strawberry Perl aims to be able to install modules like standard Perl distributions on other platforms, including compiling XS modules.
The Cygwin emulation layer is another way of running Perl under Windows. Cygwin provides a Unix-like environment on Windows, and both Perl and CPAN are available as standard pre-compiled packages in the Cygwin setup program. Since Cygwin also includes gcc , compiling Perl from source is also possible.
A perl executable is included in several Windows Resource kits in the directory with other scripting tools.
Implementations of Perl come with the MKS Toolkit and UWIN .

Database interfaces
Perl's text-handling capabilities can be used for generating SQL queries; arrays, hashes, and automatic memory management make it easy to collect and process the returned data. For example, in Tim Bunce's Perl DBI application programming interface (API), the arguments to the API can be the text of SQL queries; thus it is possible to program in multiple languages at the same time (e.g., for generating a Web page using HTML , JavaScript , and SQL in a here document ). The use of Perl variable interpolation to programmatically customize each of the SQL queries, and the specification of Perl arrays or hashes as the structures to programmatically hold the resulting data sets from each SQL query, allows a high-level mechanism for handling large amounts of data for post-processing by a Perl subprogram. [81] In early versions of Perl, database interfaces were created by relinking the interpreter with a client-side database library. This was sufficiently difficult that it was done for only a few of the most-important and most widely used databases, and it restricted the resulting perl executable to using just one database interface at a time.
In Perl 5, database interfaces are implemented by Perl DBI modules. The DBI (Database Interface) module presents a single, database-independent interface to Perl applications, while the DBD (Database Driver) modules handle the details of accessing some 50 different databases; there are DBD drivers for most ANSI SQL databases.
DBI provides caching for database handles and queries, which can greatly improve performance in long-lived execution environments such as mod perl , [82] helping high-volume systems avert load spikes as in the Slashdot effect .
In modern Perl applications, especially those written using web frameworks such as Catalyst , the DBI module is often used indirectly via object-relational mappers such as DBIx::Class , Class::DBI or Rose::DB::Object that generate SQL queries and handle data transparently to the application author.

Comparative performance
The Computer Language Benchmarks Game compares the performance of implementations of typical programming problems in several programming languages. [83] The submitted Perl implementations typically perform toward the high end of the memory-usage spectrum and give varied speed results. Perl's performance in the benchmarks game is typical for interpreted languages. [84]
Large Perl programs start more slowly than similar programs in compiled languages because perl has to compile the source every time it runs. In a talk at the YAPC::Europe 2005 conference and subsequent article "A Timely Start", Jean-Louis Leroy found that his Perl programs took much longer to run than expected because the perl interpreter spent significant time finding modules within his over-large include path. [85] Unlike Java, Python, and Ruby, Perl has only experimental support for pre-compiling. [86] Therefore, Perl programs pay this overhead penalty on every execution. The run phase of typical programs is long enough that amortized startup time is not substantial, but benchmarks that measure very short execution times are likely to be skewed due to this overhead.
A number of tools have been introduced to improve this situation. The first such tool was Apache's mod perl , which sought to address one of the most-common reasons that small Perl programs were invoked rapidly: CGI Web development. ActivePerl , via Microsoft ISAPI , provides similar performance improvements.
Once Perl code is compiled, there is additional overhead during the execution phase that typically isn't present for programs written in compiled languages such as C or C++. Examples of such overhead include bytecode interpretation, reference-counting memory management, and dynamic type-checking.

Optimizing
Because Perl is an interpreted language, it can give problems when efficiency is critical; in such situations, the most critical routines can be written in other languages (such as C ), which can be connected to Perl via simple Inline modules or the more complex but flexible XS mechanism. [87]

Perl 6
At the 2000 Perl Conference , Jon Orwant made a case for a major new language-initiative. [89] This led to a decision to begin work on a redesign of the language, to be called Perl 6. Proposals for new language features were solicited from the Perl community at large, which submitted more than 300 RFCs .
Wall spent the next few years digesting the RFCs and synthesizing them into a coherent framework for Perl 6. He has presented his design for Perl 6 in a series of documents called "apocalypses" – numbered to correspond to chapters in Programming Perl . As of January 2011 [update] , the developing specification of Perl 6 is encapsulated in design documents called Synopses – numbered to correspond to Apocalypses. [90]
Perl 6 is not intended to be backward compatible, although there will be a compatibility mode. Perl 6 and Perl 5 are distinct languages with a common ancestry. [91]
Thesis work by Bradley M. Kuhn , overseen by Wall, considered the possible use of the Java virtual machine as a runtime for Perl. [92] Kuhn's thesis showed this approach to be problematic. In 2001, it was decided that Perl 6 would run on a cross-language virtual machine called Parrot . This will mean that other languages targeting the Parrot will gain native access to CPAN , allowing some level of cross-language development.
In 2005, Audrey Tang created the Pugs project, an implementation of Perl 6 in Haskell . This acted as, and continues to act as, a test platform for the Perl 6 language (separate from the development of the actual implementation) – allowing the language designers to explore. The Pugs project spawned an active Perl/Haskell cross-language community centered around the freenode #perl6 IRC channel.
As of 2012 [update] , a number of features in the Perl 6 language show similarities to Haskell.
As of 2012 [update] , Perl 6 development centers primarily around two compilers: [93]

Future of Perl 5
Development of Perl 5 is also continuing. Perl 5.12.0 was released in April 2010 with some new features influenced by the design of Perl 6, [36] [96] followed by Perl 5.14.1 (released on June 17, 2011), Perl 5.16.1 (released on August 9, 2012. [97] ), and Perl 5.18.0 (released on May 18, 2013). Perl 5 development versions are released on a monthly basis, with major releases coming out once per year. [98]
Future plans for Perl 5 include making the core language easier to extend from modules, and providing a small, extensible meta-object protocol in core. [99]
The relative proportion of Internet searches for 'Perl programming', as compared with similar searches for other programming languages, steadily declined from about 10% in 2005 to about 2% in 2011, and has remained around the 2% level since. [100]

Perl community
Perl's culture and community has developed alongside the language itself. Usenet was the first public venue in which Perl was introduced, but over the course of its evolution, Perl's community was shaped by the growth of broadening Internet-based services including the introduction of the World Wide Web. The community that surrounds Perl was, in fact, the topic of Wall's first "State of the Onion" talk. [101]

State of the Onion
State of the Onion is the name for Wall’s yearly keynote -style summaries on the progress of Perl and its community. They are characterized by his hallmark humor, employing references to Perl’s culture, the wider hacker culture, Wall’s linguistic background, sometimes his family life, and occasionally even his Christian background. [102]
Each talk is first given at various Perl conferences and is eventually also published online.

Perl pastimes

Perl on IRC
There are a number of IRC channels that offer support for the language and some modules.

CPAN Acme
There are also many examples of code written purely for entertainment on the CPAN . Lingua::Romana::Perligata , for example, allows writing programs in Latin . [110] Upon execution of such a program, the module translates its source code into regular Perl and runs it.
The Perl community has set aside the " Acme " namespace for modules that are fun in nature (but its scope has widened to include exploratory or experimental code or any other module that is not meant to ever be used in production). Some of the Acme modules are deliberately implemented in amusing ways. This includes Acme::Bleach , one of the first modules in the Acme:: namespace, [111] which allows the program's source code to be "whitened" (i.e., all characters replaced with whitespace) and yet still work.

Example code
In older versions of Perl, one would write the Hello World program as:
In later versions, which support the say statement, one can also write it as:
Good Perl practices require more complex programs to add the use strict; and use warnings; pragmas , leading into something like:
Here is a more complex Perl program, that counts down the seconds up to a given threshold:
The perl interpreter can also be used for one-off scripts on the command line. The following example (as invoked from an sh-compatible shell, such as Bash) translates the string "Bob" in all files ending with .txt in the current directory to "Robert":

Criticism
Perl has been referred to as " line noise " by some programmers who claim its syntax makes it a write-only language . The earliest such mention was in the first edition of the book Learning Perl , a Perl 5 tutorial book written by Randal L. Schwartz , [112] in the first chapter of which he states: "Yes, sometimes Perl looks like line noise to the uninitiated, but to the seasoned Perl programmer, it looks like checksummed line noise with a mission in life." [113] He also stated that the accusation that Perl is a write-only language could be avoided by coding with "proper care". [113] The Perl overview document perlintro states that the names of built-in "magic" scalar variables "look like punctuation or line noise". [114] The perlstyle document states that line noise in regular expressions could be mitigated using the /x modifier to add whitespace. [115]
According to the Perl 6 FAQ , Perl 6 was designed to mitigate "the usual suspects" that elicit the "line noise" claim from Perl 5 critics, including the removal of "the majority of the punctuation variables" and the sanitization of the regex syntax. [116] The Perl 6 FAQ also states that what is sometimes referred to as Perl's line noise is "the actual syntax of the language" just as gerunds and prepositions are a part of the English language . [116] In a December 2012 blog posting, despite claiming that "Rakudo Perl 6 has failed and will continue to fail unless it gets some adult supervision", chromatic stated that the design of Perl 6 has a "well-defined grammar" as well as an "improved type system, a unified object system with an intelligent metamodel, metaoperators, and a clearer system of context that provides for such niceties as pervasive laziness". [117] He also stated that "Perl 6 has a coherence and a consistency that Perl 5 lacks." [117]

See also
WebPage index: 00073
Lee Daniel Crocker
Lee Daniel Crocker (born July 3, 1963) is an American computer programmer and poker player. He is best known for rewriting the software upon which Wikipedia runs, to address scalability problems. This software, originally known as "Phase III", went live in July 2002 and became the foundation of what is now called MediaWiki . MediaWiki's code repository was still named "phase3" until the move from Subversion to Git in March 2012.
He was involved in the creation of the GIF , JPEG , and PNG image file formats, and appears as a co-author of the PNG specification. He invented the per-scanline variable pre-filtering compression method used by PNG, the sum-of-abs heuristic used by many encoding programs, [1] and proposed an early version of the Adam7 algorithm , using 5 passes rather than 7. [ citation needed ] In 1998, he was one of the 23 original creators of the " Transhumanist Declaration". [2] As of 1999, he was a member of the Extropians ' futurist society. [3]
In June 2010, Crocker and others won the USENIX Advanced Computing Technical Association STUG award for contributions to the Wikipedia software.
WebPage index: 00074
Andrew Lih
Andrew Lih ( simplified Chinese : 郦安治 ; traditional Chinese : 酈安治 ; pinyin : Lì Ānzhì ; born 1968) is a Chinese American new media researcher, consultant and writer, as well as an authority on both Wikipedia and internet censorship in the People's Republic of China . [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] He is currently an associate professor of journalism at American University in Washington, D.C. [10]

Life and career
Lih worked as a software engineer for AT&T Bell Labs from 1990 to 1993. He founded the new-media startup Mediabridge Infosystems in 1994. He also obtained a Masters degree in Computer Science from Columbia University in 1994. [12]
From 1995 to 2000 he served as an adjunct professor of journalism at Columbia, and director of technology for their Center for New Media. [13] In 2000 he formed Columbia's Interactive Design Lab, a collaboration with the university's School of the Arts to explore interactive design for both fiction and non-fiction, including advertising, news, documentaries and films. [1] Soon afterward, Lih served as an assistant professor and the Director of Technology at the Journalism and Media Studies Centre of the University of Hong Kong . [1] [14]
He then moved to Beijing , China , [14] where he lived until 2009. He currently lives in Washington, D.C., where he is an associate professor at American University 's School of Communication . [15]

Wikipedia activity
Lih is a veteran Wikipedia contributor and administrator on the English Wikipedia under the username Fuzheado . [16] In 2009, he published the book The Wikipedia Revolution: How a Bunch of Nobodies Created the World's Greatest Encyclopedia . Lih has been interviewed in a variety of publications, including Salon.com , [17] The New York Times Freakonomics blog, [18] and NPR Talk of the Nation [19] as an expert on Wikipedia.
Lih claims that editing Wikipedia with smartphones is difficult and this discourages new potential contributors. Lih claims several years running the number of Wikipedia editors has been falling and alleges there is serious disagreement among existing contributors how to resolve this. Lih fears these situations could imperil Wikipedia’s long term future. [20]

Selected publications
WebPage index: 00075
Wikimedia Foundation
The Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. ( WMF ) is an American non-profit and charitable organization headquartered in San Francisco , California . It is mostly known for participating in the Wikimedia movement . It owns the internet domain names of most movement projects and hosts sites like Wikipedia . The foundation was founded in 2003 by Jimmy Wales as a way to fund Wikipedia and its sister projects through non-profit means. [5] [6]
As of 2015 [update] , the foundation employs over 280 people, with annual revenues in excess of US$ 75 million . [7] Christophe Henner is chair of the board . [8] Katherine Maher is the executive director since March 2016.

Goal
The Wikimedia Foundation has stated its goal is to develop and maintain open content , wiki -based projects and to provide the full contents of those projects to the public free of charge . [9] Another main objective of the Wikimedia Foundation is political advocacy . [10]
The Wikimedia Foundation was granted section 501(c)(3) status by the U.S. Internal Revenue Code as a public charity in 2005. [11] Its National Taxonomy of Exempt Entities (NTEE) code is B60 ( Adult , Continuing education ). [12] [13] The foundation's by-laws declare a statement of purpose of collecting and developing educational content and to disseminate it effectively and globally. [14]

History
In 2001, Jimmy Wales , an Internet entrepreneur , and Larry Sanger , an online community organizer and philosophy professor, founded Wikipedia as an Internet encyclopedia to supplement Nupedia . The project was originally funded by Bomis , Wales' for-profit business. As Wikipedia's popularity skyrocketed, revenues to fund the project stalled. [5] Since Wikipedia was depleting Bomis' resources, Wales and Sanger thought of a charity model to fund the project. [5] The Wikimedia Foundation was incorporated in Florida on June 20, 2003. [6] [15] It applied to the United States Patent and Trademark Office to trademark Wikipedia on September 17, 2004. The mark was granted registration status on January 10, 2006. Trademark protection was accorded by Japan on December 16, 2004, and, in the European Union , on January 20, 2005. There were plans to license the use of the Wikipedia trademark for some products, such as books or DVDs. [16]
In April 2005, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service approved the foundation as an educational foundation in the category " Adult , Continuing education ", meaning all contributions to the foundation are tax-deductible for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
On December 11, 2006, the Foundation's board noted that the corporation could not become the membership organization initially planned but never implemented due to an inability to meet the registration requirements of Florida statutory law. Accordingly, [ according to whom? ] the by-laws were amended to remove all reference to membership rights and activities. The decision to change the bylaws was passed by the board unanimously. [17]
On September 25, 2007, the foundation's board gave notice that the operations would be moving to the San Francisco Bay Area . Major considerations cited for choosing San Francisco were proximity to like-minded organizations and potential partners, a better talent pool, as well as cheaper and more convenient international travel than is available from St. Petersburg, Florida . [18] [19] [20]
Lila Tretikov was appointed executive director of the Wikimedia Foundation in May 2014. She resigned in March 2016. Former chief communications officer Katherine Maher was appointed the interim executive director, a position made permanent in June 2016.

Projects and initiatives

 Wikimedia projects
In addition to Wikipedia, the foundation operates other wikis that follow the free content model with their main goal being the dissemination of knowledge. These include:
Several additional projects exist to provide infrastructure or coordination of the free knowledge projects. For instance, a wiki helps coordinate work on MediaWiki software and Outreach gives guidelines for best practices on encouraging the use of Wikimedia sites.

Movement affiliates
Wikimedia movement affiliates are independent, but formally recognized, groups of people intended to work together to support and contribute to the Wikimedia movement. The Wikimedia Foundation's Board of Trustees has approved three active models for movement affiliates: chapters, thematic organizations, and user groups. Movement affiliates are intended to organize and engage in activities to support and contribute to the Wikimedia movement, such as regional conferences, outreach, edit-a-thons , hackathons , public relations , public policy advocacy, GLAM engagement, and Wikimania . [21] [22] [23]
Recognition of a chapter and thematic organization is approved by the foundation's board. Recommendations on recognition of chapters and thematic organizations are made to the foundation's board by an Affiliations Committee , composed of Wikimedia community volunteers. The Affiliations Committee approves the recognition of individual user groups. While movement affiliates are formally recognized by the Wikimedia Foundation, they are independent of the Wikimedia Foundation, with no legal control of nor responsibility for the Wikimedia projects. [22] [23] [24]
The foundation began recognizing chapters in 2004. [25] In 2010, development on additional models began. In 2012, the foundation approved, finalized, and adopted the thematic organization and user group recognition models. An additional model, movement partners, was also approved but as of 27 October 2015 [update] has not yet been finalized or adopted. [21] [23] [26]

Wikimania
Each year, an international conference called Wikimania brings the people together who are involved in the Wikimedia organizations and projects. The first Wikimania was held in Frankfurt , Germany, in 2005. Nowadays, Wikimania is organized by a committee supported usually by the national chapter, in collaboration with the Wikimedia Foundation. Wikimania has been held in cities such as Buenos Aires , [27] Cambridge , [28] Haifa , [29] Hong Kong , [30] and London . [31] In 2015, Wikimania took place in Mexico City . [32] In 2016, Wikimania was held in Esino Lario , Italy . [33]

Strategic plan
In response to the growing size and popularity of Wikipedia, the Wikimedia Foundation announced a Strategic Plan to improve and sustain the Wikimedia movement. The plan was announced in July 2009, followed by a process of interviews and surveys with people from across the Wikimedia movement, including board of trustees, members of staff and volunteer editors. [34] The ongoing plan was intended to be the basis of a five-year plan to further outreach, improve content quality and quality control, and optimising operational areas such as finance and infrastructure. [35]

Wikipedia Usability Initiative
In December 2008, the Wikimedia Foundation announced a restricted donation grant of US$890,000 from the Stanton Foundation , to improve Wikipedia's accessibility. [36] Later named the Wikipedia Usability Initiative, the grant was used by the Wikimedia Foundation to appoint project-specific staff to the technology department. [37]
A series of surveys were conducted throughout 2009. This began with a qualitative environment survey on MediaWiki extensions, followed by a Qualitative Statistical Survey focusing on volume of edits, number of new users, and related statistics. In March 2009, a usability and experience study was carried out on new and non-editors of the English Wikipedia. The aim was to discover what obstacles participants encountered while editing Wikipedia, ranging from small changes to more complicated syntax such as templates. The study recruited 2500 people for in-person laboratory testing via the Wikipedia website, which was filtered down to ten participants. The results were collated and used by the technology team to improve Wikipedia's usability. [38] The Usability and Experience Study was followed up by the Usability, Experience and Progress Study in September 2009. This study recruited different new and non-editors for in-person trials on a new Wikipedia skin. [39]
The initiative ultimately culminated in a new Wikipedia skin named Vector, constructed based on the results of the usability studies. This was introduced by default in stages, beginning in May 2010. [40]

Public Policy Initiative
In May 2010, the Wikimedia Foundation announced the Public Policy Initiative, following a US$1.2 million donation by the Stanton Foundation. The Initiative was set up to improve articles relating to public policy–related issues. [41] As part of the initiative, Wikipedia collaborated with ten universities to help students and professors create and maintain articles relating to public policy. [42] Volunteer editors of Wikipedia, known as "ambassadors", provided assistance to students and professors. This was either done on campus sites or online. [43]
In April 2017, the Foundation was one of the founding partners in the Initiative for Open Citations . [44]

Technology
The foundation employs technology including hardware and software to run its projects.

Hardware
Wikipedia employed a single server until 2004, when the server setup was expanded into a distributed multitier architecture . [45]
In January 2005, the project ran on 39 dedicated servers in Florida. [ citation needed ] This configuration included a single master database server running MySQL , multiple database servers, 21 web servers running the Apache HTTP Server , and seven Squid cache servers. [ citation needed ]
Wikimedia currently runs on dedicated clusters of Linux servers (mainly Ubuntu ). [46] [47] As of December 2009 [update] , there were 300 in Florida and 44 in Amsterdam . [48] The number of servers needed to run the infrastructure has been mostly stable since then: 520 servers are used in the main cluster (eqiad) as of November 2015. [49]
As of 2015, the system still runs on central master database and application servers, but there are several cache layers with various ever-changing technologies, as well as a multitude of subsystems for DNS resolution, load balancing, metrics, monitoring, other system administration etc. [50]

Softwаrе
The operation of Wikimedia depends on MediaWiki , a custom-made, free and open-source wiki software platform written in PHP and built upon the MySQL database. [51] The software incorporates programming features such as a macro language , variables , a transclusion system for templates , and URL redirection . MediaWiki is licensed under the GNU General Public License and it is used by all Wikimedia projects, as well as many other wiki projects. Originally, Wikipedia ran on UseModWiki written in Perl by Clifford Adams (Phase I), which initially required CamelCase for article hyperlinks; the present double bracket style was incorporated later. Starting in January 2002 (Phase II), Wikipedia began running on a PHP wiki engine with a MySQL database; this software was custom-made for Wikipedia by Magnus Manske . The Phase II software was repeatedly modified to accommodate the exponentially increasing demand. In July 2002 (Phase III), Wikipedia shifted to the third-generation software, MediaWiki, originally written by Lee Daniel Crocker . Several MediaWiki extensions are installed to extend the functionality of MediaWiki software. In April 2005, a Lucene extension [52] [53] was added to MediaWiki's built-in search and Wikipedia switched from MySQL to Lucene for searching. Currently Lucene Search 2.1, [54] which is written in Java and based on Lucene library 2.3, [55] is used. Wikimedia Foundation also uses CiviCRM [56] and WordPress . [57]
The Foundation published official Wikipedia mobile apps for Android and iOS devices and in March 2015, the apps were updated to include mobile user friendly features. [58]

Finances

In general
The Wikimedia Foundation relies on public contributions and grants to fund its mission. [59] It is exempt from federal income tax [59] [60] and from state income tax. [59] [61] It is not a private foundation, and contributions to it qualify as tax-deductible charitable contributions. [59]
The continued technical and economic growth of each of the Wikimedia projects is dependent mostly on donations but the Wikimedia Foundation also increases its revenue by alternative means of funding such as grants , sponsorship, services and brand merchandising. The Wikimedia OAI-PMH update feed service, targeted primarily at search engines and similar bulk analysis and republishing, has been a source of revenue for several years, [59] but is no longer open to new customers. [62] DBpedia was given access to this feed free of charge. [63] In July 2014, the Foundation announced it would be accepting Bitcoin donations. [64]
Since the end of fiscal year ended 2004, the Foundation's net assets have grown from US$57,000 [65] to US$53.5 million at the end of fiscal year ended June 30, 2014. [66] Under the leadership of Sue Gardner, who joined the Wikimedia Foundation in 2007, the Foundation's staff levels, number of donors and revenue have seen very significant growth. [67]
In 2007, Charity Navigator gave Wikimedia an overall rating of three out of four possible stars [68] Charity Navigator gave three out of four possible stars in overall rating for fiscal years 2008 and 2009 which improved to four-stars in 2010. [69] As of December 2016, the current overall rating was four stars. [70]

Grants
In March 2008, the Foundation announced a large donation, at the time its largest donation yet: a three-year, US$3 million grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation . [71]
In 2009, the Foundation received four grants – the first grant was a US$890,000 Stanton Foundation grant which was aimed to help study and simplify user interface for first-time authors of Wikipedia. [72] The second was a US$300,000 Ford Foundation Grant, given in July 2009, for Wikimedia Commons that aimed to improve the interfaces and workflows for multimedia uploading on Wikimedia websites. [73] In August 2009, the Foundation received a US$500,000 grant from The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation . [74] Lastly, in August 2009, the Omidyar Network issued a potential [ clarification needed ] US$2 million in "grant" funding to Wikimedia. [75]
In 2010, the Google corporation donated US$2 million to the Foundation. [76] The Stanton Foundation granted $1.2 million to fund the Public Policy Initiative, a pilot program for what would later become the Wikipedia Education Program (and the spinoff Wiki Education Foundation ). [77] [78] [79] Also in 2010, the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation pledged a US$800,000 grant and all was funded during 2011. [ citation needed ]
In March 2011, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation authorized another US$3 million grant to continue to develop and maintain the Foundation's mission. The grant was to be funded over three years with the first US$1 million funded in July 2011 and the remaining US$2 million was scheduled to be funded in August 2012 and 2013. In August 2011, the Stanton Foundation pledged to fund a US$3.6 million grant of which US$1.8 million was funded and the remaining was due to be funded in September 2012. As of 2011, this was the largest grant received by the Wikimedia Foundation to-date. [80] In November 2011, the Foundation received a US$500,000 donation from Google co-founder Sergey Brin and his wife. [81] [82]
In 2012, the Foundation was awarded a grant of US$1.25 million from the historians Lisbet Rausing [81] and Peter Baldwin through Charities Aid Foundation , scheduled to be funded in five equal installments. The first installment of US$250,000 was received in April 2012 and the remaining were to be funded in December 2012 through 2015. In 2014, the Foundation received the largest single gift in its history, a $5 million unrestricted donation from an anonymous donor supporting $1 million worth of expenses annually for the next five years. [83]
In 2015, a grant agreement was reached with the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation to build a search engine called the " Knowledge Engine ". [84] [85]

Financial summary

Governance

Board of Trustees
The Board of Trustees has ultimate authority of all the businesses and affairs of the Foundation. It is composed of ten members:
Three permanent entities support the board on its mission and responsibilities: an executive director, who leads and oversees the operational arm of the foundation; an advisory board composed of individuals selected by the board itself that advise the board on different matters; and standing committees to which the board delegates certain matters while retaining ultimate authority. The board has also at times created other orthodox entities [ clarification needed ] to support itself, such as executive secretaries and ad-hoc committees established for specific tasks.
The current board comprises Christophe Henner as chairman and María Sefidari as vice-chairman, together with Alice Wiegand, Nataliia Tymkiv, Kelly Battles , Dariusz Jemielniak as members at-large, and Jimmy Wales as founder's seat (installed as "Community Founder Trustee Position" to the WMF bylaws in August 2008). [95] [96] There are three vacant seats, most recently occupied by Arnnon Geshuri , Denny Vrandečić and Guy Kawasaki .
In a high-profile decision of 2015, James Heilman was removed from the board, [97] [98] with little explanation. [97] In January 2016, Arnnon Geshuri stepped down from the board following a controversy about an agreement he executed when at Google , violating United States antitrust law . The participating companies paid US$415 million in a class action suit on behalf of affected employees. [99] [100]

Advisory board
The Advisory Board, according to the Wikimedia Foundation, is an international network of experts who have agreed to give the foundation meaningful help on a regular basis in many different areas, including law, organizational development, technology, policy, and outreach. [101]

Staff

First appointments
In 2004, the foundation appointed Tim Starling as developer liaison to help improve the MediaWiki software, Daniel Mayer as chief financial officer ( finance , budgeting , and coordination of fund drives), and Erik Möller as content partnership coordinator. In May 2005, the foundation announced seven more official appointments. [102]
In January 2006, the foundation created several committees, including the Communication Committee, in an attempt to further organize activities essentially handled by volunteers at that time. [103] Starling resigned that month to spend more time on his PhD program.

Employees
The foundation's functions were, for the first few years, executed almost entirely by volunteers. In 2005, it had only two employees, Danny Wool, a coordinator, and Brion Vibber, a software manager.
As of October 4, 2006 [update] , the foundation had five paid employees: [104] two programmers, an administrative assistant, a coordinator handling fundraising and grants, and an interim executive director , [105] Brad Patrick, previously the foundation's general counsel . Patrick ceased his activity as interim director in January 2007, and then resigned from his position as legal counsel, effective April 1, 2007. He was replaced by Mike Godwin , who served as general counsel and legal coordinator from July 2007 [106] until 2010.
In January 2007, Carolyn Doran was named chief operating officer and Sandy Ordonez joined as head of communications . [107] Doran began working as a part-time bookkeeper in 2006 after being sent by a temporary agency . Doran, found to have had a long criminal record, [108] left the foundation in July 2007, and Sue Gardner was hired as consultant and special advisor (later CEO). Doran's departure from the organization was cited by Florence Devouard as one of the reasons the foundation took about seven months to release its fiscal 2007 financial audit. [109]
Danny Wool, officially the grant coordinator but also largely involved in fundraising and business development, resigned in March 2007. He accused Wales of misusing the foundation's funds for recreational purposes, and said that Wales had his Wikimedia credit card taken away in part because of his spending habits, a claim Wales denied. [110] In February 2007, the foundation added a new position, chapters coordinator, and hired Delphine Ménard, [111] who had been occupying the position as a volunteer since August 2005. Cary Bass was hired in March 2007 in the position of volunteer coordinator. Oleta McHenry was brought in as accountant in May 2007, through a temporary placement agency and made the official full-time accountant in August 2007. In January 2008, the foundation appointed Veronique Kessler as the new chief financial and operating officer, Kul Wadhwa as head of business development, and Jay Walsh as head of communications.
By early 2015, the foundation had well over 200 employees.

Disputes and lawsuits
Many disputes have resulted in litigation [112] [113] [114] [115] while others have not. [116] Attorney Matt Zimmerman stated, "Without strong liability protection, it would be difficult for Wikipedia to continue to provide a platform for user-created encyclopedia content." [117]
In December 2011, the Foundation hired Washington, DC lobbyist Dow Lohnes Government Strategies LLC to lobby the United States Congress with regard to "Civil Rights/Civil Liberties" and "Copyright/Patent/Trademark." [118] At the time of the hire the Foundation was concerned specifically about a bill known as the Stop Online Piracy Act . [119]
In October 2013, a German Court ruled that the Wikimedia Foundation can be held liable for content added to Wikipedia – however, this applies only when there has been a specific complaint; otherwise, the Wikimedia Foundation does not check any of the content published on Wikipedia and has no duty to do so. [120]
In June 2014, a copyright infringement lawsuit was filed by Bildkonst Upphovsrätt i Sverige against Wikimedia Sweden. [121]
On June 20, 2014, a defamation lawsuit (Law Division civil case No. L-1400-14) involving Wikipedia editors was filed with the Mercer County Superior Court in New Jersey seeking, inter alia, compensatory and punitive damages. [122] [123]
In a March 10, 2015, op-ed for The New York Times , Wales and Tretikov announced the Foundation was filing a lawsuit against the National Security Agency , calling into question its practice of mass surveillance , which they argued infringed the constitutional rights of the Foundation's readers, editors and staff. [124] [125] [126] On October 23, 2015, the United States District Court for the District of Maryland dismissed the suit Wikimedia Foundation v. NSA on grounds of standing . US District Judge T. S. Ellis III ruled that the plaintiffs could not plausibly prove they were subject to upstream surveillance , and that their argument is riddled with assumptions, speculations and mathematical gymnastics. [127] [128] The plaintiffs filed an appeal with the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit on February 17, 2016. [129]
In February 2016, Lila Tretikov announced her resignation as executive director, as a result of the WMF's controversial Knowledge Engine project and disagreements with the staff. [130] [131]
WebPage index: 00076
Ubuntu (operating system)
Ubuntu ( / ʊ ˈ b uː n t ʊ / uu- BOON -tuu , stylized as ubuntu ) [11] is a Debian -based Linux operating system for personal computers , tablets and smartphones , where Ubuntu Touch edition is used; and also runs network servers , usually with the Ubuntu Server edition , either on physical or virtual servers (such as on mainframes ) or with containers , that is with enterprise-class features; runs on the most popular architectures, including server-class ARM-based.
Ubuntu is published by Canonical Ltd , who offer commercial support. [12] It is based on free software and named after the Southern African philosophy of ubuntu (literally, 'human-ness'), which Canonical Ltd. suggests can be loosely translated as "humanity to others" or "I am what I am because of who we all are". [13] Since Ubuntu 11.04 Natty Narwhal Ubuntu has used Unity as its default user interface for the desktop, but following the release of Ubuntu 17.10 it will move to the GNOME 3 desktop instead, as work on Unity ends. [14] [15] Ubuntu is the most popular operating system running in hosted environments, so–called " clouds ", [16] as it is the most popular server Linux distribution .
Development of Ubuntu is led by UK-based Canonical Ltd., a company of South African entrepreneur Mark Shuttleworth . Canonical generates revenue through the sale of technical support and other services related to Ubuntu. [17] [18] The Ubuntu project is publicly committed to the principles of open-source software development ; people are encouraged to use free software , study how it works, improve upon it, and distribute it. [19] [20]

History and development process
Ubuntu is built on Debian 's architecture and infrastructure, to provide Linux server, desktop, phone, tablet and TV operating systems. [21] Ubuntu releases updated versions predictably every six months, [8] and each release receives free support for nine months (eighteen months prior to 13.04) [22] with security fixes, high-impact bug fixes and conservative, substantially beneficial low-risk bug fixes. [23] The first release was in October 2004.
Starting with Ubuntu 6.06, every fourth release, one release every two years, receives long-term support (LTS). [8] Long-term support includes updates for new hardware, security patches and updates to the 'Ubuntu stack' (cloud computing infrastructure). [18] The first LTS releases were supported for three years on the desktop and five years on the server; since Ubuntu 12.04 LTS, desktop support for LTS releases was increased to five years as well. [24] [25] [26] LTS releases get regular point releases with support for new hardware and integration of all the updates published in that series to date. [27]
Ubuntu packages are based on packages from Debian's unstable branch. Both distributions use Debian's deb package format and package management tools ( APT and Ubuntu Software Center ). Debian and Ubuntu packages are not necessarily binary compatible with each other, however; packages may need to be rebuilt from source to be used in Ubuntu. [28] Many Ubuntu developers are also maintainers of key packages within Debian. Ubuntu cooperates with Debian by pushing changes back to Debian, [29] although there has been criticism that this does not happen often enough. Ian Murdock , the founder of Debian, had expressed concern about Ubuntu packages potentially diverging too far from Debian to remain compatible. [30] Before release, packages are imported from Debian unstable continuously and merged with Ubuntu-specific modifications. One month before release, imports are frozen , and packagers then work to ensure that the frozen features interoperate well together.
Ubuntu is currently funded by Canonical Ltd. On 8 July 2005, Mark Shuttleworth and Canonical announced the creation of the Ubuntu Foundation and provided an initial funding of US$10 million. The purpose of the foundation is to ensure the support and development for all future versions of Ubuntu. Mark Shuttleworth describes the foundation goal as to ensure the continuity of the Ubuntu project. [31]
On 12 March 2009, Ubuntu announced developer support for 3rd-party cloud management platforms, such as those used at Amazon EC2 . [32]
Unity has become the default GUI for Ubuntu Desktop, [33] [34] although following the release of Ubuntu 17.10 it will move to the GNOME 3 desktop instead as work on Unity ends. [14] [15] However, a community-driven fork of Unity 8, called Yunit, has been created to continue the development of Unity. [35] [ non-primary source needed ] Shuttleworth wrote on 8 April 2017, "We will invest in Ubuntu GNOME with the intent of delivering a fantastic all-GNOME desktop. We're helping the Ubuntu GNOME team, not creating something different or competitive with that effort. While I am passionate about the design ideas in Unity, and hope GNOME may be more open to them now, I think we should respect the GNOME design leadership by delivering GNOME the way GNOME wants it delivered. Our role in that, as usual, will be to make sure that upgrades, integration, security, performance and the full experience are fantastic." [36] Shuttleworth also mentioned that Canonical will cease development for Ubuntu Phone, Tablet, and convergence. [37]

Features
A default installation of Ubuntu contains a wide range of software that includes LibreOffice , Firefox , Thunderbird , Transmission , and several lightweight games such as Sudoku and chess . [38] [39] Many additional software packages are accessible from the built in Ubuntu Software Center as well as any other APT -based package management tools. Many additional software packages, such as Evolution , GIMP , Pidgin , and Synaptic , that are no longer installed by default, are still accessible in the repositories, installable with the built in Ubuntu Software Center ; or by any other APT -based package management tool and Snappy.
Ubuntu operates under the GNU General Public License (GPL) and all of the application software installed by default is free software. In addition, Ubuntu installs some hardware drivers that are available only in binary format, but such packages are clearly marked in the restricted component. [40]

Security
Ubuntu's goal is to be secure "out-of-the box". By default, the user's programs run with low privileges and cannot corrupt the operating system or other users' files. For increased security, the sudo tool is used to assign temporary privileges for performing administrative tasks, which allows the root account to remain locked and helps prevent inexperienced users from inadvertently making catastrophic system changes or opening security holes. [41] PolicyKit is also being widely implemented into the desktop. Most network ports are closed by default to prevent hacking. [42] A built-in firewall allows end-users who install network servers to control access. A GUI ( GUI for Uncomplicated Firewall ) is available to configure it. [43] Ubuntu compiles its packages using GCC features such as PIE and buffer overflow protection to harden its software. [44] These extra features greatly increase security at the performance expense of 1% in 32-bit and 0.01% in 64-bit . [45]
Ubuntu also supports full disk encryption [46] as well as encryption of the home and Private directories. [47]

Installation
The system requirements vary among Ubuntu products. For the Ubuntu desktop release 16.04 LTS, a PC with at least 2 GHz dual-core processor, 2 GB of RAM and 25 GB of free disk space is recommended. [48] [49] For less powerful computers, there are other Ubuntu distributions such as Lubuntu and Xubuntu . Since version 12.04, Ubuntu supports the ARM architecture . [2] [50] [51] [52] [53] Ubuntu is also available on Power , [2] [54] [55] [56] older PowerPC architecture was at one point unofficial supported, [57] and now newer Power Architecture CPUs ( POWER8 ) are supported.
Live images are the typical way for users to assess and subsequently install Ubuntu. These can be downloaded as a disk image ( .iso ) and subsequently burnt to a DVD and booted, or run via UNetbootin directly from a USB drive (making, respectively, a live DVD or live USB medium). Running Ubuntu in this way is typically slower than running it from a hard drive , but does not alter the computer unless specifically instructed by the user. If the user chooses to boot the live image rather than execute an installer at boot time, there is still the option to then use an installer called Ubiquity to install Ubuntu once booted into the live environment. [58] Disk images of all current and past versions are available for download at the Ubuntu web site. [59] Various third-party programs such as remastersys and Reconstructor are available to create customized copies of the Ubuntu Live DVDs (or CDs). "Minimal CDs" are available (for server use) that fit on a CD.
Additionally, USB flash drive installations can be used to boot Ubuntu and Kubuntu in a way that allows permanent saving of user settings and portability of the USB-installed system between physical machines (however, the computers' BIOS must support booting from USB). [60] In newer versions of Ubuntu, the Ubuntu Live USB creator can be used to install Ubuntu on a USB drive (with or without a live CD or DVD). Creating a bootable USB drive with persistence is as simple as dragging a slider to determine how much space to reserve for persistence; for this, Ubuntu employs casper . [61] [62]
The desktop edition can also be installed using the Netboot image (a.k.a. netboot tarball) which uses the debian-installer and allows certain specialist installations of Ubuntu: setting up automated deployments, upgrading from older installations without network access, LVM or RAID partitioning, installs on systems with less than about 256 MB of RAM (although low-memory systems may not be able to run a full desktop environment reasonably). [63]

Package classification and support
Ubuntu divides most software into four domains to reflect differences in licensing and the degree of support available. [64] Some unsupported applications receive updates from community members, but not from Canonical Ltd.
Free software includes software that has met the Ubuntu licensing requirements, [64] which roughly correspond to the Debian Free Software Guidelines . Exceptions, however, include firmware and fonts , in the Main category, because although they are not allowed to be modified, their distribution is otherwise unencumbered. [ citation needed ]
Non-free software is usually unsupported (Multiverse), but some exceptions (Restricted) are made for important non-free software. Supported non-free software includes device drivers that can be used to run Ubuntu on some current hardware, such as binary-only graphics card drivers . The level of support in the Restricted category is more limited than that of Main, because the developers may not have access to the source code . It is intended that Main and Restricted should contain all software needed for a complete desktop environment. [64] Alternative programs for the same tasks and programs for specialized applications are placed in the Universe and Multiverse categories.
In addition to the above, in which the software does not receive new features after an initial release, Ubuntu Backports is an officially recognized repository for backporting newer software from later versions of Ubuntu. [65] The repository is not comprehensive; it consists primarily of user-requested packages, which are approved if they meet quality guidelines. Backports receives no support at all from Canonical, and is entirely community-maintained.
The -updates repository provides stable release updates (SRU) of Ubuntu and are generally installed through update-manager. Each release is given its own -updates repository (e.g. intrepid-updates). The repository is supported by Canonical Ltd. for packages in main and restricted, and by the community for packages in universe and multiverse. All updates to the repository must meet certain requirements and go through the -proposed repository before being made available to the public. [66] Updates are scheduled to be available until the end of life for the release.
In addition to the -updates repository, the unstable -proposed repository contains uploads which must be confirmed before being copied into -updates. All updates must go through this process to ensure that the patch does truly fix the bug and there is no risk of regression . [67] Updates in -proposed are confirmed by either Canonical or members of the community.
Canonical's partner repository lets vendors of proprietary software deliver their products to Ubuntu users at no cost through the same familiar tools for installing and upgrading software. [68] The software in the partner repository is officially supported with security and other important updates by its respective vendors. Canonical supports the packaging of the software for Ubuntu [68] [69] [70] and provides guidance to vendors. [68] The partner repository is disabled by default and can be enabled by the user. [71] Some popular products distributed via the partner repository as of 28 April 2013 [update] are Adobe Flash Player , Adobe Reader , Skype and Wine are also able to be installed to run Windows software if the user desires.

Package Archives
A Personal Package Archive (PPA) is a software repository for uploading source packages to be built and published as an Advanced Packaging Tool repository by Launchpad . [72] While the term is used exclusively within Ubuntu, Launchpad host Canonical envisions adoption beyond the Ubuntu community. [73]

Third-party software
Ubuntu has a certification system for third-party software. [74] Some third-party software that does not limit distribution is included in Ubuntu's multiverse component. The package ubuntu-restricted-extras additionally contains software that may be legally restricted, including support for MP3 and DVD playback, Microsoft TrueType core fonts , Sun's Java runtime environment , Adobe's Flash Player plugin, many common audio/video codecs , and unrar , an unarchiver for files compressed in the RAR file format .
Additionally, third-party application suites are available for purchase through Ubuntu Software, [75] including many games such as Braid and Oil Rush , [76] software for DVD playback and media codecs. More games are available through Steam .

Releases
Each Ubuntu release has a version number that consists of the year and month number of the release. [90] For example, the first release was Ubuntu 4.10 as it was released on 20 October 2004. Version numbers for future versions are provisional; if the release is delayed the version number changes accordingly.
Ubuntu releases are also given alliterative code names , using an adjective and an animal (e.g., "Karmic Koala" or "Trusty Tahr"). With the exception of the first two releases, code names are in alphabetical order, allowing a quick determination of which release is newer, at least until restarting the cycle with the planned release of Artful Aardvark in September 2017. [91] Commonly, Ubuntu releases are referred to using only the adjective portion of the code name; for example, the 14.04 LTS release is commonly known as "Trusty".
Releases are timed to be approximately one month after GNOME releases (which in turn are about one month after releases of X.org ). As a result, every Ubuntu release was introduced with an updated version of both GNOME and X. After major releases, the Ubuntu Developer Summit (UDS) is held, at which the Ubuntu community sets the development direction for the next cycle. The latest such event, as of February 2017, [update] was held 5–7 May 2015, after Ubuntu 15.04 and planning 15.10. [92]
Upgrades from one LTS release to the next LTS release (e.g. Ubuntu 14.04 LTS to Ubuntu 16.04 LTS) are supported, [93] while upgrades from non-LTS have only supported upgrade to the next release, regardless of its LTS status (e.g. Ubuntu 15.10 to Ubuntu 16.04 LTS).
Ubuntu 10.10 (Maverick Meerkat) , was released on 10 October 2010 (10–10–10). This departed from the traditional schedule of releasing at the end of October in order to get "the perfect 10", [94] and makes a playful reference to The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy books, since, in binary , 101010 equals decimal 42 , the "Answer to the Ultimate Question of Life, the Universe and Everything" within the series. [95]
Ubuntu 14.04.1 and all later releases require a 2 GB or larger installation medium. [96] Server releases still fit on CDs. [97]

Variants
The variant officially recommended for most users, and officially supported by Canonical, is Ubuntu Desktop (formally named as Ubuntu Desktop Edition, and simply called Ubuntu), designed for desktop and laptop PCs using Unity Desktop interface (earlier versions used GNOME). [98] A number of other variants are distinguished simply by each featuring a different desktop environment. The following are not commercially supported by Canonical: [59]
LXDE [99] and Xfce [100] are sometimes recommended for use with older PCs that may have less memory and processing power available.
Besides Ubuntu Desktop, there are several other official Ubuntu editions, which are created and maintained by Canonical and the Ubuntu community and receive full support from Canonical, its partners and the Community. They include the following: [101] [102]
There are more Ubuntu variants (or derivatives) based on the official Ubuntu editions. These install a default set of packages that differ from the official Ubuntu distributions.
The variants recognized by Canonical as contributing significantly towards the Ubuntu project (but not commercially supported [59] ) are the following: [102]
There are many more variants, created and maintained by individuals and organizations outside of Canonical, and they are self-governed projects that work more or less closely with the Ubuntu community. [101]

Chinese derivative Ubuntu Kylin
Since Ubuntu 10.10, a Chinese-language version of Ubuntu Desktop called "Ubuntu Chinese Edition" (later Ubuntu Kylin), had been released alongside the various other editions, up to and including 12.04. [109] However, in 2013, Canonical reached an agreement with the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of the People's Republic of China to make Ubuntu the new basis of the Kylin operating system (that had used FreeBSD ) starting with Raring Ringtail (version 13.04). [110] The first version of Ubuntu Kylin was released on 25 April 2013. [111]

Ubuntu Server
Ubuntu has a server edition that uses the same APT repositories as the Ubuntu Desktop Edition. The differences between them are the absence of an X Window environment in a default installation of the server edition (although one can easily be installed, including Unity, GNOME, KDE or Xfce), and some alterations to the installation process. [112] The server edition uses a screen-mode, character-based interface for the installation, instead of a graphical installation process. This enables installation on machines with a serial or "dumb terminal" interface without graphics support.
Since version 10.10, the server edition (like the desktop version) supports hardware virtualization and can be run in a virtual machine , either inside a host operating system or in a hypervisor , such as VMware ESXi , Oracle , Citrix XenServer , Microsoft Hyper-V , QEMU , a Kernel-based Virtual Machine , or any other IBM PC compatible emulator or virtualizer. Ubuntu 7.10 and later turn on the AppArmor security module for the Linux kernel by default on key software packages, and the firewall is extended to common services used by the operating system.
It has up-to-date versions of key server software pre-installed, including: Tomcat (v8), PostgreSQL (v9.5), Docker v(1.10), Puppet (v3.8.5), Qemu (v2.5), Libvirt (v1.3.1), LXC (v2.0), and MySQL (v5.6). [114]

Ubuntu Touch
Ubuntu Touch is an alternate version of Ubuntu developed for smartphones and tablets which was announced on 2 January 2013. Ubuntu Touch was released to manufacturing on 16 September 2014. [118] The first device to run it was the Galaxy Nexus . [119] A concept for a smartphone running Ubuntu for Phones was published [ when? ] on Ubuntu's official channel on YouTube . [120] The platform allows developing one app with two interfaces: a smartphone UI, and, when docked, a desktop UI; a demo version for higher-end Ubuntu smartphones was shown that could run a full Ubuntu desktop when connected to a monitor and keyboard, which was to ship as Ubuntu for Android. [121] Ubuntu for Tablets was previewed at 19 February 2013. According to the keynote video, an Ubuntu Phone will be able to connect to a tablet, which will then utilize a tablet interface; plugging a keyboard and mouse into the tablet will transform the phone into a desktop; and plugging a television monitor into the phone will bring up the Ubuntu TV interface. [122]
On 6 February 2015, the first smartphone running Ubuntu Touch pre-installed was announced. The BQ Aquaris E4.5 Ubuntu Edition features a 4.5-inch (110 mm) qHD display, a 1.3 GHz quad-core Cortex-A7 processor, and 1 GB of RAM. It is currently priced at €169.90, while the 5-inch Aquaris E5 HD Ubuntu Edition is available for €199.90. [123]

Cloud computing
Ubuntu offers Ubuntu Cloud Images which are pre-installed disk images that have been customized by Ubuntu engineering to run on cloud-platforms such as Amazon EC2 , OpenStack , Microsoft Windows and LXC . [124] Ubuntu is also prevalent on VPS platforms such as DigitalOcean . [125]
Ubuntu 11.04 added support for OpenStack, with Eucalyptus to OpenStack migration tools added by Canonical in Ubuntu Server 11.10. [126] [127] Ubuntu 11.10 added focus on OpenStack as the Ubuntu's preferred IaaS offering though Eucalyptus is also supported. Another major focus is Canonical Juju for provisioning, deploying, hosting, managing, and orchestrating enterprise data center infrastructure services, by, with, and for the Ubuntu Server. [128] [129]

Adoption and reception

Installed base
Because of a lack of registration, any number provided for Ubuntu usage can only be estimated. [130] In 2015, Canonical's Ubuntu Insights page stated "Ubuntu now has over 40 million desktop users and counting". [131]
W3Techs Web Technology Surveys estimated in September 2016 that:
W3Techs analyzes the top 10 million websites only. [135] It considers Linux as a subcategory of Unix and estimated in the same month that 66.7% of the analyzed websites use Unix, under that broad definition. [136]
According to TheCloudMarket.com, Ubuntu is on at least 57% of the images it scanned on Amazon EC2 (and Windows at 7.8%). [16]
Wikimedia Foundation data (based on user agent ) for September 2013 shows that Ubuntu generated the most page requests to Wikimedia sites, including Wikipedia, among recognizable Linux distributions. [137] [138]

Large-scale deployments
The public sector has also adopted Ubuntu. As of January 2009 [update] , the Ministry of Education and Science of Republic of Macedonia deployed more than 180,000 [139] Ubuntu-based classroom desktops, and has encouraged every student in the country to use Ubuntu-powered computer workstations; [140] the Spanish school system has 195,000 Ubuntu desktops. [139] The French police, having already started using open-source software in 2005 by replacing Microsoft Office with OpenOffice.org , decided to transition to Ubuntu from Windows XP after the release of Windows Vista in 2006. [141] By March 2009, the Gendarmerie Nationale had already switched 5000 workstations to Ubuntu. [141] Based on the success of that transition, it planned to switch 15,000 more over by the end of 2009 and to have switched all 90,000 workstations over by 2015 (GendBuntu project) . [141] Lt. Colonel Guimard announced that the move was very easy and allowed for a 70% saving on the IT budget without having to reduce its capabilities. [141] In 2011, Ubuntu 10.04 was adopted by the Indian justice system. [142] The Government of Kerala adopted Ubuntu for the legislators in Kerala and the government schools of Kerala began to use customized IT@School Project Ubuntu 10.04 which contains specially created software for students. Earlier, Windows was used in the schools. Textbooks were also remade with an Ubuntu syllabus and are currently used in schools. [143]
The city of Munich , Germany, has forked Kubuntu 10.04 LTS and created LiMux for use on the city's computers. [144] After originally planning to migrate 12,000 desktop computers to LiMux, it was announced in December 2013 that the project had completed successfully with the migration of 14,800 out of 15,500 desktop computers, [145] but still keeping about 5000 Windows clients for unported applications. In February 2017 the city decided to evaluate the migration back to Windows [146] – some stated reasons were missing compatibility, bad user acceptance and complexity. In March 2012, the government of Iceland launched a project to get all public institutions using free and open-source software. Already several government agencies and schools have adopted Ubuntu. The government cited cost savings as a big factor for the decision, and also stated that open source software avoids vendor lock-in . A 12-month project was launched to migrate the biggest public institutions in Iceland to open-source, and help ease the migration for others. [147] US president Barack Obama 's successful campaign for re-election in 2012, used Ubuntu in its IT department. [148] [ importance? ] In August 2014, the city of Turin , Italy, announced the migration from Windows XP to Ubuntu for its 8,300 desktop computers used by the municipality, becoming the first city in Italy to adopt Ubuntu. [149] [150]

Critical reception
Ubuntu was awarded the Reader Award for best Linux distribution at the 2005 LinuxWorld Conference and Expo in London, [151] received favorable reviews in online and print publications, [152] [153] and has won InfoWorld 's 2007 Bossie Award for Best Open Source Client OS . [154] In early 2008 PC World named Ubuntu the "best all-around Linux distribution available today", though it criticized the lack of an integrated desktop effects manager. [155] Chris DiBona, the program manager for open-source software at Google, said "I think Ubuntu has captured people's imaginations around the Linux desktop," and "If there is a hope for the Linux desktop, it would be them". As of January 2009 [update] , almost half of Google's 20,000 employees used Goobuntu, a proprietary, slightly modified version of Ubuntu. [139] In 2012, ZDNet reported that Ubuntu was still Google's desktop of choice. [156] In March 2016, Matt Hartley picked a list of best Linux distributions for Datamation ; he chose Ubuntu as number one. [157]
In 2008, Jamie Hyneman , co-host of the American television series MythBusters , advocated Linux (giving the example of Ubuntu) as a solution to software bloat . [158] Other celebrity users of Ubuntu include science fiction writer Cory Doctorow [159] and actor Stephen Fry . [160]
In March 2013, Canonical announced that it had decided to develop Mir , [161] reversing an earlier plan to move to Wayland as the primary Ubuntu display server [162] and causing widespread objection from the open source desktop community . [163] [164] [165] [166] X.Org contributor Daniel Stone opined: "I'm just irritated that this means more work for us, more work for upstream developers, more work for toolkits, more work for hardware vendors....". [167] In September 2013, an Intel developer removed XMir support from their video driver and wrote "We do not condone or support Canonical in the course of action they have chosen, and will not carry XMir patches upstream". [168] [169] [170]
In January 2014, the UK's authority for computer security, CESG , reported that Ubuntu 12.04 LTS was "the only operating system that passes as many as 9 out of 12 requirements without any significant risks". [171]
Ubuntu's developers acknowledged battery life problems from version 10.04 [172] and sought to solve the issues of power consumption in the 12.04 LTS release. [173] [ self-published source? ] The 14.04 release improved the situation, but still lagged other operating systems in the battery life metric. [174]

Amazon controversy
One of the new features of Unity in Ubuntu 12.10 was the shopping lens—Amazon search results displayed in the Unity dash. It was alternately described as the "Amazon controversy", [175] [176] "privacy fiasco" [177] and "spyware". [178]
From October 2012, it sent the user's queries through a secure HTTPS connection from the home lens to productsearch.ubuntu.com, [179] which then polled Amazon.com to find relevant products; Amazon then sent product images directly to the user's computer through HTTP. If the user clicked on one of these results and then bought something, Canonical got a small fraction of the sale. [180]
In 2012, many reviewers criticized it: as the home lens is the normal means to search for content on the local machine, reviewers were concerned about the disclosure of queries that were intended to be local, creating a privacy problem. [179] As the feature is active by default instead of opt-in, many users could be unaware of it. [179] [180] [181] [182]
Some users chose to turn it off or to remove the feature using a patch. [183] An April 2014 article by Scott Gilbertson stated that the online search components of Ubuntu could be turned off with a couple of clicks in version 14.04. [174]
For the move, it was awarded the 2013 Austria Big Brother Award . [184]
Since Ubuntu 16.04, the setting is off by default. [185]

Conformity with European data privacy law
Soon after being introduced, doubts emerged on the conformance of the shopping lens with the European Data Protection Directive . [186] [187] A petition was later signed by over 50 Ubuntu users and delivered to Canonical demanding various modifications to the feature in order to clearly frame it within European law. [188] [ self-published source? ] Canonical did not reply.
In 2013, a formal complaint on the shopping lens was filed with the Information Commissioner's Office (ICO), the UK data privacy office. Almost one year later the ICO ruled in favour of Canonical, considering the various improvements introduced to the feature in the meantime to render it conformable with the Data Protection Directive . [189] [ self-published source? ] According to European rules, this ruling is automatically effective in the entirety of the European Union. However, the ruling also made clear that at the time of introduction the feature was not legal, among other things, since it was missing a privacy policy statement.

Local communities (LoCos)
In an effort to reach out to users who are less technical, and to foster a sense of community around the distribution, Local Communities, [190] better known as "LoCos", have been established throughout the world. Originally, each country had one LoCo Team. However, in some areas, most notably the United States and Canada, each state or province may establish a team. [191] A LoCo Council approves teams based upon their efforts to aid in either the development or the promotion of Ubuntu. [192]

Hardware vendor support
Ubuntu works closely with OEMs to jointly make Ubuntu available on a wide range of devices. [193] A number of vendors offer computers with Ubuntu pre-installed, including Dell , [194] Hasee , [195] Sharp Corporation , [196] and Cirrus7. [197] [198] Specifically, Dell offers the XPS 13 laptop, Developer Edition with Ubuntu pre-installed. [199] Together, Dell, Lenovo, HP, and ASUS offer over 200 desktop and close to 500 laptop PCs preloaded with Ubuntu. Certified OEM images are also available for Ubuntu Advantage customers. [193] System76 , [200] WeWi [201] and Tesco [ citation needed ] . System76 PCs are sold exclusively with Ubuntu. Dell and System76 customers are able to choose between 30-day, three-month, and yearly Ubuntu support plans through Canonical. [202] Dell computers (running Ubuntu 10.04) include extra support for ATI Video Graphics, Dell Wireless, Fingerprint Readers , HDMI , Bluetooth , DVD playback (using LinDVD ), and MP3 / WMA / WMV . [203] Asus is also selling some Eee PCs with Ubuntu pre-installed and announced "many more" models running Ubuntu for 2011. [204] [205] [206] Vodafone has made available a notebook for the South-African market called "Webbook". [207] [208] [209]
Dell sells computers (initially Inspiron 14R and 15R laptops) pre-loaded with Ubuntu in India and China, with 850 and 350 retail outlets respectively. [210] [211] Starting in 2013, Alienware began offering its X51 model gaming desktop pre-installed with Ubuntu at a lower price than if it were pre-installed with Windows. [212]
While Linux already works in IBM's mainframe system ( zLinux ), IBM in collaboration with Canonical (and SUSE ; " Linux Foundation will form a new Open Mainframe Project") announced Ubuntu support for their z/Architecture (IBM claims their latest system, IBM zEnterprise System , version z13 is the most powerful computer in the world; it is the largest computer by transistor count) for the first time, at the time of their "biggest code drop" ("LinuxOne") in Linux history. [213]
In early 2015, Intel launched the Intel Compute Stick small form factor computer available preloaded with Ubuntu or Windows operating systems. [214]

Windows subsystem
In March 2016, Microsoft announced that they would support the Ubuntu userland on top of the Windows 10 kernel by implementing the Linux system calls as a subsystem . The focus lies on command-line tools like Bash and is therefore primarily directed towards developers. [3] [4] [5]

See also
WebPage index: 00077
Wikimedia project
A Wikimedia project is a wiki -based community project run by the Wikimedia Foundation , [1] a nonprofit organization founded in San Francisco , California in 2003. The Foundation operates many free software and free content projects, listed below, which are developed by volunteers of the Wikimedia movement .

List
Content on most Wikimedia Foundation websites is licensed for redistribution under v3.0 of the Attribution and Share-alike Creative Commons licenses . This content is sourced from contributing volunteers and from resources with few or no copyright restrictions, such as copyleft material and works in the public domain .
The order in the table below is as listed in the Wikimedia SiteMatrix .
The only Wikimedia Foundation project which has been closed and deleted is the September 11 Memorial wiki, which was created shortly after the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks .

Language codes
Wikimedia projects use language codes to identify language specific editions of a Wikimedia project. The codes are often used as a subdomain, e.g. for the Wikipedia editions it is a subdomain below wikipedia.org. Interlanguage links in the English Wikipedia are sorted by that code.
The codes mostly correspond to the language codes defined by ISO 639-1 and ISO 639-3 , and the decision of which language code to use is mostly in accordance with the IETF language tag policy.
One code is not a language code ('be-x-old') but refers to a specific orthography.

Codes that do not agree with the ISO 639 meaning or are deprecated
Several codes are used for project editions where the ISO 639 meaning is different from the content contained in the project. [2]
This makes the codes partially "not useful". [3]

Project codes

Internal code changes
The following codes have been changed for the mark-up: [11]

Redirects

Usage in Wikimedia projects

Project specific codes

Wikidata
In Wikidata a property named "Wikimedia language code" exists. [14]

Software projects and other backstage projects
The Foundation also hosts various private wikis – such as those for the Chapters Committee, Board of Trustees, OTRS , and Wikimedia Foundation Office – and various public wikis – for specialized groups such as Outreach , [24] the regional Chapters, and thematic organizations.

See also
WebPage index: 00078
Copyright law of Japan
Japanese copyright laws ( 著作権法 , Chosakukenhō ? ) consist of two parts: "Author's Rights" and "Neighbouring Rights." As such, "copyright" is a convenient collective term rather than a single concept in Japan . Japan was a party to the original Berne convention in 1899, so its copyright law is in sync with most international regulations.

English translation
The definitive version of Japanese law regarding copyright exists only in Japanese text. An official English-language translation of the law does not exist, but the Japanese Ministry of Justice has a website called "Japanese Law Translation" [1] where one can search for Japanese laws and their unofficial English translation. IP laws such as Patent Act, Copyright Act, Trademark Act, Design Act and Unfair Competition Prevention Act are included there.
Reliable information on Japanese copyright law in English is also provided by the websites of Intellectual Property High Court , [2] "Transparency of Japanese Law Project", [3] European Patent Office , [4] and Copyright Research and Information Center (CRIC). [5] For more details, see "External links" at the bottom of this page.

Author's rights

Applicability
Japanese copyright law protects all works "in which thoughts or sentiments are expressed in a creative way, and which falls within the literary , scientific , artistic or musical domain ." The laws automatically provide the following rights, without the need for formal declaration or registration.

Moral rights
" Moral rights " are non-transferable; they remain with the author until they expire. Although moral rights themselves cannot be waived, the exercise of moral rights is waived by contract, when, for example, an employee or contractor creates a derivative work of her/his employer's or principal's product. In such a situation, the moral rights would technically remain with the creator, but the creator would be potentially liable for breach of contract if he attempts to exercise those rights.

Economic rights
Unlike moral rights, economic rights can be freely transferred or relinquished. If the author transfers their economic rights to another, the holder of the economic rights becomes the "copyright holder", but the author retains authorship.

Neighboring rights
"Neighboring rights" refer to the rights of performers, broadcasters, and other individuals who do not author works, but play an important role in communicating them to the public.

Performers' rights
Performers generally have two non-transferable moral rights:
Live performers have the transferable economic rights of fixation (control over recording), making available (control over publication in interactive media such as the internet ), and diffusion (control over diffusion by wire or broadcast).
Fixed aural performers have the transferable economic rights of fixation and making available , as well as transfer of ownership , and rental . They can also demand remuneration if their work is broadcast or diffused by wire.

Phonogram producers' rights
Phonogram producers have the same economic rights as fixed aural performers, but do not have any moral rights .

Broadcasters' and wire diffusers' rights
Broadcasters and wire diffusers have the transferable economic rights of fixation , reproduction , making available , and retransmission . Television broadcasters also have a right to control photography of their broadcasts.

Limitations and exceptions

Artistic works
Artistic works located in public places can be reproduced freely by photograph, film, etc. However, except for architecture, the author's permission must be obtained before publicly exhibiting their work, and commercial reproductions of artistic works are not permitted without the author's permission.

Educational use
Teachers at non-profit educational institutions are permitted to reproduce copyrighted works for the purpose of teaching, as long as such reproduction does not infringe on the interests of the author. For example, a teacher may duplicate a television program or audio recording, but may not distribute copies of educational software without express permission. Works can also be reproduced in examinations at educational institutions, but the author must be remunerated if the exam is performed for-profit .

News
Unless a newspaper or wire service article specifically states that it cannot be reproduced, free reproduction is permitted. Normally, copyrighted materials can also be reproduced to the extent necessary for reporting of current events (this extends to printed matter, film, and photographs).

Non-profit performance
Works can be performed or exhibited freely if the performer is not remunerated, and the audience is not charged an admission fee.

Political speeches
Political speeches and government proceedings can be freely reproduced, except when the intent of the reproduction is to create an anthology of the author's works.

Publication for the blind
Braille and audio versions of printed materials may be reproduced for the purpose of lending, but not for commercial use.

Quotation
Works may be quoted freely, as long as the quotation does not exceed what is justified for its purpose.

Software
Software can be reproduced for personal use. If one of the above exceptions to reproduce a work publicly is used, the person reproducing the work must cite its source.
In 2009, Japanese copyright law was updated to allow the following digitally focused limitations and exceptions.

Copying by search engines
Copying on servers of in-copyright works in order to provide search engine –type services.

Orphan works
The use of an orphan work , an in-copyright work whose owner cannot be found, on the internet, subject to approval from the Japanese Ministry of Culture.

Use of artistic works on the internet
Reflecting the popularity of online auction websites like eBay , the use of an image of an in-copyright work, on the internet when advertising something for sale.

Text and data mining
The analysis of in-copyright works using computers (Art.47 septies ) in order to extract statistics and information, and come up with new ideas. Japan was the first country in the world to introduce an exception for text mining as well as data mining in 2009.

Temporary copying
Caching, storing, copying etc.

Public domain
Even when particular materials are said to be "in the public domain" there can be some use restrictions. In such cases, the term copyright-free is sometimes used instead. Many pre-1953 Japanese and non-Japanese films are considered to be in the public domain in Japan. [6] An author's work may be put into the public domain fifty years after the individual dies, unless the publisher re-publishes the work. [ clarification needed ]

Length of protection
Works authored by an individual, under their own name or a known pseudonym, are protected for fifty years following the individual's death. Works authored anonymously or pseudonymously, as well as works authored by corporations, where the individual author or authors are unknown, are protected for fifty years following publication. As of May 2014 [update] , in the ongoing Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations, Japan had reportedly agreed to extend the duration of protection to seventy years to be more in line with the United States and some other nations. [7]
Cinematographic works are protected for seventy years following publication (or seventy years following creation if unpublished). [8] This update was made in 2004 to be more consistent with some other nations, notably the United States and most of Europe, as the previous term was fifty years. However, in 2006 the Tokyo District Court said that the 2004 law cannot be applied retroactively, so that all cinematographic works published (or created, if unpublished) before 1953 are now public domain. [9] However, in 2007 the Tokyo District Court ruled that for works (in particular from Akira Kurosawa ) released before and in 1970 copyright protection is extended until 38 years after the original copyright holder's death. [10] [11]
Neighboring rights apply for fifty years after the work is performed, transmitted, or put on sale.
Works authored by, or transferred to, residents of countries which were Allied Powers in World War II , before the effectuation of the San Francisco Peace Treaty , are given some prolonged protection by an exemption law. This extension compensates for the unprotected period in World War II , and varies with the country of the author or the copyright holder in the wartime. The prolongation is normally by 3,794 days (including Australia , Canada , France , United Kingdom , and the United States ), but some countries ratified later, and have longer wartime (the longest is 4,413 days for Lebanon ).

Recent developments

Compensation system for digital private recording
In 1992, the "Compensation System for Digital Private Recording" was introduced. According to this system, those who make digital sound or visual recordings for personal use should pay compensation to the copyright owners. This compensation is added in advance to the prices of specified digital recording equipment ( DAT , DCC , MD , CD-R , CD-RW ), and specified recording media ( DVCR , D-VHS , MVDISC , DVD-RW , DVD-RAM ) ( Japan Copyright Office 2001 , 17; ibid. 24).
The compensation is collected and distributed by SARAH ( Society for the Administration of Remuneration for Audio Home Recording ) and SARVH ( Society for the Administration of Remuneration for Video Home Recording ). The users of this equipment and media have to pay a fee, or "compensation", so that they can use the described materials for copying the copyright-protected works. The public domain is not directly threatened, but in an indirect way, it becomes more difficult (expensive) to reproduce works for personal use.

Downloadable audio for mobile phones
The only way to get these downloadable audio files is by creating a sort of user account on a provider's website, and agreeing with a click-wrap contract that allows a user to download a certain number of audio files for a fixed payment. This kind of system is in fact a kind of trusted system , although we may not be aware of it.
Mamoru Kato, a JASRAC executive, said during a press conference after having set new fees for downloadable audio (in cooperation with the Network Music Rights Conference ), that "the(se) new agreements will help enlighten Internet users, many of whom believe music can freely be copied from the Net . We have to teach them that you should not use other people's assets for free, by opening up a legal window for them to use" ( The Japan Times Online , 18 August 2000). In other words, the clever user who tries to free-ride on the original genius of the creator of this or that audio file has to be educated, and forced to participate in a trusted system in order to obtain the desired audio files. No one has so far mentioned about either fair use or the reach of the public domain.
The above examples show that if trusted systems (and look-alikes) intend to play an important role in the future without intruding on anonymity, etc., one will have to incorporate these values as gaps in the architecture of these systems. It is, however, doubtful whether this will happen.

Right of communication to the public
In 1997, the Japanese Copyright Law was updated to expand the coverage of the author's "right of communication to the public" (established in 1986 under the name of Rights of Broadcasting and Wire Transmission ) to the stage of making it transmittable. The objects of the right of communication to the public are the activities of connecting a server to a network , and the activities of transmission ( Fujiwara 1999, 98).
The Copyright Law defines the concepts, "public transmission" ( Copyright Law , Article 2, paragraph 1 (7-2)), and "interactive transmission" ( Copyright Law , Article 2, paragraph 1 (9-4)):
Besides these two definitions, Article 23 (1) of the Copyright Law provides that the "author shall have the exclusive right to make the public transmission of his or her work (including the making transmittable of his or her work in the case of the interactive transmission)". This can be considered an expansion of the right of public transmission of authors to the preceding stage of making transmittable , available ( Fujiwara 1999 , 98-99; Japan Copyright Office 2001 , 31), and even of a right of making transmittable that goes further than the WIPO Copyright Treaty ( Ficsor 2002 , 506).
Apart from this, and in order to comply with the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty , a right of making transmittable was also granted to performers and phonogram producers. The scope here is especially to regulate the internet broadcasting of live performances ( Fujiwara 1999 , 98; Japan Copyright Office 2001, 31).
At first sight, one should say that the law was adapted to the new possibilities, the Internet provides—uploading content to a server, and accessing context via hyperlinks . Indeed, as the difference between simultaneous and non-simultaneous receptions fades ( The Japanese Multimedia Report ( Ficsor 2002 , 198)), it seems to make sense to expand the right of public transmission of authors also to the stage of making transmittable (i.e., "uploading of content to a server that is accessible by the public"). But on the other hand, when we look at it from the viewpoint of the public domain, the wider reach of the concept of communication to the public means a big limitation of the reach of this public domain.
This is not a discourse against "copyright protection". Indeed, in a lot of cases, copyright protection seems to work as a system, and creates an incentive to produce. We only should be aware that the current transformations in the legislation concerning intellectual property rights—in Japan and in other countries—is moving very fast, and do not seem to take into account all facets of the story, nor remember the very basic goal of copyright , which is "to contribute to the development of culture ". While copyright protection is an urgent task, excessive protection that allows for no copying "may damage the functioning of society that thrives on impartiality and imitation " ( The Japan Times Online , 21 February 2002).

Copyright management business law
In November 2000, the "Copyright Management Business Law" (4.2.2.3) was enacted. Its main purpose is to facilitate the establishment of new copyright management businesses, in order to "respond to the development of digital technologies and communication networks" ( Japan Copyright Office 2001 , 27). In general, we can say that this law will facilitate the rise of copyright management businesses, and possibly create a further limitation to the reach of the public domain.
In its book, " Copyright System in Japan ", the title of this section is to "secure the effectiveness of rights by utilizing new technologies " ( Japan Copyright Office 2001 , 32). This shows clearly that the Japanese government considers software to be a tool for enforcing copyright legislation. Not mentioned, however, is the possible negative side-effects concerning fair use (limitation on rights ), or the reach of the public domain.
Under the section (in the same book) pertaining to the "(r)egulation of the circumvention of technological measures such as copy protection, etc.", it is stated that "transfer to the public (of) the ownership of, and manufacture, etc. of, the devices to circumvent technological measures (e.g., copy protection), which prevent copying of videogram (sic) or music CD without authorization, are regulated by the (sic) criminal penalty " ( Japan Copyright Office 2001 , 32). It is quite clear that with this regulation, it becomes impossible to circumvent the copyright-protection of intellectual property in the context of fair use . This means that when a CD, etc. is copyright-protected, there is not only technically no space for fair use, but also from the legislative side, there is no support for copying in the context of fair use .
The "regulation of the alteration etc. of the rights management information" section strengthens the first regulation by saying that it is forbidden to remove rights management information attached to the work. However, it is to be said that this provision, and such, does not seem to limit immediately the reach of the public domain. Mentioning the source, etc. of the quoted material is generally considered as appropriate.

Right of transfer of ownership
As stated by the Japan Copyright Office , the "right of transfer of ownership" was established in 1999, in order to enrich the rights of authors. This means that authors, performers and phonogram producers can exercise their right concerning the transfer of the ownership of the original, or copies of the work, at the first legal transfer . After this, the right will be extinguished ( Japan Copyright Office 2001 , 32). This new ruling can be considered as a contribution to the recent strengthening of author-centered regimes .

Right of presentation
Another aspect of the 1999 amendment to the Japanese Copyright Law was the so called extension of the "right of presentation". Previously, this right was only granted to cinematographic work ( Japan Copyright Office 2001 , 32). After the amendment, it was extended to all kinds of works, reaffirming at the same time, exactly as in the right of transfer of ownership , the importance of the notion of the author.

See also
WebPage index: 00079
Wapedia
Wapedia was a mobile version of Wikipedia . It was started in August 2004 by Florian Amrhein and shut down on 4 November 2013. It was operated by Taptu . [1]
Wapedia was originally a Wireless Application Protocol (WAP) site for use on mobile phones of the very early 2000s. The URL for Wapedia was http://wapedia.mobi (which was one of the early examples of a .mobi website). [2]
Over time HTML interfaces were added with the site generating pages optimised for a variety of mobile devices such as smart phones, PDAs , and tablets.
In 2009 dedicated applications for iPhone /iPad/iPod, [3] Android and WebOS were launched.
Wapedia offers the most recent version of every article, which is done by using a combination of a proxy -like behavior and a local article database. This combination provides both high speed and up-to-date articles and low load and traffic for the Wikipedia servers. The copying of data is one way, from Wikipedia to Wapedia, and so Wapedia does not offer the ability to edit pages. Edits must be made to the original page on the Wikipedia site, which propagate through to Wapedia over time. For many Wapedia users on low-powered mobile devices, this is not an issue since their devices are unsuited to editing significant quantities of text.
Standard Wikipedia pages are typically too long for display on these devices, so long pages are divided into smaller chunks to fit into the small displays and the standard side navigation is removed. To reduce the bandwidth requirements, images are scaled down to the resolution of the mobile device. In addition, Wapedia includes a search engine that is independent from Wikipedia servers. Wapedia supports WML and modern XHTML Mobile formats, with an autodetection of the best format for each device. Articles are served from an independent article database.
Unlike many other mobile Wikipedia solutions , Wapedia injects adverts into the Wikipedia articles, either in the HTML or in the applications.

See also
WebPage index: 00080
Bing (search engine)
Bing is a web search engine owned and operated by Microsoft . The service has its origins in Microsoft's previous search engines: MSN Search , Windows Live Search and later Live Search . Bing provides a variety of search services, including web, video, image and map search products. It is developed using ASP.NET .
Bing, Microsoft's replacement for Live Search, was unveiled by Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer on May 28, 2009, at the All Things Digital conference in San Diego , California, for release on June 1, 2009. [3] Notable new features at the time included the listing of search suggestions while queries are entered and a list of related searches (called "Explore pane") based on semantic technology from Powerset , [4] which Microsoft had acquired in 2008. [5]
In July 2009, Microsoft and Yahoo! announced a deal in which Bing would power Yahoo! Search . [6] All Yahoo! Search global customers and partners made the transition by early 2012. [7] The deal was altered in 2015, meaning Yahoo! was only required to use Bing for a "majority" of searches. [8]
In October 2011, Microsoft stated that they were working on new back-end search infrastructure with the goal of delivering faster and slightly more relevant search results for users. Known as "Tiger", the new index-serving technology had been incorporated into Bing globally since August that year. [9] In May 2012, Microsoft announced another redesign of its search engine that includes "Sidebar", a social feature that searches users' social networks for information relevant to the search query. [10]
As of November 2015 [update] , Bing is the second largest search engine in the US, with a query volume of 20.9%, behind Google on 63.9%. Yahoo! Search , which Bing largely powers, has 12.5%. [11]

History

MSN Search
Microsoft originally launched MSN Search in the third quarter of 1998, using search results from Inktomi . It consisted of a search engine, index, and web crawler . In early 1999, MSN Search launched a version which displayed listings from Looksmart blended with results from Inktomi except for a short time in 1999 when results from AltaVista were used instead. Since then Microsoft upgraded MSN Search to provide its own self-built search engine results, the index of which was updated weekly and sometimes daily. The upgrade started as a beta program in November 2004, and came out of beta in February 2005. Image search was powered by a third party, Picsearch . The service also started providing its search results to other search engine portals in an effort to better compete in the market.

Windows Live Search
The first public beta of Windows Live Search was unveiled on March 8, 2006, with the final release on September 11, 2006 replacing MSN Search. The new search engine used search tabs that include Web, news, images, music, desktop, local, and Microsoft Encarta .
In the roll-over from MSN Search to Windows Live Search, Microsoft stopped using Picsearch as their image search provider and started performing their own image search, fueled by their own internal image search algorithms. [12]

Live Search
On March 21, 2007, Microsoft announced that it would separate its search developments from the Windows Live services family, rebranding the service as Live Search. Live Search was integrated into the Live Search and Ad Platform headed by Satya Nadella , part of Microsoft's Platform and Systems division. As part of this change, Live Search was merged with Microsoft adCenter . [13]
A series of reorganisations and consolidations of Microsoft's search offerings were made under the Live Search branding. On May 23, 2008, Microsoft announced the discontinuation of Live Search Books and Live Search Academic and integrated all academic and book search results into regular search, and as a result this also included the closure of Live Search Books Publisher Program . Soon after, Windows Live Expo was discontinued on July 31, 2008. Live Search Macros, a service for users to create their own custom search engines or use macros created by other users, was also discontinued shortly after. On May 15, 2009, Live Product Upload , a service which allowed merchants to upload products information onto Live Search Products , was discontinued. The final reorganisation came as Live Search QnA was rebranded as MSN QnA on February 18, 2009, however, it was subsequently discontinued on May 21, 2009. [14]

Rebrand as Bing
Microsoft recognised that there would be a problem with branding as long as the word "Live" remained in the name. [15] As an effort to create a new identity for Microsoft's search services, Live Search was officially replaced by Bing on June 3, 2009. [16]
The Bing name was chosen through focus groups, and Microsoft decided that the name was memorable, short, easy to spell, and that it would function well as a URL around the world. The word would remind people of the sound made during "the moment of discovery and decision making." [17] Microsoft was assisted by branding consultancy Interbrand in their search for the best name for the new search engine. [18] The name also has strong similarity to the word ' bingo ', which is used to mean that something sought has been found or realized, as is interjected when winning the game Bingo . Microsoft advertising strategist David Webster originally proposed the name "Bang" for the same reasons the name Bing was ultimately chosen (easy to spell, one syllable, and easy to remember). He noted, "It's there, it's an exclamation point [...] It's the opposite of a question mark." This name was ultimately not chosen because it could not be properly used as a verb in the context of an internet search; Webster commented "Oh, 'I banged it' is very different than 'I binged it'". [19]
According to the Guardian "[Microsoft] hasn't confirmed that it stands recursively for Bing Is Not Google, but that's the sort of joke software engineers enjoy." [20] Qi Lu, president of Microsoft Online Services, also announced that Bing's official Chinese name is bì yìng ( simplified Chinese : 必应 ; traditional Chinese : 必應 ), which literally means "very certain to respond" or "very certain to answer" in Chinese. [21]
While being tested internally by Microsoft employees, Bing's codename was Kumo ( くも ), [22] which came from the Japanese word for spider ( 蜘蛛 ; くも , kumo ) as well as cloud ( 雲 ; くも , kumo ), referring to the manner in which search engines " spider " Internet resources to add them to their database, as well as cloud computing .

Legal challenges
On July 31, 2009, The Laptop Company, Inc. stated in a press release that it would challenge Bing's trademark application, alleging that Bing may cause confusion in the marketplace as Bing and their product BongoBing both do online product search. [23] Software company TeraByte Unlimited, which has a product called BootIt Next Generation (abbreviated to BING), also contended the trademark application on similar grounds, as did a Missouri-based design company called Bing! Information Design. [24]
Microsoft contended that claims challenging its trademark were without merit because these companies filed for U.S. federal trademark applications only after Microsoft filed for the Bing trademark in March 2009. [25]

Yahoo! search deal
On July 29, 2009, Microsoft and Yahoo! announced that they had made a ten-year deal in which the Yahoo! search engine would be replaced by Bing, retaining the Yahoo! user interface . Yahoo! will get to keep 88% of the revenue from all search ad sales on its site for the first five years of the deal, and have the right to sell advertising on some Microsoft sites. [26] [27] All Yahoo! Search global customers and partners made the transition by early 2012. [7]

Features

Interface features

Media features

Instant answers

Local info

Third-party integration
Facebook users have the option to share their searches with their Facebook friends using Facebook Connect . [32]
On June 10, 2013, Apple announced that it would be dropping Google as its web search engine in favour of Bing. [33] This feature is only integrated with iOS 7 and higher and for users with an iPhone 4S or higher as the feature is only integrated with Siri, Apple's personal assistant.

Integration with Windows 8
Windows 8.1 includes Bing "Smart Search" integration, which processes all queries submitted through the Windows Start Screen. [34] The Bing integration captures a variety of features, one of the most prominent and advertised: Hero Search. This feature allows users to browse for popular and well-known places, objects or people. Searching France, for example, will show popular search items, such as population, calling code and date founded. The current weather and location are also directly accessible using Bing Weather and Bing maps. The "Hero" result will go further to provide attractions using Bing Images and popular websites relating to France, such as France Wikipedia and France's official website. Searching an artist will display similar results with the option to play music using the Windows 8-integrated Groove Music application.

Translator
Bing Translator is a user facing translation portal provided by Microsoft to translate texts or entire web pages into different languages. All translation pairs are powered by the Microsoft Translator , a statistical machine translation platform and web service, developed by Microsoft Research , as its backend translation software. Two transliteration pairs (between Chinese (Simplified) and Chinese (Traditional) ) are provided by Microsoft's Windows International team. [35] As of May 2017, Bing Translator offers translations in 60 different language systems. [36]
Bing Translator can translate phrases entered by the user or acquire a link to a web page and translate its entirely. When translating an entire web page, or when the user selects "Translate this page" in Bing search results, the Bilingual Viewer is shown, which allows users to browse the original web page text and translation in parallel, supported by synchronized highlights, scrolling, and navigation. [37] Four Bilingual Viewer layouts are available: side by side, top and bottom, original with hover translation and translation with hover original.

International
Bing is available in many languages and has been localized for many countries. [38] Even if the language of the search and of the results are the same, Bing delivers substantially different results for different parts of the world. [39]

Languages in which Bing can find results

Languages in which Bing can be displayed

Search products
In addition to its tool for searching web pages , Bing also provides the following search offerings: [40]

Webmaster services
Bing allows webmasters to manage the web crawling status of their own websites through Bing Webmaster Center . Additionally, users may also submit contents to Bing via the Bing Local Listing Center , which allows businesses to add business listings onto Bing Maps and Bing Local.

Mobile services
Bing Mobile allow users to conduct search queries on their mobile devices, either via the mobile browser or a downloadable mobile application.

Developer services
Bing Application Programming Interface enables developers to programmatically submit queries and retrieve results from the Bing Engine. http://www.bing.com/developers
To use the Bing API developers have to obtain an Application ID, http://www.bing.com/developers/createapp.aspx
Bing API can be used with following protocols:
Query examples:

Software

Toolbars
The Bing Bar, a browser extension toolbar that replaced the MSN Toolbar, provides users with links to Bing and MSN content from within their web browser without needing to navigate away from a web page they are already on. The user can customize the theme and color scheme of the Bing Bar as well as choose which MSN content buttons to present within the user interface. Bing Bar also displays the current local weather forecast and stock market positions. [44]
The Bing Bar features integration with Microsoft Bing search engine. In addition to the traditional web search functions, Bing Bar also allows search on other Bing services such as Images, Video, News and Maps. When users perform a search on another search engine, the Bing Bar's search box will automatically populate itself, allowing the user to view the results from Bing, should it be desired.
Bing Bar also links to Outlook.com , Skype and Facebook . [45]

Desktop
Microsoft released a beta version of Bing Desktop, a program developed to allow users to search Bing from the desktop, on April 4, 2012. [46] The initial release followed shortly on April 24, 2012, supporting Windows 7 only. [47] With the release of version 1.1 in December 2012 it supported Windows XP and higher. [48]
Bing Desktop allows users to initiate a web search from the desktop, view news headlines, automatically set their background to the Bing homepage image, or choose a background from the previous nine background images. [49]
A similar program, the Bing Search gadget, was a Windows Sidebar Gadget that used Bing to fetch the user's search results and render them directly in the gadget. Another gadget, the Bing Maps gadget, displayed real-time traffic conditions using Bing Maps. [50] The gadget provided shortcuts to driving directions, local search and full-screen traffic view of major US and Canadian cities, including Atlanta , Boston , Chicago , Denver , Detroit , Houston , Los Angeles , Milwaukee , Montreal , New York City , Oklahoma City , Ottawa , Philadelphia , Phoenix , Pittsburgh , Portland , Providence , Sacramento , Salt Lake City , San Diego , San Francisco , Seattle , St. Louis , Tampa , Toronto , Vancouver , and Washington, D.C.
Prior to October 30, 2007, the gadgets were known as Live Search gadget and Live Search Maps gadget ; both gadgets were removed from Windows Live Gallery due to possible security concerns. [51] The Live Search Maps gadget was made available for download again on January 24, 2008 with the security concern addressed. [52] However around the introduction of Bing in June 2009 both gadgets have been removed again for download from Windows Live Gallery .

Market share
Before the launch of Bing, the marketshare of Microsoft web search pages (MSN and Live search) had been small. By January 2011, Experian Hitwise show that Bing's market share had increased to 12.8% at the expense of Yahoo! and Google . Bing powered searches also continued to have a higher "success rate" compared to Google, with more users clicking on the resulting links. [ citation needed ] In the same period, comScore’s "2010 U.S. Digital Year in Review" report showed that "Bing was the big gainer in year-over-year search activity, picking up 29% more searches in 2010 than it did in 2009". [53] The Wall Street Journal notes the 1% jump in share "appeared to come at the expense of rival Google Inc". [54] In February 2011, Bing beat Yahoo! for the first time with 4.37% search share while Yahoo! received 3.93%. [55]
Counting core searches only, i.e., those where the user has an intent to interact with the search result, Bing had a market share of 14.54% in the second quarter of 2011 in the United States. [32] [56] [57] [58]
The combined "Bing Powered" U.S. searches have declined from 26.5% in 2011 to 25.9% in April 2012. [59] By November 2015, its market share had declined further to 20.9%. [60]

Marketing and advertisements

Live Search
Since 2006, Microsoft had conducted a number of tie-ins and promotions for promoting Microsoft's search offerings. These include:

Debut
Bing's debut featured an $80 to $100 million online, TV, print, and radio advertising campaign in the US. The advertisements do not mention other search engine competitors, such as Google and Yahoo!, directly by name; rather, they attempt to convince users to switch to Bing by focusing on Bing's search features and functionality. [64] The ads claim that Bing does a better job countering "search overload". [65]

"Decision engine"
Bing has been heavily advertised as a "decision engine", [66] though thought by columnist David Berkowitz to be more closely related to a web portal . [67]

Bing Rewards
Currently known as " Microsoft Rewards ", [68] launched by Microsoft in September 2010, it provides credits to users through regular Bing searches and special promotions. [69] These credits are then redeemed for various products including electronics, gift cards, sweepstakes, and charitable donations. [70] Users are given either Member, Silver or Gold status at one given time based on how frequent they use the program. [71] However, Microsoft has modified it to only two levels, Level 1 and Level 2. Level 1 is similar to 'Member' and Level 2 is similar to 'Gold' of the previous Bing Rewards. Initially, participants were required to download and use the Bing Bar for Internet Explorer in order to earn credits; however, this is no longer the case, and the service now works with all desktop browsers. [72] The Bing Rewards program is similar to two earlier services, SearchPerks! and Bing Cashback , which have now been discontinued.

The Colbert Report
During the episode of The Colbert Report that aired on June 8, 2010, Stephen Colbert stated that Microsoft would donate $2,500 to help clean up the Gulf oil spill each time he mentioned the word "Bing" on air. Colbert mostly mentioned Bing in out-of-context situations, such as Bing Crosby and Bing cherries . By the end of the show, Colbert had said the word 40 times, for a total donation of $100,000. Colbert poked fun at their rivalry with Google, stating "Bing is a great website for doing Internet searches. I know that, because I Googled it." [73] [74]

Search deals
Bing was added into the list of search engines available in Opera browser from v10.6, but Google remained the default search engine. [75] Mozilla Firefox made a deal with Microsoft to jointly release "Firefox with Bing" , an edition of Firefox where Bing has replaced Google as the default search engine. [76] [77] The standard edition of Firefox has Google as its default search engine, but has included Bing in its list of search providers since Firefox version 4.0. [78]
In addition, Microsoft paid Verizon Wireless $550 million USD [79] to use Bing as the default search provider on Verizon's BlackBerry and have Verizon "turn off" (via BlackBerry service books) the other search providers available. Users could still access other search engines via the mobile browser. [80]

Bing It On
In 2012, a Bing marketing campaign asked the public which search engine they believed was better when its results were presented without branding, similar to the Pepsi Challenge in the 1970s. [81] [82] This poll was nicknamed "Bing It On". [83] [84] Microsoft presented a study of almost 1,000 people [85] which showed that 57% of participants in such a test preferred Bing's results, with only 30% preferring Google. [86]

Adult content
Bing censors results for "adult" search terms for some regions, including India, People's Republic of China, Germany and Arab countries [87] where required by local laws. [88] However, Bing allows users to change their country or region preference to somewhere without restrictions, such as the United States, United Kingdom or Republic of Ireland.

Criticism

Censorship
Microsoft has been criticized for censoring Bing search results to queries made in simplified Chinese characters , used in mainland China . This is done to comply with the censorship requirements of the government in China . [89] Microsoft has not indicated a willingness to stop censoring search results in simplified Chinese characters in the wake of Google's decision to do so. [90] All simplified Chinese searches in Bing are censored regardless of the user's country. [91]
On February 20, 2017, Bing agreed to a voluntary United Kingdom code of practice obligating it to demote links to copyright-infringing content in its search results. [92] [93]

Performance issues
Bing has been criticized for being slower to index websites than Google. It has also been criticized for not indexing some websites at all. [94] [95]

Copying Google's results
Bing has been criticized by competitor Google for utilizing user input via Internet Explorer, the Bing Toolbar, or Suggested Sites , to add results to Bing. After discovering in October 2010 that Bing appeared to be imitating Google's auto-correct results for a misspelling, despite not actually fixing the spelling of the term, Google set up a honeypot , configuring the Google search engine to return specific unrelated results for 100 nonsensical queries such as hiybbprqag . [96] Over the next couple of weeks, Google engineers entered the search term into Google, while using Microsoft Internet Explorer, with the Bing Toolbar installed and the optional Suggested Sites enabled. In 9 out of the 100 queries, Bing later started returning the same results as Google, despite the only apparent connection between the result and search term being that Google's results connected the two. [97] [98]
Microsoft's response to this issue, coming from a company's spokesperson, was: "We do not copy Google's results." Bing's Vice President, Harry Shum, later reiterated that the search result data Google claimed that Bing copied had in fact come from Bing's very own users. Shum further wrote that "we use over 1,000 different signals and features in our ranking algorithm. A small piece of that is clickstream data we get from some of our customers, who opt into sharing anonymous data as they navigate the web in order to help us improve the experience for all users." [99] Microsoft commented that clickstream data from customers who had opted in was collected, but said that it was just a small piece of over 1000 signals used in their ranking algorithm, and that their intention was to learn from their collective customers. They stated that Bing was not intended to be a duplicate of any existing search engines. [100]

See also
WebPage index: 00081
SOS Children's Villages UK
SOS Children's Villages UK , is a child sponsorship charity based in Cambridge in the United Kingdom. It is part of the international group SOS Children's Villages – the largest international charity group dedicated to the care of orphaned and abandoned children. The charity is registered under the working names "SOS Children" and "World Orphan Week" (a fundraising event held once a year) with the Charity Commission.
Internationally, SOS Children's Villages works in 134 countries and territories, of which it provides services in 125. Its slogan is "A loving home for every child". Programmes include SOS Children's Villages which are communities that offer a new family home for orphaned and abandoned children, and family strengthening services which foster community development and help to prevent child abandonment. [1] The charity is non-denominational and works in the spirit of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child .
Since 1995, SOS Children's Villages has worked with the United Nations to help governments and organisations support children who have lost or are at risk of losing parental care. In 2009, the charity worked with other experts to develop the UN Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children. [2]
In 1969 chairman of SOS Children's Villages UK, Dickson Mabon attempted to arrange the construction of Children's Villages in Scotland. However, he was refused permission to build the Villages on planning grounds by the local authorities concerned. [3]

Supporters and Ambassadors
Supporters include Stephen Hawking , Alexander McCall Smith , Anyika Onuora , Richard Attenborough , Kate Humble and Wayne Rooney . [4]
International Ambassador, as of April 2014, is Belgian footballer Vincent Kompany . [5]
Angelina Jolie is a long-term supporter and has visited SOS Children's Villages in Haiti , Ethiopia and Jordan . [6]
Nelson Mandela was a supporter of SOS Children's Villages work in South Africa and officially opened the SOS Children's Village in Cape Town . [7] Upon his death in December 2013, SOS Children's Villages joined in memorials to celebrate his life. The Dalai Lama supports SOS Children, particularly the SOS Children's Villages in North India , which provide a home for child refugees from Tibet .

Our Africa
In 2011 SOS Children's Villages UK created a new web site "Our Africa" [8] which won the New Media category of the One World Media Awards . [9] Our Africa is an educational site with many short videos and articles created to celebrate 40 years of SOS Children's Villages work in Africa. Many of the videos are devised and filmed by children across Africa.

Wikipedia for Schools
Since 2006, SOS Children's Villages UK has produced a offline selection from Wikipedia , based around the UK national curriculum and targeted at a school-age audience. The project was initially aimed at schools in the developing world, where internet access is often limited, but has also proved popular in developed countries as well. This is partly because all content is checked to ensure suitability for children and relevance to the classroom, making it safe for use in schools. As well as being an offline resource available on request, it is also available online. It was last updated in 2013.

Trustees
Current trustees are Mary Cockcroft (Chairman), George Windsor, Earl of St Andrews , Michael Brewer, Graham Budd, Ayesha Khan, Matthew de Villiers, and Thomas Bauer.
WebPage index: 00082
OmniScriptum
Omniscriptum Publishing Group is a German publishing group based in Saarbrücken , Germany, with offices in Argentina, [5] Latvia, Mauritius, and Moldova. [3] [4] [6] [7] Its book production is based on print on demand technology.
OmniScriptum's imprints —including Alphascript , Betascript , Fastbook Publishing , and Doyen Verlag —specialize in publishing and collecting theses throughout the universities websites, and selling them, research notes, and dissertations in printed form via print on demand, in e-commerce bookstores. [8] Alphascript distributes publications through several on-line book retailers.
Most of the books are printed by Amazon.com . As of November 2010 around 150,000 such titles had been produced. In June 2010 OMS started its own online-bookshop, MoreBooks! Publishing. [9] [10]
Omniscriptum's publishing methods have been questioned for the soliciting of manuscripts from individuals, for providing authors with the appearance of a peer-reviewed publishing history. Omniscriptum responds that it is a valuable, quality resource, that the company has no problem asking authors for content, that buyers are informed of where information comes from, that books are a convenient form to collect articles about interesting subjects, and that its customers are satisfied with Omniscriptum's products but the authors are not, especially when they found out that they give their work to a publisher without even getting a printed copy of the book, however, the company argues that they give them the possibility to purchase copies ( with high prices). [11] OmniScriptum is designated as non-scientific by the Norwegian Scientific Index . [12]

History
The first publishing house of the group was founded in Düsseldorf in 2002 by Wolfgang Philipp Müller, and transferred to Saarbrücken in August 2005. [3] The Mauritian office was established in April 2007 and was managed from 2008 up until May 2011 by the jewish David Benoit Novel, [13] [14] followed by Reezwan Ghanty. [15]
In 2007 the group began distributing its publications through Lightning Source , [16] Amazon, [17] and the German company Books on Demand. [18] [19]

Products and services
Omniscriptum specializes in German , Russian , [20] Spanish , [21] French , and English dissertations , theses , and research projects. [22] [23] Its services are free to authors. Its business model involves a team of acquisitions editors , who search the Internet for academic authors and invite them by e-mail for their manuscripts. [24] [25] [26] OMS sends emails to people who have written a master's thesis or doctoral dissertation and whose college library has a web-accessible catalog. [27] According to the Michigan Tech Thesis and Dissertation FAQ: [28]
The Australian Higher Education Research Data Collection (HERDC) determined that:
In April 2010 Omniscriptum founded an imprint devoted to religion , spirituality , and Christian theology : Fromm Verlag . [30] In October 2010 Dictus Publishing was launched to publish political texts related to the European Union . [31]
In 2011 the imprint JustFiction! (also spelled Just Fiction!) began publishing novels and short stories by new, unpublished authors. [32] [33]
As of August 2011 [update] , there two JustFiction! Kindle books were listed on Amazon.com. [34]

Editorial policies
Omniscriptum can produce a new book in six weeks: two weeks for the cover and four weeks for production. There is no cost to the author, who receives one free e-copy of the book. Omniscriptum, "tend[s] not to edit works" assuming manuscripts they accept "are already of a high standard". Proofreading is not performed to keep costs low. [35]
In 2010 the publishing house claimed to publish more than 10,000 new titles annually and thus to be "one of the leading publishing houses of academic research". [22] In 2011 Omniscriptum as a whole claimed to release 50,000 new book titles per month and to be the largest book publisher in the world. [36]

Business practices
Omniscriptum's business practices have been questioned for profiting by the sale of unacclaimed works and for insufficiently disclosing that content is available elsewhere. In November 2009 an article in the Swiss newspaper Berner Zeitung described Omniscriptum's practices as questionable. The paper faulted Omniscriptum for not disclosing that the books it was publishing were academic dissertations, for publishing works that received a passing grade, and for charging high prices. [37] American writer Victoria Strauss characterized OMS as "an academic author mill ", [38] [39] [40] while Pagan Kennedy notes that OMS's practices are comparable to a form of kudzu weed proliferation in book publishing. [41]
In January 2011 German professor Debora Weber-Wulff, in Copy, Shake, and Paste (a blog about plagiarism and scientific misconduct), referred to OMS as a spam publisher, which has been further confirmed in a blog post at Guide2Research. [42]
Weber-Wulff recounted the experience of a former student who was contacted by OMS, in an attempt to publish the student's bachelor's thesis. In a 2009 interview published on the OMS website, CEO Wolfgang Philipp Müller, explained the aggressive reputation of Omniscriptum Publishing: "We make an approach to our authors offering to publish their work. That's not good manners in the distinguished publishing sector. On the other hand, our customers are totally satisfied with our publishing service.” [43]

Wikipedia content 

Alphascript and Betascript Publishing
During its activity, the company has worked with many print agencies, such as Alphascript Publishing (created in April 2009); [44] Betascript Publishing (created in January 2010); Fastbook Publishing (created in July 2009); [45] and Doyen Verlag (created in April 2010), who have published books based on online materials. [46] Alphascript lists amazon.de, amazon.co.uk, amazon.com, knv.de , libri.de, schaltungsdienst.de, bod.de, VSG, ingrambook.com , umbreit.de, reha Marketing, smartprofessionals.de, xing.de , lightningsource.com , and bischoffundpartner.de as business partners . [8] These books have been purchased by German libraries at the request of their patrons, [47] and by Flemish libraries. [48]
These titles are published as edited by Frederic P. Miller, Agnes F. Vandome, and John McBrewster who are also listed as authors. As of 21 December 2011 [update] 80,818 titles were listed on the OMS bookshop. [49] Betascript lists "Lambert M. Surhone, Miriam T. Timpledon, Susan F. Marseken, Mariam T. Tennoe and Susan F. Henssonow" as editors, giving an additional 356,765 titles as of 21 December 2011 [update] . [50]
Regarding its publishing strategies, Alphascript asserts that: "There is hardly another platform for quick and better processing of information than Wikipedia" for customers "who want to be informed on a specific subject" in book form, though they can "have online everything free of charge ". [51] [52] [53]
In response to an interview question about whether some Alphascript’s books are based on Wikipedia information, Alphascript responded, "Yes, since we believe that the quality of the Wikipedia-articles is so good that it is worthwhile creating books with them. Wikipedia themselves give an impulse for this. The articles published on their sites are free in every respect and without any limitations as to further use. All authors participating in texts of Wikipedia know this or should at least know it." In response to whether this should be made clear in the product description, Alphascript responded, "It is pointed out in every Alphascript book that contents are Wikipedia articles. Do we now have to write in Amazon-books: “Attention! Books contains Wikipedia!”? Then other publishing houses would have to point out in their books: “Attention! Book contains nonsense!”, or: “Attention! Book has only sex-scenario!” [54]
Omniscriptum has edited 22,000 works. [55]

Multiplication of imprint names

Omniscriptum Group subsidiaries
Omniscriptum Publishing Group has 27 subsidiaries (the date of creation and headquarters are in brackets): [4] [135]

Publishing houses

Service industries

See also
WebPage index: 00083
Journal of Documentation
The Journal of Documentation is a double-blind peer-reviewed academic journal covering theories, concepts, models, frameworks, and philosophies in information science . The journal publishes scholarly articles, research reports, and critical reviews.
The scope of the Journal of Documentation is broadly information sciences , encompassing all of the academic and professional disciplines which deal with recorded information. These include, but are not limited to, information science, library science , and related disciplines, knowledge management , knowledge organization , information seeking , information retrieval , human information behaviour, and digital literacy . [1]
The main audience for the journal is educators, scholars, researchers, and policy-makers in information-related areas. It published quarterly between 1945 and 1996, expanding to five issues per year between 1997-1999. Since 2000, it is published bimonthly. It is currently edited by David Bawden ( City University London .) [2] In celebration of the journal's 60th anniversary, a series of review articles were published between 2004-2006, which commented on the significance of eleven articles originally published in the Journal in the previous six decades. [3]
The journal is published by Emerald Group Publishing . It is available for subscription singularly and also as part of an online subscription to the Emerald Library and Information Studies Subject Collection. [4]
WebPage index: 00084
Mobile Web
The mobile Web refers to browser-based Internet services accessed from handheld mobile devices , such as smartphones or feature phones , through a mobile or other wireless network .
Traditionally, the World Wide Web has been accessed via fixed-line services on laptops and desktop computers. However, the Web is now more accessible by portable and wireless devices. An early 2010 ITU (International Telecommunication Union) report said that with current growth rates, web access by people on the go — via laptops and smart mobile devices — is likely to exceed web access from desktop computers within the next five years. [1] In January 2014 mobile Internet use exceeded desktop use in the United States. [2] The shift to mobile Web access has accelerated since 2007 with the rise of larger multitouch smartphones, and since 2010 with the rise of multitouch tablet computers. Both platforms provide better Internet access, screens, and mobile browsers , or application-based user Web experiences, than previous generations of mobile devices. Web designers may work separately on such pages, or pages may be automatically converted, as in Mobile Wikipedia . Faster speeds, smaller, feature-rich devices, and a multitude of applications continue to drive explosive growth for mobile Internet traffic. The 2017 Virtual Network Index (VNI) report produced by Cisco Systems forecasts that by 2021, there will be 5.5 billion global mobile users (up from 4.9 billion in 2016). [3] Additionally, the same 2017 VNI report forecasts that average access speeds will increase by roughly 3 times from 6.8 Mbit/s to 20 Mbit/s in that same time span with video comprising the bulk of the traffic (78%).
The distinction between mobile Web applications and native applications is anticipated to become increasingly blurred, as mobile browsers gain direct access to the hardware of mobile devices (including accelerometers and GPS chips ), and the speed and abilities of browser-based applications improve. Persistent storage and access to sophisticated user interface graphics functions may further reduce the need for the development of platform -specific native applications .
The Mobile Web has also been called Web 3.0, drawing parallels to the changes users were experiencing as Web 2.0 websites proliferated. [4] [5] [6]
Mobile Web access today still suffers from interoperability and usability problems. Interoperability issues stem from the platform fragmentation of mobile devices, mobile operating systems , and browsers. Usability problems are centered on the small physical size of the mobile phone form factors (limits on display resolution and user input /operating). Despite these shortcomings, many mobile developers choose to create apps using mobile Web. A June 2011 research on mobile development found mobile Web the third most used platform, trailing Android and iOS. [7]
In an article in Communications of the ACM in April 2013, Web technologist Nicholas C. Zakas, noted that mobile phones in use in 2013 were more powerful than Apollo 11 's 70 lb (32 kg) Apollo Guidance Computer used in the July 1969 lunar landing. [8] [9] [10] However, in spite of their power, in 2013, mobile devices still suffer from Web performance with slow connections similar to the 1996 stage of Web development. [9] [10] Mobile devices with slower download request/response times, the latency of over-the-air data transmission, [9] [10] with "high-latency connections, slower CPUs, and less memory" force developers to rethink Web applications created for desktops with "wired connections, fast CPUs, and almost endless memory." [9] [10]

Mobile access
'Mobile Internet' refers to access to the Internet via a cellular telephone service provider. It is wireless access that can handoff to another radio tower while it is moving across the service area. It can refer an immobile device that stays connected to one tower, but this is not the meaning of "mobile" here. Wi-Fi and other better methods are commonly available for users not on the move. Cellular base stations are more expensive to provide than a wireless base station that connects directly to an internet service provider, rather than through the telephone system.
A mobile phone, such as a smartphone , that connects to data or voice services without going through the cellular base station is not on mobile Internet. A laptop with a broadband modem and a cellular service provider subscription, that is traveling on a bus through the city is on mobile Internet.
A mobile broadband modem " tethers " the smartphone to one or more computers or other end user devices to provide access to the Internet via the protocols that cellular telephone service providers may offer.
According to BuzzCity , mobile internet increased 30% from Q1 to Q2 2011. The four countries which have advertising impression (?) in total more than 1 billion in one quarter were India , Indonesia , Vietnam and United States . [11] As of July 2012, approximately 10.5% of all Web traffic occurs through mobile devices (up from 4% in December 2010). [12]

Standards
Standards improve the interoperability, usability, and accessibility of mobile web usage.
The Mobile Web Initiative (MWI) was set up by the W3C to develop the best practices and technologies relevant to the mobile Web. The goal of the initiative is to make browsing the Web from mobile devices more reliable and accessible. The main aim is to evolve standards of data formats from Internet providers that are tailored to the specifications of particular mobile devices. The W3C has published guidelines for mobile content , and is addressing the problem of device diversity by establishing a technology to support a repository of device descriptions.
W3C is also developing a validating scheme to assess the readiness of content for the mobile web, through its mobileOK Scheme , which will help content developers to quickly determine if their content is web-ready. The W3C guidelines and mobile OK approach have not been immune from criticism. [ citation needed ] This puts the emphasis on Adaptation, which is now seen as the key process in achieving the ubiquitous web, when combined with a device description repository .
mTLD, the registry for .mobi , has released a free testing tool called the MobiReady Report (see mobiForge ) to analyze the mobile readiness of website. It does a free page analysis and gives a Mobi Ready score. This report tests the mobile-readiness of the site using industry best practices and standards.
Other standards for the mobile web are being documented and explored for particular applications by interested industry groups, such as the use of the mobile web for the purpose of education and training.

Development
The first access to the mobile Web was commercially offered in Finland at the end of 1996 on the Nokia 9000 Communicator phone via the Sonera and Radiolinja networks. This was access to the real internet. The first commercial launch of a mobile-specific browser-based web service was in 1999 in Japan when i-mode was launched by NTT DoCoMo .
The mobile Web primarily utilises lightweight pages like this one written in Extensible Hypertext Markup Language (XHTML) or Wireless Markup Language (WML) to deliver content to mobile devices. Many new mobile browsers are moving beyond these limits by supporting a wider range of Web formats, including variants of HTML commonly found on the desktop Web.

Top-level domain
The .mobi sponsored top-level domain was launched specifically for the mobile Internet by a consortium of companies including Google, Microsoft, Nokia, Samsung, and Vodafone. By forcing sites to comply with mobile web standards, .mobi tries to ensure visitors a consistent and optimized experience on their mobile device. However, this domain has been criticized by several big names, including Tim Berners-Lee of the W3C , who claims that it breaks the device independence of the web:

Advertising
Advertisers are increasingly using the mobile Web as a platform to reach consumers. The total value of advertising on mobile was 2.2 billion dollars in 2007. A recent study by the Online Publishers Association, now called Digital Content Next (DCN), reported that about one-in-ten mobile Web users said they have made a purchase based on a mobile Web ad, while 23% said they have visited a Web site, 13% said they have requested more information about a product or service and 11% said they have gone to a store to check out a product.

Accelerated Mobile Pages
In the fall of 2015, Google announced it would be rolling out an open source initiative called " Accelerated Mobile Pages " or AMP. The goal of this project is to improve the speed and performance of content rich pages which include video , animations , and graphics . Since the majority of the population now consumes the web through tablets and smartphones , having web pages that are optimized for these products is the primary need to AMP. [13] [14]
The three main types of AMP are AMP HTML , AMP JS , and Google AMP Cache . [15]

Limitations
Though Internet access "on the go" provides advantages to many, such as the ability to communicate by email with others and obtain information anywhere, the web, accessed from mobile devices, has many limits, which may vary, depending on the device. However, newer smartphones overcome some of these restrictions. Some problems which may be encountered include:
The inability of mobile web applications to access the local capabilities on the mobile device can limit their ability to provide the same features as native applications. The OMTP BONDI activity is acting as a catalyst to enable a set of JavaScript APIs which can access local capabilities in a secure way on the mobile device. Specifications and a reference implementation [17] have been produced. Security is a key aspect in this provision in order to protect users from malicious web applications and widgets.
In addition to the limits of the device, there are limits that should be made known to users concerning the interference these devices cause in other electromagnetic technology.
The convergence of the Internet and phone, in particular has caused hospitals to increase their mobile phone exclusion zones. A study by Erik van Lieshout and colleagues ( Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam ) has found that the General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) used in modern phones can affect machines from up to 3 meters away. The Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS) signals, used in 3G networks, have a smaller exclusion zone of just a few centimeters. The worst offenders in hospitals are the doctors. [18]

See also
WebPage index: 00085
WebOS
WebOS , also known as Open WebOS or LG WebOS , (previously known as HP WebOS and Palm WebOS , stylized as webOS ) [2] is a Linux kernel -based multitask operating system for smart devices such as Smart TVs and it has been used as a mobile operating system . Initially developed by Palm (which was acquired by Hewlett-Packard ), HP made the platform open source , at which point it became Open WebOS. The operating system was later sold to LG Electronics . HP still held many patents related to WebOS. In January 2014, Qualcomm announced that it had acquired technology patents from HP, which included all the WebOS patents. [3]
Various versions of WebOS have been featured on several devices, including Pre , Pixi , and Veer smartphones , TouchPad tablet , LG Smart TVs since 2015.

History

Palm
Palm launched WebOS, then called Palm WebOS , in January 2009 as the successor to Palm OS . The first WebOS device was the original Palm Pre , released by Sprint in June 2009. The Palm Pixi followed. Upgraded "Plus" versions of both Pre and Pixi were released on Verizon and AT&T.

HP
In April 2010 HP acquired Palm; WebOS was described by Leo Apotheker as a key asset and motivation for the purchase. The $1.2 billion acquisition finalized in June. HP indicated its intention to develop the WebOS platform for use in multiple new products, including smartphones, tablets, and printers . [4]
In February 2011, HP announced that it would use WebOS as the universal platform for all its devices. [5] However, HP also made the decision [6] that the Palm Pre, Palm Pixi, and the "Plus" revisions would not receive over-the-air updates to WebOS 2.0, [7] despite a previous commitment to an upgrade "in coming months." [8] HP announced several WebOS devices, including the HP Veer and HP Pre 3 smartphones, running WebOS 2.2, and the HP TouchPad , a tablet computer released in July 2011 that runs WebOS 3.0.
In March 2011 HP announced plans for a version of WebOS by the end of 2011 to run within Windows , [9] and to be installed on all HP desktop and notebook computers in 2012. [10] Neither ever materialized, although work had begun on an x86 port around this time involving a team in Fort Collins, Colorado ; work was scrapped later in the year. [ citation needed ]
In August 2011 HP announced that it was interested in selling its Personal Systems Group, responsible for all of its consumer PC products, including WebOS, and that WebOS device development and production lines would be halted. [11] [12] [13] It remained unclear whether HP would consider licensing WebOS software to other manufacturers. When HP reduced the price of the Touchpad to $99, the existing inventory quickly sold out. [14]
The HP Pre 3 was launched in select areas of Europe, and US-based units were available only through unofficial channels (both AT&T and Verizon canceled their orders just prior to delivery after Apotheker's (HP's CEO at the time) announcement. [15] Notably, these US Pre 3 units, having been released through unofficial channels, lacked both warranties and carried no support obligation from HP; as a result parts are nearly impossible to come by. HP announced that it would continue to issue updates for the HP Veer and HP TouchPad , but these updates have failed to materialize for the former, and the latter saw a final, unofficial release called "WebOS CE" that contained only open-sourced components of WebOS meant for what remained of the developer community rather than a conventional, user-centric update to the operating system. The last HP WebOS version, 3.0.5, was released on 12 January 2012.
In December 2011, after abandoning the TouchPad and the proposed sale of the HP Personal Systems Group, HP announced it would release WebOS source code in the near future under an open-source license. [16] In August 2012, code specific to the existing devices was released as WebOS Community Edition (CE), with support for the existing HP hardware. [17] Open WebOS includes open source libraries designed to target a wider range of hardware. HP renamed its WebOS unit as "Gram". [18] [19]
In February 2012 HP released Isis, a new web browser for Open WebOS. [20]

Growth and decline of HP App Catalog
The HP App Catalog was an app store for apps for the mobile devices running WebOS.
On 6 June 2009, WebOS launched on the Palm Pre with 18 available apps. The number of apps grew to 30 by 17 June 2009, [21] with 1 million cumulative downloads by 27 June 2009; [22] 30 official and 31 unofficial apps by 13 July 2009; [23] 1,000 official apps by 1 January 2010; [24] 4,000 official apps 29 September 2010; [25] and 10,002 official apps on 9 December 2011. [26]
Subsequently, the number of available apps has decreased because many apps have been pulled from the App Catalog by its owners. Examples include the apps for The New York Times and Pandora Radio . The number of remaining functional apps was unknown. When factoring out abandoned and/or non-functioning apps that remain in the App Catalog at present, the number is projected to be substantially lower. WebOS users lost HP App Catalog access after the 15 March 2015 shutdown of the HP App Catalog servers; this was notified by a Catalog splash screen on 11 November 2014. [27]

LG
On 25 February 2013, HP announced that it was licensing WebOS to LG Electronics for use on its web-enabled smart TVs. Under the agreement LG Electronics is allowed unlimited access to the documentation, source code, developers and all related websites. LG Electronics licensed WebOS from HP to enhance its smart TVs , replacing its previous NetCast platform. [28] [29] However, HP will still hold on to patents underlying WebOS as well as cloud-based services such as the App Catalog. [30] As well as its use as an OS for smart TVs, LG has expanded its use to various IoT devices. As a starting point, LG showcased an LG Wearable Platform OS (WebOS) smartwatch in early 2015. [31]

Features
The WebOS mobile platform introduced some innovative features, such as the cards interface, that are still in use by Apple , Microsoft and Google on their mobile operating systems iOS , Windows Phone , and Android , respectively.

Multitasking interface
Navigation uses multi-touch gestures on the touchscreen . The interface uses "cards" to manage multitasking and represent apps. The user switches between running apps with a flick from left and right on the screen. Apps are closed by flicking a "card" up—and "off"—the screen. The app "cards" can be rearranged for organization. WebOS 2.0 introduced 'stacks', where related cards could be "stacked" together.

Synergy
Palm referred to integration of information from many sources as "Synergy." Users can sign into multiple email accounts from different providers and integrate all of these sources into a single list. Similar capabilities pull together calendars and also instant messages and SMS text messages from multiple sources. [38]

Over-the-air updates
The OS can be updated without docking to a PC, instead receiving OS updates over the carrier connection.

Notifications
The notification area is located on the bottom portion of the screen on phones, and on the top status bar area on tablets.
On phones, when a notification comes in, it slides in from the bottom of the screen. Due to the resizable nature of the Mojo and Enyo application frameworks, the app usually resizes itself to allow unhindered use while the notification is displayed. After the notification slides away, it usually remains as an icon. The user can then tap on the icons to expand them. Notifications can then be dismissed (sliding off the screen), acted upon (tapping), or left alone.

Sync
By default, data sync uses a cloud-based approach rather than using a desktop sync client. The first version of WebOS shipped with the ability to sync with Apple's iTunes software by masquerading as an Apple device, but this feature was disabled by subsequent iTunes software updates.

Third-party applications
On HP WebOS, officially vetted third-party apps are accessible to be installed on the device from the HP App Catalog. [39]
As HP WebOS replaced Palm OS , Palm commissioned MotionApps to code and develop an emulator called Classic, to enable backward compatibility to Palm OS apps. This operates with WebOS version 1.0. Palm OS emulation was discontinued in WebOS version 2.0. [40] MotionApps disengaged from Classic in 2010, citing HP Palm as "disruptive." [41]
Another source of applications is homebrew software . [42] [43] Homebrew apps are not directly supported by HP. Programs used to distribute homebrew WebOS apps include WebOS Quick Install (Java-based for Desktop computers), and Preware (a homebrew WebOS app catalog, which must be sideloaded to install). If software problems do occur after installing homebrew programs, "WebOS Doctor" (provided by HP) can restore a phone back to factory settings and remove changes made by homebrew apps and patches. [44]

Smart TV features
LG has redesigned the UI of WebOS, whilst maintaining the card UI as a feature called "Simple switching" between the TV apps. The other two features promoted by the company are simple connection (using an animated Clippy -like character called Beanbird to aid the user through setup), and simple discovery.

Platform
Underneath the graphical user interface , WebOS has much in common with mainstream Linux distributions . Versions 1.0 to 2.1 use a patched Linux 2.6.24 kernel . [45]
The list of open-source components used by the different releases of WebOS, as well as the source code of and patches applied to each component, is available at the Palm Open Source webpage. [45] This page also serves as a reference listing of the versions of WebOS that have been publicly released.
In 2011, Enyo replaced Mojo, released in June 2009, as the software development kit (SDK). [46]

Hardware

Phones

Tablets

Televisions

Watch

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00086
MIT Technology Review
MIT Technology Review is a magazine published by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . [3] It was founded in 1899 as The Technology Review , [4] and was re-launched without the "The" in its name on April 23, 1998 under then publisher R. Bruce Journey. In September 2005, it underwent another transition under the current editor-in-chief and publisher, Jason Pontin , to a form resembling the historical magazine.
Before the 1998 re-launch, the editor stated that "nothing will be left of the old magazine except the name." It is therefore necessary to distinguish between the modern and the historical Technology Review . [4] The historical magazine had been published by the MIT Alumni Association, was more closely aligned with the interests of MIT alumni, and had a more intellectual tone and much smaller public circulation. The magazine, billed from 1998 to 2005 as "MIT's Magazine of Innovation," and from 2005 onwards as simply "published by MIT", focused on new technology and how it is commercialized; was mass-marketed to the public; and was targeted at senior executives, researchers, financiers, and policymakers, as well as MIT alumni. [4]
In 2011, Technology Review received an Utne Reader Independent Press Award for Best Science/Technology Coverage. [5]

History

Original magazine: 1899–1998
Technology Review was founded in 1899 under the name "The Technology Review" and relaunched in 1998 without the "The" in its original name. It currently claims to be "the oldest technology magazine in the world." [6]
In 1899 The New York Times commented: [7]
The career path of James Rhyne Killian illustrates the close ties between Technology Review and the Institute. In 1926, Killian graduated from college and got his first job as assistant managing editor of Technology Review; he rose to editor-in-chief; became executive assistant to then-president Karl Taylor Compton in 1939; vice-president of MIT in 1945; and succeeded Compton as president in 1949.
The May 4, 1929 issue contained an article by Dr. Norbert Wiener , then Assistant Professor of Mathematics, describing some deficiencies in a paper Albert Einstein had published earlier that year. Wiener also commented on a cardinal's critique of the Einstein theory saying:
The historical Technology Review often published articles that were controversial, or critical of certain technologies. A 1980 issue contained an article by Jerome Wiesner attacking the Reagan administration's nuclear defense strategy. The cover of a 1983 issue stated "Even if the fusion program produces a reactor, no one will want it," and contained an article by Lawrence M. Lidsky , [8] associate director of MIT's Plasma Fusion Center , challenging the feasibility of fusion power (which at the time was often fancied to be just around the corner). The May 1984 issue contained an expose about microchip manufacturing hazards.
As late as 1967, the New York Times described Technology Review as a "scientific journal." Of its writing style, writer George V. Higgins complained:
In 1984, Technology Review printed an article about a Russian scientist using ova from frozen mammoths to create a mammoth-elephant hybrid called a "mammontelephas.". [10] Apart from being dated "April 1, 1984," there were no obvious giveaways in the story. The Chicago Tribune News Service picked it up as a real news item, and it was printed as fact in hundreds of newspapers.
The prank was presumably forgotten by 1994, when a survey of "opinion leaders" ranked Technology Review [4] No. 1 in the nation in the "most credible" category. [11]
Contributors to the magazine also included Thomas A. Edison , Winston Churchill , and Tim Berners-Lee . [12]

Relaunch: 1998–2005
A radical transition of the magazine occurred in 1996. At that time, according to the Boston Business Journal , [13] in 1996 Technology Review had lost $1.6 million over the previous seven years and was "facing the possibility of folding" due to "years of declining advertising revenue."
R. Bruce Journey was named publisher, the first full-time publisher in the magazine's history. According to previous publisher William J. Hecht, although Technology Review had "long been highly regarded for its editorial excellence," the purpose of appointing Journey was to enhance its "commercial potential" and "secure a prominent place for Technology Review in the competitive world of commercial publishing." [14] John Benditt replaced Steven J. Marcus as editor-in-chief, the entire editorial staff was fired, and the modern Technology Review was born.
Boston Globe columnist David Warsh [15] described the transition by saying that the magazine had been serving up "old 1960s views of things: humanist , populist , ruminative, suspicious of the unseen dimensions of new technologies" and had now been replaced with one that "takes innovation seriously and enthusiastically." Former editor Marcus characterized the magazine's new stance as "cheerleading for innovation."
Under Bruce Journey, Technology Review billed itself as "MIT's Magazine of Innovation." Since 2001, it has been published by Technology Review Inc., a nonprofit independent media company owned by MIT. [16]
Intending to appeal to business leaders, editor John Benditt said in 1999, "We're really about new technologies and how they get commercialized." Technology Review covers breakthroughs and current issues on fields such as biotechnology , nanotechnology , and computing . Articles are also devoted to more mature disciplines such as energy , telecommunications , transportation , and the military .
Since Journey, Technology Review has been distributed as a regular mass-market magazine and appears on newsstands. By 2003, circulation had more than tripled from 92,000 to 315,000, about half that of Scientific American , and included 220,000 paid subscribers and 95,000 sent free to MIT alumni. Additionally, in August 2003, a German edition of Technology Review was started in cooperation with the publishing house Heinz Heise (circulation of about 50,000 as of 2005). According to The New York Times , [17] as of 2004 the magazine was still "partly financed by M.I.T. (though it is expected to turn a profit eventually)."
Technology Review also functions as the MIT alumni magazine; the edition sent to alumni contains a separate section, "MIT News," containing items such as alumni class notes. This section is not included in the edition distributed to the general public.
The magazine is published by Technology Review, Inc, an independent media company owned by MIT. MIT's website lists it as a MIT publication, [18] and the MIT News Office states that "the magazine often uses MIT expertise for some of its content." In 1999 The Boston Globe noted that (apart from the alumni section) "few Technology Review articles actually concern events or research at MIT." [19] However, in the words of editor Jason Pontin:
From 1997 to 2005, R. Bruce Journey held the title of "publisher"; Journey was also the president and CEO of Technology Review, Inc. Editors-in-chief have included John Benditt (1997), Robert Buderi (2002), and Jason Pontin (2004).
The magazine has won numerous Folio! awards, presented at the annual magazine publishing trade show conducted by Folio! magazine. In 2001, these included a "Silver Folio: Editorial Excellence Award" in the consumer science and technology magazine category and many awards for typography and design . [21] In 2006, Technology Review was named a finalist in the "general excellence" category of the annual National Magazine Awards, sponsored by the American Society of Magazine Editors. [22]
On June 6, 2001, Fortune and CNET Networks launched a publication entitled FORTUNE/CNET Technology Review . [23] MIT sued [24] FORTUNE's parent corporation, Time, Inc. for infringement of the Technology Review trademark. [25] The case was quickly settled. In August the MIT student newspaper reported that lawyers for MIT and Time were reluctant to discuss the case, citing a confidentiality agreement that both sides described as very restrictive. Jason Kravitz, a Boston attorney who represented MIT in the case, suggested that the magazine’s change of name to Fortune/CNET Tech Review, a change that occurred in the middle of the case, may have been part of the settlement. [26]
Many publications covering specific technologies have used "technology review" as part of their names, such as Lawrence Livermore Labs 's Energy & Technology Review , [27] AACE 's Educational Technology Review , [28] and the International Atomic Energy Agency 's Nuclear Technology Review. [29]
In 2005, Technology Review, along with Wired News and other technology publications, was embarrassed by the publication of a number of stories by freelancer Michelle Delio containing information which could not be corroborated. Editor-in-chief Pontin said, "Of the ten stories which were published, only three were entirely accurate. In two of the stories, I'm fairly confident that Michelle Delio either did not speak to the person she said she spoke to, or misrepresented her interview with him." [30] The stories were retracted.

Modern magazine: 2005-present
On August 30, 2005, Technology Review announced that R. Bruce Journey, publisher from 1996 to 2005, would be replaced by the current Editor in Chief, Jason Pontin, and would reduce the print publication frequency from eleven to six issues per year while enhancing the publication's website. [30] The Boston Globe characterized the change as a "strategic overhaul." Editor and publisher Jason Pontin stated that he would "focus the print magazine on what print does best: present[ing] longer-format, investigative stories and colorful imagery." Technology Review's Web site, Pontin said, would henceforth publish original, daily news and analysis (whereas before it had merely republished the print magazine's stories). Finally, Pontin said that Technology Review's stories in print and online would identify and analyze emerging technologies. [31] This focus resembles that of the historical Technology Review.
Every year the magazine publishes a list of the 10 technologies it considers the most influential. [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] [40] [41]

Annual Lists
Each year, MIT Technology Review publishes three annual lists:

TR35
MIT Technology Review has become well known for its annual TR35 list of the top 35 innovators in the world under the age of 35. In 1999, and then in 2002–2004, TR produced the TR100, a list of "100 remarkable innovators under the age of 35." In 2005, this list was renamed the TR35 and shortened to 35 individuals under the age of 35. Notable recipients of the award include Google co-founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin , PayPal co-founder Max Levchin , Geekcorps creator Ethan Zuckerman , Linux developer Linus Torvalds , BitTorrent developer Bram Cohen , MacArthur "genius" bioengineer Jim Collins , investor Micah Siegel and Netscape co-founder Marc Andreessen . [42] [43] The list was renamed Innovators Under 35 in 2013.

Recognition
In 2006, Technology Review was a finalist in the National Magazine Awards in the category of General Excellence. [44]
In 2010, Technology Review won the gold and silver prizes for best full issue of a technology magazine (for its November and June 2009 issues) and the gold, silver, and bronze prizes for best single article in a technology magazine (for “Natural Gas Changes the Energy Map” by David Rotman; [45] “Prescription: Networking” by David Talbot; [46] and “Chasing the Sun“ by David Rotman) [47] in the Folio Magazine Eddie Awards. [48]
In 2007, Technology Review won the bronze prizes in the Folio Magazine Eddie Awards in the categories of best issue of a technology magazine and best single technology article. [49] That same year, technologyreview.com won third place in the MPA Digital Awards for best business or news Website and second place for best online video or video series. [50]
In 2008, Technology Review won the gold prize for the best issue of a technology magazine (for its May 2008 issue); the gold, silver, and bronze prizes for best single articles in a technology magazine (for The Price of Biofuels by David Rotman; [51] Brain Trauma in Iraq by Emily Singer; [52] and Una Laptop por Niño by David Talbot); [53] the gold prize for best online community; and the bronze prize for best online tool in the Folio Magazine Eddie Awards. [54] That same year, Technology Review won third place in the Magazine Publishers of America (MPA) Digital Awards for best online videos. [55]
In 2009, Technology Review won the gold prize for Best Online News Coverage; the gold and silver prizes for best single articles in a technology magazine (for "How Obama Really Did It" by David Talbot) [56] and "Can Technology Save the Economy?" by David Rotman [57] and the silver prize for best online community in the Folio Magazine Eddie Awards. [58]
In 2011, Technology Review won the silver prize for best full issue of a technology magazine (for its January 2011 issue) and the gold and silver prizes for best single article in a technology magazine (for “Moore's Outlaws” by David Talbot [59] and "Radical Opacity" by Julian Dibbell) [60] in the Folio Magazine Eddie Awards. [61] That same year, Technology Review was recognized for the best science and technology coverage in the Utne Reader Independent Press Awards. [62]
In 2012, MIT Technology Review won the gold and silver prizes for best full issue of a technology magazine (for its June and October 2012 issues), and the gold and bronze prizes for best single article in a technology magazine (for "People Power 2.0" by John Pollock [63] and "The Library of Utopia" by Nicholas Carr) [64] in the Folio Magazine Eddie Awards. [65] That same year, MIT Technology Review won the gold prize for best feature design (for "The Library of Utopia" by Nicholas Carr) [64] in the Folio Magazine Ozzie Awards. [66]

See also
WebPage index: 00087
Wikipedia in culture
References to Wikipedia in culture have increased as more people learn about and use the online encyclopedia project. Many parody Wikipedia's openness, with characters vandalising or modifying articles. Still others feature characters using the references as a source, or positively comparing a character's intelligence to Wikipedia. Also, the encyclopedia many times is not used as an encyclopedia at all, but instead serves more as a character trait or even as a game. Wikipedia has also become culturally significant with many individuals seeing the presence of a Wikipedia entry as a status symbol. [1]

Cases

Wikiality
In a July 2006 episode of the satirical comedy The Colbert Report , Stephen Colbert announced the neologism "wikiality," a portmanteau of the words Wiki and reality , for his segment "The Wørd". Colbert defined wikiality as "truth by consensus" (rather than fact), modeled after the approval-by-consensus format of Wikipedia. He ironically praised Wikipedia for following his philosophy of truthiness , in which intuition and consensus is a better reflection of reality than fact:
According to Stephen Colbert, together "we can all create a reality that we all can agree on; the reality that we just agreed on." During the segment, he joked: "I love Wikipedia... any site that's got a longer entry on truthiness than on Lutherans has its priorities straight." Colbert also used the segment to satirize the more general issue of whether the repetition of statements in the media leads people to believe they are true. The piece was introduced with the tagline "The Revolution Will Not Be Verified", referencing the lack of objective verification seen in some articles.
Colbert suggested that viewers change the elephant page to state that the number of African elephants has tripled in the last six months. [17] The suggestion resulted in numerous incorrect changes to Wikipedia articles related to elephants and Africa. [1] Wikipedia administrators subsequently restricted edits to the pages by anonymous and newly created user accounts.
Colbert went on to type on a laptop facing away from the camera, claiming to be making the edits to the pages himself. In addition, initial edits to Wikipedia corresponding to these claimed "facts" were made by a user named Stephencolbert . Thus, many believe Colbert himself vandalized several Wikipedia pages at the time he was encouraging other users to do the same. The account, whether it was Stephen Colbert himself or someone posing as him, has been blocked from Wikipedia indefinitely. [18] Wikipedia blocked the account not for the vandalism (as believed), but for violating Wikipedia's username policies , which state that using the names of celebrities as login names without permission is inappropriate.

Other instances

In art

In comics

In feature films
Wikipedia is mentioned in the feature film Bandslam (2009): Sa5m ( Vanessa Hudgens ) tells Will Burton ( Gaelan Connell ), that one of the main characters, Charlotte Barnes ( Aly Michalka ), has her own Wikipedia page. Burton then reads the Charlotte Barnes on Wikipedia article.
In the post credit sequence song dedicated to Rajinikanth , in Hindi movie Chennai Express , the protagonist suggests people read about him on Wikipedia . [20] [21] [22]

In literature
Missing Links and Secret Histories: A Selection of Wikipedia Entries from Across the Known Multiverse (2013), edited by L. Timmel Duchamp , is a collection of speculative fiction short stories in the form of fictitious Wikipedia entries. [23]

In music
Ukrainian composer Andriy Bondarenko wrote a musical piece "Anthem of Wikipedia". It was performed in a concert devoted to 15th anniversary of Wikipedia in Kyiv. [24] [25]

In postal items
On January 14, 2011, Israel Postal Company chose to commemorate Wikipedia's 10th anniversary by issuing a special postmark and a souvenir leaf. These were the world's first Wikipedia-related postal items. As is customary on Wikipedia, the souvenir leaf, the postmark, and the text on the back of the souvenir leaf were created by a collaboration of volunteers. The design of the postmark was based on the work of "MT0", a Wikipedia editor.

In radio broadcasts

In television episodes

In web comics

Contexts
Wikipedia is not always referenced in the same way. The ways described below are some of the ways it has been mentioned.

Citations of Wikipedia in culture

Inaccuracies on Wikipedia as portrayed in culture

In politics

Wikipedia as a character trait

Wikipedia as an award recipient

Wikipedia as comedic material

Possibly mistaken

Entertainment information source

Food information source

General information source

Student information source

Game show category

Criticism

Claims of negative impact of Wikipedia on culture
Andrew Keen 's 2007 book The Cult of the Amateur: How Today's Internet Is Killing Our Culture asserted the proliferation of user-generated content on Wikipedia obscured and devalued traditional, higher-quality information outlets. [102]

See also

Notes

References and footnotes
WebPage index: 00088
United States Intelligence Community
The United States Intelligence Community ( IC ) [1] is a federation of 16 separate United States government agencies that work separately and together to conduct intelligence activities considered necessary for the conduct of foreign relations and national security of the United States . Member organizations of the IC include intelligence agencies , military intelligence , and civilian intelligence and analysis offices within federal executive departments . The IC is headed by the Director of National Intelligence (DNI), who reports to the President of the United States .
Among their varied responsibilities, the members of the Community collect and produce foreign and domestic intelligence, contribute to military planning , and perform espionage . The IC was established by Executive Order 12333 , signed on December 4, 1981, by U.S. President Ronald Reagan . [2]
The Washington Post reported in 2010 that there were 1,271 government organizations and 1,931 private companies in 10,000 locations in the United States that are working on counterterrorism, homeland security, and intelligence, and that the intelligence community as a whole includes 854,000 people holding top-secret clearances. [3] According to a 2008 study by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence , private contractors make up 29% of the workforce in the U.S. intelligence community and account for 49% of their personnel budgets. [4]

Etymology
The term "Intelligence Community" was first used during Lt. Gen. Walter Bedell Smith 's tenure as Director of Central Intelligence (1950–1953). [5]

History
Intelligence is information that agencies collect, analyze, and distribute in response to government leaders' questions and requirements. Intelligence is a broad term that entails:
Executive Order 12333 charged the IC with six primary objectives: [7]

Organization

Members
The IC is headed by the Director of National Intelligence (DNI), whose statutory leadership is exercised through the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI). The 16 members of the IC are: [8]

Programs
The IC performs under two separate programs:
Since the definitions of the NIP and MIP overlap when they address military intelligence , assignment of intelligence activities to the NIP and MIP sometimes proves problematic.

Organizational structure and leadership
The overall organization of the IC is primarily governed by the National Security Act of 1947 (as amended) and Executive Order 12333 . The statutory organizational relationships were substantially revised with the 2004 Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act (IRTPA) amendments to the 1947 National Security Act.
Though the IC characterizes itself as a federation of its member elements, its overall structure is better characterized as a confederation due to its lack of a well-defined, unified leadership and governance structure. Prior to 2004, the Director of Central Intelligence (DCI) was the head of the IC, in addition to being the director of the CIA. A major criticism of this arrangement was that the DCI had little or no actual authority over the budgetary authorities of the other IC agencies and therefore had limited influence over their operations.
Following the passage of IRTPA in 2004, the head of the IC is the Director of National Intelligence (DNI). The DNI exerts leadership of the IC primarily through statutory authorities under which he or she:
However, the DNI has no authority to direct and control any element of the IC except his own staff—the Office of the DNI—neither does the DNI have the authority to hire or fire personnel in the IC except those on his own staff. The member elements in the executive branch are directed and controlled by their respective department heads, all cabinet-level officials reporting to the President. By law, only the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency reports to the DNI.
In light of major intelligence failures in recent years that called into question how well Intelligence Community ensures U.S. national security, particularly those identified by the 9/11 Commission (National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States), and the " WMD Commission " (Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction), the authorities and powers of the DNI and the overall organizational structure of the IC have become subject of intense debate in the United States.

Interagency cooperation
Previously, interagency cooperation and the flow of information among the member agencies was hindered by policies that sought to limit the pooling of information out of privacy and security concerns. Attempts to modernize and facilitate interagency cooperation within the IC include technological, structural, procedural, and cultural dimensions. Examples include the Intellipedia wiki of encyclopedic security-related information; the creation of the Office of the Director of National Intelligence , National Intelligence Centers , Program Manager Information Sharing Environment , and Information Sharing Council ; legal and policy frameworks set by the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 , information sharing Executive Orders 13354 and Executive Order 13388 , and the 2005 National Intelligence Strategy .

Budget
The U.S. intelligence budget (excluding the Military Intelligence Program) in fiscal year 2013 was appropriated as $52.7 billion, and reduced by the amount sequestered to $49.0 billion. [9] In fiscal year 2012 it peaked at $53.9 billion, according to a disclosure required under a recent law implementing recommendations of the 9/11 Commission . [10] The 2012 figure was up from $53.1 billion in 2010, [11] $49.8 billion in 2009, [12] $47.5 billion in 2008, [13] $43.5 billion in 2007, [14] and $40.9 billion in 2006. [15]
About 70 percent of the intelligence budget went to contractors for the procurement of technology and services (including analysis), according to the May 2007 chart from the ODNI. Intelligence spending has increased by a third over ten years ago, in inflation -adjusted dollars, according to the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments . [ citation needed ]
In a statement on the release of new declassified figures, DNI Mike McConnell said [ when? ] there would be no additional disclosures of classified budget information beyond the overall spending figure because "such disclosures could harm national security". How the money is divided among the 16 intelligence agencies and what it is spent on is classified. It includes salaries for about 100,000 people, multibillion-dollar satellite programs , aircraft , weapons , electronic sensors, intelligence analysis , spies , computers , and software .
On August 29, 2013 the Washington Post published the summary of the Office of the Director of National Intelligence's multivolume FY 2013 Congressional Budget Justification, the U.S. intelligence community's top-secret "black budget." [16] [17] [18] The IC's FY 2013 budget details, how the 16 spy agencies use the money and how it performs against the goals set by the president and Congress. Experts said that access to such details about U.S. spy programs is without precedent. Steven Aftergood, Federation of American Scientists , which provides analyses of national security issues stated that "It was a titanic struggle just to get the top-line budget number disclosed, and that has only been done consistently since 2007 … but a real grasp of the structure and operations of the intelligence bureaucracy has been totally beyond public reach. This kind of material, even on a historical basis, has simply not been available." [19] Access to budget details will enable an informed public debate on intelligence spending for the first time said the co-chair of the 9/11 Commission Lee H. Hamilton. He added that Americans should not be excluded from the budget process because the intelligence community has a profound impact on the life of ordinary Americans. [19]

Oversight
Intelligence Community Oversight duties are distributed to both the Executive and Legislative branches. Primary Executive oversight is performed by the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board , the Joint Intelligence Community Council , the Office of the Inspector General , and the Office of Management and Budget . Primary congressional oversight jurisdiction over the IC is assigned to two committees : the United States House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence and the United States Senate Select Committee on Intelligence . The House Armed Services Committee and Senate Armed Services Committee draft bills to annually authorize the budgets of DoD intelligence activities, and both the House and Senate appropriations committees annually draft bills to appropriate the budgets of the IC. The Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs took a leading role in formulating the intelligence reform legislation in the 108th Congress .

See also
WebPage index: 00089
YouTube
YouTube is an American video-sharing website headquartered in San Bruno, California . The service was created by three former PayPal employees – Chad Hurley , Steve Chen , and Jawed Karim – in February 2005. Google bought the site in November 2006 for US$1.65 billion; YouTube now operates as one of Google's subsidiaries . The site allows users to upload, view, rate, share, add to favorites, report and comment on videos, subscribe to other users , and it makes use of WebM , H.264/MPEG-4 AVC , and Adobe Flash Video technology to display a wide variety of user-generated and corporate media videos. Available content includes video clips , TV show clips, music videos , short and documentary films, audio recordings, movie trailers and other content such as video blogging , short original videos, and educational videos.
Most of the content on YouTube has been uploaded by individuals, but media corporations including CBS , the BBC , Vevo , and Hulu offer some of their material via YouTube as part of the YouTube partnership program. Unregistered users can only watch videos on the site, while registered users are permitted to upload an unlimited number of videos and add comments to videos. Videos deemed potentially offensive are available only to registered users affirming themselves to be at least 18 years old.
YouTube earns advertising revenue from Google AdSense , a program which targets ads according to site content and audience. The vast majority of its videos are free to view, but there are exceptions, including subscription-based premium channels, film rentals, as well as YouTube Red , a subscription service offering ad-free access to the website and access to exclusive content made in partnership with existing users. As of February 2017 [update] , there are more than 400 hours of content uploaded to YouTube each minute, and one billion hours of content is watched on YouTube every day. As of April 2017 [update] , the website is ranked as the second most popular site in the world by Alexa Internet , a web traffic analysis company. [1]

Company history
YouTube was founded by Chad Hurley , Steve Chen , and Jawed Karim , who were all early employees of PayPal . [4] Hurley had studied design at Indiana University of Pennsylvania , and Chen and Karim studied computer science together at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign . [5] According to a story that has often been repeated in the media, Hurley and Chen developed the idea for YouTube during the early months of 2005, after they had experienced difficulty sharing videos that had been shot at a dinner party at Chen's apartment in San Francisco. Karim did not attend the party and denied that it had occurred, but Chen commented that the idea that YouTube was founded after a dinner party "was probably very strengthened by marketing ideas around creating a story that was very digestible". [6]
Karim said the inspiration for YouTube first came from Janet Jackson 's role in the 2004 Super Bowl incident , when her breast was exposed during her performance, and later from the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami . Karim could not easily find video clips of either event online, which led to the idea of a video sharing site. [7] Hurley and Chen said that the original idea for YouTube was a video version of an online dating service , and had been influenced by the website Hot or Not . [6] [8]
YouTube began as a venture capital -funded technology startup , primarily from an $11.5 million investment by Sequoia Capital between November 2005 and April 2006. [9] YouTube's early headquarters were situated above a pizzeria and Japanese restaurant in San Mateo, California. [10] The domain name www.youtube.com was activated on February 14, 2005, and the website was developed over the subsequent months. [11] The first YouTube video, titled Me at the zoo , shows co-founder Jawed Karim at the San Diego Zoo . [12] The video was uploaded on April 23, 2005, and can still be viewed on the site. [13] YouTube offered the public a beta test of the site in May 2005. The first video to reach one million views was a Nike advertisement featuring Ronaldinho in November 2005. [14] [15] Following a $3.5 million investment from Sequoia Capital in November, the site launched officially on December 15, 2005, by which time the site was receiving 8 million views a day. [16] [17] The site grew rapidly, and in July 2006 the company announced that more than 65,000 new videos were being uploaded every day, and that the site was receiving 100 million video views per day. [18] According to data published by market research company comScore , YouTube is the dominant provider of online video in the United States, with a market share of around 43% and more than 14 billion views of videos in May 2010. [19]
In May 2011, 48 hours of new videos were uploaded to the site every minute, [20] which increased to 60 hours every minute in January 2012, [20] 100 hours every minute in May 2013, [21] [22] 300 hours every minute in November 2014, [23] and 400 hours every minute in February 2017. [24] [25] The site has 800 million unique users a month. [26] It is estimated that in 2007 YouTube consumed as much bandwidth as the entire Internet in 2000. [27] According to third-party web analytics providers, Alexa and SimilarWeb , YouTube is the second-most visited website in the world, as of December 2016 [update] ; SimilarWeb also lists YouTube as the top TV and video website globally, attracting more than 15 billion visitors per month. [1] [28] [29]
The choice of the name www.youtube.com led to problems for a similarly named website, www.utube.com . The site's owner, Universal Tube & Rollform Equipment , filed a lawsuit against YouTube in November 2006 after being regularly overloaded by people looking for YouTube. Universal Tube has since changed the name of its website to www.utubeonline.com . [30] [31] In October 2006, Google Inc. announced that it had acquired YouTube for $1.65 billion in Google stock, [32] [33] and the deal was finalized on November 13, 2006. [34] [35]
In March 2010, YouTube began free streaming of certain content, including 60 cricket matches of the Indian Premier League . According to YouTube, this was the first worldwide free online broadcast of a major sporting event. [36] On March 31, 2010, the YouTube website launched a new design, with the aim of simplifying the interface and increasing the time users spend on the site. Google product manager Shiva Rajaraman commented: "We really felt like we needed to step back and remove the clutter." [37] In May 2010, YouTube videos were watched more than two billion times per day. [38] [39] [40] This increased to three billion in May 2011, [41] [42] [43] and four billion in January 2012. [20] [44] In February 2017, one billion hours of YouTube was watched every day. [45] [46] [47]
In October 2010, Hurley announced that he would be stepping down as chief executive officer of YouTube to take an advisory role, and that Salar Kamangar would take over as head of the company. [48] In April 2011, James Zern, a YouTube software engineer, revealed that 30% of videos accounted for 99% of views on the site. [49] In November 2011, the Google+ social networking site was integrated directly with YouTube and the Chrome web browser, allowing YouTube videos to be viewed from within the Google+ interface. [50]
In December 2011, YouTube launched a new version of the site interface, with the video channels displayed in a central column on the home page, similar to the news feeds of social networking sites. [51] At the same time, a new version of the YouTube logo was introduced with a darker shade of red, the first change in design since October 2006. [52] In May 2013, YouTube launched a pilot program to begin offering some content providers the ability to charge $0.99 per month or more for certain channels, but the vast majority of its videos would remain free to view. [53] [54]
In February 2015, YouTube released a secondary mobile app known as YouTube Kids . The app is designed to provide an experience optimized for children, and features a simplified user interface, curated selections of channels featuring age-approriate content (including existing channels and entertainment brands), and parental control features. [55] Later on August 26, 2015, YouTube launched YouTube Gaming—a video gaming -oriented sub-site and app that is intended to compete with the Amazon.com -owned Twitch.tv . [56] 2015 also saw the announcement of a premium YouTube service titled YouTube Red, which provides users with both ad-free content as well as the ability to download videos among other features. [57] On August 10, 2015, Google announced that it was creating a new company, Alphabet , to act as the holding company for Google, with the change in financial reporting to begin in the fourth quarter of 2015. YouTube remains as a subsidiary of Google. [58] In January 2016, YouTube expanded its headquarters in San Bruno by purchasing an office park for $215 million. The complex has 554,000 square feet of space and can house up to 2,800 employees. [59]

Features

Video technology

Playback
Previously, viewing YouTube videos on a personal computer required the Adobe Flash Player plug-in to be installed in the browser. [60] In January 2010, YouTube launched an experimental version of the site that used the built-in multimedia capabilities of web browsers supporting the HTML5 standard. [61] This allowed videos to be viewed without requiring Adobe Flash Player or any other plug-in to be installed. [62] [63] The YouTube site had a page that allowed supported browsers to opt into the HTML5 trial. Only browsers that supported HTML5 Video using the H.264 or WebM formats could play the videos, and not all videos on the site were available. [64] [65] On January 27, 2015, YouTube announced that HTML5 will be the default playback method on supported browsers. Supported browsers include Chrome, Safari 8 , and Internet Explorer 11. [66] YouTube experimented with Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over HTTP (MPEG-DASH), an adaptive bit-rate HTTP-based streaming solution optimizing the bitrate and quality for the available network. [67] YouTube uses Adobe Dynamic Streaming for Flash . [68]

Uploading
All YouTube users can upload videos up to 15 minutes each in duration. Users who have a good track record of complying with the site's Community Guidelines may be offered the ability to upload videos up to 12 hours in length, which requires verifying the account, normally through a mobile phone. [69] When YouTube was launched in 2005, it was possible to upload long videos, but a ten-minute limit was introduced in March 2006 after YouTube found that the majority of videos exceeding this length were unauthorized uploads of television shows and films. [70] [71] The 10-minute limit was increased to 15 minutes in July 2010. [72] If an up-to-date browser version is used, videos greater than 20 GB can be uploaded. [73] Videos captions are made using speech recognition technology when uploaded. Such captioning is usually not perfectly accurate, so YouTube provides several options for manually entering the captions for greater accuracy. [74]
YouTube accepts videos that are uploaded in most container formats , including AVI , MP4 , MPEG-PS , QuickTime File Format and FLV . It supports WebM files and also 3GP , allowing videos to be uploaded from mobile phones. [75]
Videos with progressive scanning or interlaced scanning can be uploaded, but for the best video quality, YouTube suggests interlaced videos be deinterlaced before uploading. All the video formats on YouTube use progressive scanning. [76] YouTube's statistics shows that interlaced videos are still being uploaded to YouTube, and there is no sign of that actually dwindling. YouTube attributes this to uploading of made-for-TV content. [77]

Quality and formats
YouTube originally offered videos at only one quality level, displayed at a resolution of 320×240 pixels using the Sorenson Spark codec (a variant of H.263 ), [78] [79] with mono MP3 audio. [80] In June 2007, YouTube added an option to watch videos in 3GP format on mobile phones. [81] In March 2008, a high-quality mode was added, which increased the resolution to 480×360 pixels. [82] In November 2008, 720p HD support was added. At the time of the 720p launch, the YouTube player was changed from a 4:3 aspect ratio to a widescreen 16:9 . [83] With this new feature, YouTube began a switchover to H.264/MPEG-4 AVC as its default video compression format. In November 2009, 1080p HD support was added. In July 2010, YouTube announced that it had launched a range of videos in 4K format, which allows a resolution of up to 4096×3072 pixels. [84] [85] In June 2015, support for 8K resolution was added, with the videos playing at 7680×4320 pixels. [86] In November 2016, support for HDR video was added which can be encoded with Hybrid Log-Gamma (HLG) or Perceptual Quantizer (PQ). [87] HDR video can be encoded with the Rec. 2020 color space. [88]
In June 2014, YouTube introduced videos playing at 60 frames per second , in order to reproduce video games with a frame rate comparable to high-end graphics cards . [89] [90] The videos play back at a resolution of 720p or higher. [91] YouTube videos are available in a range of quality levels. The former names of standard quality (SQ), high quality (HQ) and high definition (HD) have been replaced by numerical values representing the vertical resolution of the video. The default video stream is encoded in the VP9 format with stereo Opus audio; if VP9/WebM is not supported in the browser/device or the browser's user agent reports Windows XP , then H.264/MPEG-4 AVC video with stereo AAC audio is used instead. [92]

3D videos
In a video posted on July 21, 2009, [98] YouTube software engineer Peter Bradshaw announced that YouTube users can now upload 3D videos . The videos can be viewed in several different ways, including the common anaglyph (cyan/red lens) method which utilizes glasses worn by the viewer to achieve the 3D effect. [99] [100] [101] The YouTube Flash player can display stereoscopic content interleaved in rows, columns or a checkerboard pattern, side-by-side or anaglyph using a red/cyan, green/magenta or blue/yellow combination. In May 2011, an HTML5 version of the YouTube player began supporting side-by-side 3D footage that is compatible with Nvidia 3D Vision . [102]

360° videos
In January 2015, Google announced that 360° videos would be natively supported on YouTube. On March 13, 2015, YouTube enabled 360° videos which can be viewed from Google Cardboard , a virtual reality system. YouTube 360 can also be viewed from all other virtual reality headsets. [103]

User features

Community
On September 13, 2016, YouTube launched a public beta of Community, a social media -based feature that allows users to post text, images (including GIFs ), live videos and others in a separate "Community" tab on their channel. [104] At the time of release, Vlogbrothers , Lilly Singh , The Game Theorists , Karmin , The Key of Awesome , The Kloons, Peter Hollens , Rosianna Halse Rojas , Sam Tsui , Threadbanger and Vsauce3 received the feature. [105]

Content accessibility
YouTube offers users the ability to view its videos on web pages outside their website. Each YouTube video is accompanied by a piece of HTML that can be used to embed it on any page on the Web. [106] This functionality is often used to embed YouTube videos in social networking pages and blogs. Users wishing to post a video discussing, inspired by or related to another user's video are able to make a "video response". On August 27, 2013, YouTube announced that it would remove video responses for being an underused feature. [107] Embedding, rating, commenting and response posting can be disabled by the video owner. [108]
YouTube does not usually offer a download link for its videos, and intends for them to be viewed through its website interface. [109] A small number of videos, such as the weekly addresses by President Barack Obama , can be downloaded as MP4 files. [110] Numerous third-party web sites, applications and browser plug-ins allow users to download YouTube videos. [111] In February 2009, YouTube announced a test service, allowing some partners to offer video downloads for free or for a fee paid through Google Checkout . [112] In June 2012, Google sent cease and desist letters threatening legal action against several websites offering online download and conversion of YouTube videos. [113] In response, Zamzar removed the ability to download YouTube videos from its site. [114] The default settings when uploading a video to YouTube will retain a copyright on the video for the uploader, but since July 2012, it has been possible to select a Creative Commons license as the default, allowing other users to reuse and remix the material if it is free of copyright. [115]

Platforms
Most modern smartphones are capable of accessing YouTube videos, either within an application or through an optimized website. YouTube Mobile was launched in June 2007, using RTSP streaming for the video. [116] Not all of YouTube's videos are available on the mobile version of the site. [117] Since June 2007, YouTube's videos have been available for viewing on a range of Apple products. This required YouTube's content to be transcoded into Apple 's preferred video standard, H.264 , a process that took several months. YouTube videos can be viewed on devices including Apple TV , iPod Touch and the iPhone . [118] In July 2010, the mobile version of the site was relaunched based on HTML5 , avoiding the need to use Adobe Flash Player and optimized for use with touch screen controls. [119] The mobile version is also available as an app for the Android platform. [120] [121] In September 2012, YouTube launched its first app for the iPhone, following the decision to drop YouTube as one of the preloaded apps in the iPhone 5 and iOS 6 operating system. [122] According to GlobalWebIndex , YouTube was used by 35% of smartphone users between April and June 2013, making it the third most used app. [123]
A TiVo service update in July 2008 allowed the system to search and play YouTube videos. [124] In January 2009, YouTube launched "YouTube for TV", a version of the website tailored for set-top boxes and other TV-based media devices with web browsers, initially allowing its videos to be viewed on the PlayStation 3 and Wii video game consoles . [125] [126] In June 2009, YouTube XL was introduced, which has a simplified interface designed for viewing on a standard television screen. [127] YouTube is also available as an app on Xbox Live . [128] On November 15, 2012, Google launched an official app for the Wii, allowing users to watch YouTube videos from the Wii channel. [129] An app is also available for Wii U and Nintendo 3DS , and videos can be viewed on the Wii U Internet Browser using HTML5. [130] Google made YouTube available on the Roku player on December 17, 2013, [131] and, in October 2014, the Sony PlayStation 4 . [132]

Localization
On June 19, 2007, Google CEO Eric Schmidt was in Paris to launch the new localization system. [133] The interface of the website is available with localized versions in 89 countries, one territory (Hong Kong) and a worldwide version. [134]
The YouTube interface suggests which local version should be chosen on the basis of the IP address of the user. In some cases, the message "This video is not available in your country" may appear because of copyright restrictions or inappropriate content. [182] The interface of the YouTube website is available in 76 language versions, including Amharic, Albanian, Armenian, Bengali, Burmese, Khmer, Kyrgyz, Laotian, Mongolian, Persian and Uzbek, which do not have local channel versions. [183] Access to YouTube was blocked in Turkey between 2008 and 2010, following controversy over the posting of videos deemed insulting to Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and some material offensive to Muslims. [184] [185] In October 2012, a local version of YouTube was launched in Turkey, with the domain youtube.com.tr . The local version is subject to the content regulations found in Turkish law. [186] In March 2009, a dispute between YouTube and the British royalty collection agency PRS for Music led to premium music videos being blocked for YouTube users in the United Kingdom. The removal of videos posted by the major record companies occurred after failure to reach agreement on a licensing deal. The dispute was resolved in September 2009. [187] In April 2009, a similar dispute led to the removal of premium music videos for users in Germany. [188]

YouTube Red
YouTube Red is YouTube's premium subscription service. It offers advertising-free streaming, access to exclusive content, background and offline video playback on mobile devices, and access to the Google Play Music "All Access" service. [189] YouTube Red was originally announced on November 12, 2014, as "Music Key", a subscription music streaming service, and was intended to integrate with and replace the existing Google Play Music "All Access" service. [190] [191] [192] On October 28, 2015, the service was re-launched as YouTube Red, offering ad-free streaming of all videos, as well as access to exclusive original content. [193] [194] [195]
As of November 2016 [update] , the service has 1.5 million subscribers, with a further million on a free-trial basis. [196]

YouTube TV
On February 28, 2017, in a press announcement held at YouTube Space Los Angeles, YouTube announced the launch of YouTube TV, an over-the-top MVPD -style subscription service that would be available for $35 per month. Initially launching in five major U.S. markets ( New York City , Los Angeles , Chicago , Philadelphia and San Francisco ) on April 5, 2017, [197] [198] the service offers live streams of programming from the five major broadcast networks ( ABC , CBS , The CW , Fox Broadcasting Company and NBC ), as well as approximately 40 cable channels owned by the corporate parents of those networks, The Walt Disney Company , CBS Corporation , 21st Century Fox , and NBCUniversal (including among others Bravo , USA Network , Syfy , Disney Channel , E! , Fox Sports 1 , Freeform , FX and ESPN ). Subscribers can also receive Showtime and Fox Soccer Plus as optional add-ons for an extra fee, and can access YouTube Red original content (YouTube TV does not include a YouTube Red subscription). [199] [200]

Social impact
Both private individuals [201] and large production companies [202] have used YouTube to grow audiences. Independent content creators have built grassroots followings numbering in the thousands at very little cost or effort, while mass retail and radio promotion proved problematic. [201] Concurrently, old media celebrities moved into the website at the invitation of a YouTube management that witnessed early content creators accruing substantial followings, and perceived audience sizes potentially larger than that attainable by television. [202] YouTube channels launched by The Ellen DeGeneres Show and The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon became two of the most subscribed . While YouTube's revenue-sharing "Partner Program" made it possible to earn a substantial living as a video producer—its top five hundred partners each earning more than $100,000 annually [203] and its ten highest-earning channels grossing from $2.5 million to $12 million (the most successful of whom were YouTubers PewDiePie , Smosh , and the Fine Brothers ) [204] —in 2012 CMU business editor characterized YouTube as "a free-to-use... promotional platform for the music labels". [205] In 2013 Forbes ' Katheryn Thayer asserted that digital-era artists' work must not only be of high quality, but must elicit reactions on the YouTube platform and social media. [206] Videos of the 2.5% of artists categorized as "mega", "mainstream" and "mid-sized" received 90.3% of the relevant views on YouTube and Vevo in that year, [207] as the Vevo channels of Justin Bieber and Rihanna became two of the top five most subscribed , and music videos outperformed other content in attracting the most views and the most likes , particularly in the cases of " Gangnam Style " in 2012 and " See You Again " in 2015. By early 2013 Billboard had announced that it was factoring YouTube streaming data into calculation of the Billboard Hot 100 and related genre charts. [208]
Observing that face-to-face communication of the type that online videos convey has been "fine-tuned by millions of years of evolution", TED curator Chris Anderson referred to several YouTube contributors and asserted that "what Gutenberg did for writing, online video can now do for face-to-face communication". [209] Anderson asserted that it's not far-fetched to say that online video will dramatically accelerate scientific advance, and that video contributors may be about to launch "the biggest learning cycle in human history." [209] In education, for example, the Khan Academy grew from YouTube video tutoring sessions for founder Salman Khan's cousin into what Forbes' Michael Noer called "the largest school in the world", with technology poised to disrupt how people learn. [210] YouTube was awarded a 2008 George Foster Peabody Award , [211] the website being described as a Speakers' Corner that "both embodies and promotes democracy." [212] The Washington Post reported that a disproportionate share of YouTube's most subscribed channels feature minorities, contrasting with mainstream television in which the stars are largely white. [213] A Pew Research Center study reported the development of "visual journalism", in which citizen eyewitnesses and established news organizations share in content creation. [214] The study also concluded that YouTube was becoming an important platform by which people acquire news. [215]
YouTube has enabled people to more directly engage with government, such as in the CNN/YouTube presidential debates (2007) in which ordinary people submitted questions to U.S. presidential candidates via YouTube video, with a techPresident co-founder saying that Internet video was changing the political landscape. [216] Describing the Arab Spring (2010- ), sociologist Philip N. Howard quoted an activist's succinct description that organizing the political unrest involved using "Facebook to schedule the protests, Twitter to coordinate, and YouTube to tell the world." [217] In 2012, more than a third of the U.S. Senate introduced a resolution condemning Joseph Kony 16 days after the " Kony 2012 " video was posted to YouTube, with resolution co-sponsor Senator Lindsey Graham remarking that the video "will do more to lead to (Kony's) demise than all other action combined." [218]
Conversely, YouTube has also allowed government to more easily engage with citizens, the White House 's official YouTube channel being the seventh top news organization producer on YouTube in 2012 [221] and in 2013 a healthcare exchange commissioned Obama impersonator Iman Crosson 's YouTube music video spoof to encourage young Americans to enroll in the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) -compliant health insurance. [222] In February 2014, U.S. President Obama held a meeting at the White House with leading YouTube content creators to not only promote awareness of Obamacare [223] but more generally to develop ways for government to better connect with the "YouTube Generation". [219] Whereas YouTube's inherent ability to allow presidents to directly connect with average citizens was noted, the YouTube content creators' new media savvy was perceived necessary to better cope with the website's distracting content and fickle audience. [219]
Some YouTube videos have themselves had a direct effect on world events, such as Innocence of Muslims (2012) which spurred protests and related anti-American violence internationally. [224] TED curator Chris Anderson described a phenomenon by which geographically distributed individuals in a certain field share their independently developed skills in YouTube videos, thus challenging others to improve their own skills, and spurring invention and evolution in that field. [209] Journalist Virginia Heffernan stated in The New York Times that such videos have "surprising implications" for the dissemination of culture and even the future of classical music. [225]
The Legion of Extraordinary Dancers [226] and the YouTube Symphony Orchestra [227] selected their membership based on individual video performances. [209] [227] Further, the cybercollaboration charity video " We Are the World 25 for Haiti (YouTube edition) " was formed by mixing performances of 57 globally distributed singers into a single musical work, [228] with The Tokyo Times noting the "We Pray for You" YouTube cyber-collaboration video as an example of a trend to use crowdsourcing for charitable purposes. [229] The anti-bullying It Gets Better Project expanded from a single YouTube video directed to discouraged or suicidal LGBT teens, [230] that within two months drew video responses from hundreds including U.S. President Barack Obama, Vice President Biden, White House staff, and several cabinet secretaries. [231] Similarly, in response to fifteen-year-old Amanda Todd 's video "My story: Struggling, bullying, suicide, self-harm", legislative action was undertaken almost immediately after her suicide to study the prevalence of bullying and form a national anti-bullying strategy. [232]

Revenue
Google does not provide detailed figures for YouTube's running costs, and YouTube's revenues in 2007 were noted as " not material " in a regulatory filing. [233] In June 2008, a Forbes magazine article projected the 2008 revenue at $200 million, noting progress in advertising sales. [234] In January 2012, it was estimated that visitors to YouTube spent an average of 15 minutes a day on the site, in contrast to the four or five hours a day spent by a typical U.S. citizen watching television. [26] In 2012, YouTube's revenue from its ads program was estimated at 3.7 billion. [235] In 2013 it nearly doubled and estimated to hit 5.6 billion dollars according to eMarketer, [235] [236] [237] others estimated 4.7 billion, [235] The vast majority of videos on YouTube are free to view and supported by advertising. [53] In May 2013, YouTube introduced a trial scheme of 53 subscription channels with prices ranging from $0.99 to $6.99 a month. [238] The move was seen as an attempt to compete with other providers of online subscription services such as Netflix and Hulu. [53]

Advertisement partnerships
YouTube entered into a marketing and advertising partnership with NBC in June 2006. [239] In March 2007, it struck a deal with BBC for three channels with BBC content, one for news and two for entertainment. [240] In November 2008, YouTube reached an agreement with MGM , Lions Gate Entertainment , and CBS , allowing the companies to post full-length films and television episodes on the site, accompanied by advertisements in a section for US viewers called "Shows". The move was intended to create competition with websites such as Hulu, which features material from NBC, Fox , and Disney . [241] [242] In November 2009, YouTube launched a version of "Shows" available to UK viewers, offering around 4,000 full-length shows from more than 60 partners. [243] In January 2010, YouTube introduced an online film rentals service, [244] which is available only to users in the US, Canada and the UK as of 2010. [245] [246] The service offers over 6,000 films. [247]

Partnership with video creators
In May 2007, YouTube launched its Partner Program, a system based on AdSense which allows the uploader of the video to share the revenue produced by advertising on the site. [248] YouTube typically takes 45 percent of the advertising revenue from videos in the Partner Program, with 55 percent going to the uploader. [249] There are over a million members of the YouTube Partner Program. [250] According to TubeMogul , in 2013 a pre-roll advertisement on YouTube (one that is shown before the video starts) cost advertisers on average $7.60 per 1000 views. Usually no more than half of eligible videos have a pre-roll advertisement, due to a lack of interested advertisers. [251] Assuming pre-roll advertisements on half of videos, a YouTube partner would earn 0.5 X $7.60 X 55% = $2.09 per 1000 views in 2013. [251]

Revenue to copyright holders
Much of YouTube's revenue goes to the copyright holders of the videos. [237] In 2010, it was reported that nearly a third of the videos with advertisements were uploaded without permission of the copyright holders. YouTube gives an option for copyright holders to locate and remove their videos or to have them continue running for revenue. [252] In May 2013, Nintendo began enforcing its copyright ownership and claiming the advertising revenue from video creators who posted screenshots of its games. [253] In February 2015, Nintendo agreed to share the revenue with the video creators. [254] [255] [256]

Community policy
YouTube has a set of community guidelines aimed to reduce abuse of the site's features. Generally prohibited material includes sexually explicit content, videos of animal abuse, shock videos , content uploaded without the copyright holder's consent, hate speech, spam, and predatory behavior. [257] Despite the guidelines, YouTube has faced criticism from news sources for content in violation of these guidelines.

Copyrighted material
At the time of uploading a video, YouTube users are shown a message asking them not to violate copyright laws. [258] Despite this advice, there are still many unauthorized clips of copyrighted material on YouTube. YouTube does not view videos before they are posted online, and it is left to copyright holders to issue a DMCA takedown notice pursuant to the terms of the Online Copyright Infringement Liability Limitation Act . Any successful complaint about copyright infringement results in a YouTube copyright strike . Three successful complaints for copyright infringement against a user account will result in the account and all of its uploaded videos being deleted. [259] [260] Organizations including Viacom , Mediaset , and the English Premier League have filed lawsuits against YouTube, claiming that it has done too little to prevent the uploading of copyrighted material. [261] [262] [263] Viacom, demanding $1 billion in damages, said that it had found more than 150,000 unauthorized clips of its material on YouTube that had been viewed "an astounding 1.5 billion times". YouTube responded by stating that it " goes far beyond its legal obligations in assisting content owners to protect their works ". [264]
During the same court battle, Viacom won a court ruling requiring YouTube to hand over 12 terabytes of data detailing the viewing habits of every user who has watched videos on the site. The decision was criticized by the Electronic Frontier Foundation , which called the court ruling "a setback to privacy rights". [265] [266] In June 2010, Viacom's lawsuit against Google was rejected in a summary judgment, with U.S. federal Judge Louis L. Stanton stating that Google was protected by provisions of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act. Viacom announced its intention to appeal the ruling. [267] On April 5, 2012, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit reinstated the case, allowing Viacom's lawsuit against Google to be heard in court again. [268] On March 18, 2014, the lawsuit was settled after seven years with an undisclosed agreement. [269]
In August 2008, a US court ruled in Lenz v. Universal Music Corp. that copyright holders cannot order the removal of an online file without first determining whether the posting reflected fair use of the material. The case involved Stephanie Lenz from Gallitzin, Pennsylvania, who had made a home video of her 13-month-old son dancing to Prince 's song " Let's Go Crazy ", and posted the 29-second video on YouTube. [270] In the case of Smith v. Summit Entertainment LLC , professional singer Matt Smith sued Summit Entertainment for the wrongful use of copyright takedown notices on YouTube. [271] He asserted seven causes of action , and four were ruled in Smith's favor. [272]
In April 2012, a court in Hamburg ruled that YouTube could be held responsible for copyrighted material posted by its users. The performance rights organization GEMA argued that YouTube had not done enough to prevent the uploading of German copyrighted music. YouTube responded by stating:
On November 1, 2016, the dispute with GEMA was resolved, with Google content ID being used to allow advertisements to be added to videos with content protected by GEMA. [274]
In April 2013, it was reported that Universal Music Group and YouTube have a contractual agreement that prevents content blocked on YouTube by a request from UMG from being restored, even if the uploader of the video files a DMCA counter-notice. When a dispute occurs, the uploader of the video has to contact UMG. [275] [276] YouTube's owner Google announced in November 2015 that they would help cover the legal cost in select cases where they believe "fair use" laws apply. [277]

Content ID
In June 2007, YouTube began trials of a system for automatic detection of uploaded videos that infringe copyright. Google CEO Eric Schmidt regarded this system as necessary for resolving lawsuits such as the one from Viacom , which alleged that YouTube profited from content that it did not have the right to distribute. [278] The system, which became known as Content ID, [279] creates an ID File for copyrighted audio and video material, and stores it in a database. When a video is uploaded, it is checked against the database, and flags the video as a copyright violation if a match is found. [280] When this occurs, the content owner has the choice of blocking the video to make it unviewable, tracking the viewing statistics of the video, or adding advertisements to the video. YouTube describes Content ID as "very accurate in finding uploads that look similar to reference files that are of sufficient length and quality to generate an effective ID File". [280] Content ID accounts for over a third of the monetized views on YouTube. [281]
An independent test in 2009 uploaded multiple versions of the same song to YouTube, and concluded that while the system was "surprisingly resilient" in finding copyright violations in the audio tracks of videos, it was not infallible. [282] The use of Content ID to remove material automatically has led to controversy in some cases, as the videos have not been checked by a human for fair use. [283] If a YouTube user disagrees with a decision by Content ID, it is possible to fill in a form disputing the decision. [284] YouTube has cited the effectiveness of Content ID as one of the reasons why the site's rules were modified in December 2010 to allow some users to upload videos of unlimited length. [285]

Controversial content
YouTube has also faced criticism over the offensive content in some of its videos. The uploading of videos containing defamation, pornography, and material encouraging criminal conduct is prohibited by YouTube's terms of service. [257] Controversial content has included material relating to Holocaust denial and the Hillsborough disaster , in which 96 football fans from Liverpool were crushed to death in 1989. [286] [287] YouTube relies on its users to flag the content of videos as inappropriate, and a YouTube employee will view a flagged video to determine whether it violates the site's terms of service. [257] In July 2008, the Culture and Media Committee of the House of Commons of the United Kingdom stated that it was "unimpressed" with YouTube's system for policing its videos, and argued that "proactive review of content should be standard practice for sites hosting user-generated content". YouTube responded by stating:
In October 2010, U.S. Congressman Anthony Weiner urged YouTube to remove from its website videos of imam Anwar al-Awlaki . [289] YouTube pulled some of the videos in November 2010, stating they violated the site's guidelines. [290] In December 2010, YouTube added the ability to flag videos for containing terrorism content. [291]
YouTube's policies on " advertiser-friendly content " restrict what may be incorporated into videos being monetized; this includes strong violence, language, sexual content, and "controversial or sensitive subjects and events, including subjects related to war, political conflicts, natural disasters and tragedies, even if graphic imagery is not shown", unless the content is "usually newsworthy or comedic and the creator's intent is to inform or entertain". [292] In September 2016, after introducing an enhanced notification system to inform users of these violations, YouTube's policies were criticized by prominent users, including Phillip DeFranco and Vlogbrothers . DeFranco argued that not being able to earn advertising revenue on such videos was "censorship by a different name". A YouTube spokesperson stated that while the policy itself was not new, the service had "improved the notification and appeal process to ensure better communication to our creators." [293] [294] [295]
In March 2017, the government of the United Kingdom pulled its advertising campaigns from YouTube, after reports that its ads had appeared on videos containing extremism content. The government demanded assurances that its advertising would "be delivered in a safe and appropriate way". The Guardian newspaper, as well as other major British and U.S. brands, similarly suspended their advertising on YouTube in response to their advertising appearing near offensive content. Google stated that it had "begun an extensive review of our advertising policies and have made a public commitment to put in place changes that give brands more control over where their ads appear". [296] [297] In early-April 2017, the YouTube channel h3h3Productions presented evidence claiming that a Wall Street Journal article had fabricated screenshots showing major brand advertising on an offensive video containing Johnny Rebel music overlaid on a Chief Keef music video, citing that the video itself had not earned any ad revenue for the uploader. The video was retracted after it was found that the ads had actually been triggered by the use of copyrighted content in the video. [298] [299]
On April 6, 2017, YouTube announced that in order to "ensure revenue only flows to creators who are playing by the rules", it would change its practices to require that a channel undergo a policy compliance review, and have at least 10,000 lifetime views, before they may join the Partner Program. [300]

User comments
Most videos enable users to leave comments, and these have attracted attention for the negative aspects of both their form and content. In 2006, Time praised Web 2.0 for enabling "community and collaboration on a scale never seen before", and added that YouTube "harnesses the stupidity of crowds as well as its wisdom. Some of the comments on YouTube make you weep for the future of humanity just for the spelling alone, never mind the obscenity and the naked hatred". [301] The Guardian in 2009 described users' comments on YouTube as:
In September 2008, The Daily Telegraph commented that YouTube was "notorious" for "some of the most confrontational and ill-formed comment exchanges on the internet", and reported on YouTube Comment Snob, "a new piece of software that blocks rude and illiterate posts". [303] The Huffington Post noted in April 2012 that finding comments on YouTube that appear "offensive, stupid and crass" to the "vast majority" of the people is hardly difficult. [304]
On November 6, 2013, Google implemented a comment system oriented on Google+ that required all YouTube users to use a Google+ account in order to comment on videos. The stated motivation for the change was giving creators more power to moderate and block comments, thereby addressing frequent criticisms of their quality and tone. [305] The new system restored the ability to include URLs in comments, which had previously been removed due to problems with abuse. [306] [307] In response, YouTube co-founder Jawed Karim posted the question "why the fuck do I need a google+ account to comment on a video?" on his YouTube channel to express his negative opinion of the change. [308] The official YouTube announcement [309] received 20,097 "thumbs down" votes and generated more than 32,000 comments in two days. [310] Writing in the Newsday blog Silicon Island, Chase Melvin noted that "Google+ is nowhere near as popular a social media network as Facebook, but it's essentially being forced upon millions of YouTube users who don't want to lose their ability to comment on videos" and "Discussion forums across the Internet are already bursting with outcry against the new comment system". In the same article Melvin goes on to say: [311]
On July 27, 2015, Google announced in a blog post that it would be removing the requirement to sign up to a Google+ account to post comments to YouTube. [312]
On November 3, 2016, YouTube announced a trial scheme which allows the creators of videos to decide whether to approve, hide or report the comments posted on videos based on an algorithm that detects potentially offensive comments. [313]

View counts
In December 2012, two billion views were removed from the view counts of Universal and Sony music videos on YouTube, prompting a claim by The Daily Dot that the views had been deleted due to a violation of the site's terms of service, which ban the use of automated processes to inflate view counts. This was disputed by Billboard , which said that the two billion views had been moved to Vevo, since the videos were no longer active on YouTube. [314] [315] On August 5, 2015, YouTube removed the feature which caused a video's view count to freeze at "301" (later "301+") until the actual count was verified to prevent view count fraud . [316] YouTube view counts now update in real time. [317]

Censorship and filtering
As of September 2012, countries with standing national bans on YouTube include China, Iran, and Turkmenistan.
YouTube is blocked for a variety of reasons, including: [318]
In some countries, YouTube is completely blocked, either through a long term standing ban or for more limited periods of time such as during periods of unrest, the run-up to an election, or in response to upcoming political anniversaries. In other countries access to the website as a whole remains open, but access to specific videos is blocked. In cases where the entire site is banned due to one particular video, YouTube will often agree to remove or limit access to that video in order to restore service. [318]
Businesses, schools, government agencies, and other private institutions often block social media sites, including YouTube, due to bandwidth limitations and the site's potential for distraction. [318]
Several countries have blocked access to YouTube:

Music Key licensing
In May 2014, prior to the launch of YouTube's subscription-based Music Key service, the independent music trade organization Worldwide Independent Network alleged that YouTube was using non-negotiable contracts with independent labels that were "undervalued" in comparison to other streaming services, and that YouTube would block all music content from labels who do not reach a deal to be included on the paid service. In a statement to the Financial Times in June 2014, Robert Kyncl confirmed that YouTube would block the content of labels who do not negotiate deals to be included in the paid service "to ensure that all content on the platform is governed by its new contractual terms." Stating that 90% of labels had reached deals, he went on to say that "while we wish that we had [a] 100% success rate, we understand that is not likely an achievable goal and therefore it is our responsibility to our users and the industry to launch the enhanced music experience." [360] [361] [362] [363] The Financial Times later reported that YouTube had reached an aggregate deal with Merlin Network —a trade group representing over 20,000 independent labels, for their inclusion in the service. However, YouTube itself has not confirmed the deal. [192]

NSA Prism program
Following media reports about PRISM , NSA's massive electronic surveillance program, in June 2013, several technology companies were identified as participants, including YouTube. According to leaks of said program, YouTube joined the PRISM program in 2010. [364]

April Fools
YouTube featured an April Fools prank on the site on April 1 of every year from 2008 to 2016.
In 2008, all the links to the videos on the main page were redirected to Rick Astley 's music video " Never Gonna Give You Up ", a prank known as " Rickrolling ". [365] [366]
In 2009, when clicking on a video on the main page, the whole page turned upside down. YouTube claimed that this was a "new layout". [367]
In 2010, YouTube temporarily released a "TEXTp" mode, which translated the colors in the videos to random upper case letters. YouTube claimed in a message that this was done in order to reduce bandwidth costs by $1 per second. [368]
In 2011, the site celebrated its "100th anniversary" with a "1911 button" and a range of sepia-toned silent, early 1900s-style films, including "Flugelhorn Feline", a parody of Keyboard Cat . [369]
In 2012, clicking on the image of a DVD next to the site logo led to a video about "The YouTube Collection", a purported option to order every YouTube video for home delivery on DVD, videocassette, LaserDisc , or Betamax tapes. The spoof promotional video touted "the complete YouTube experience completely offline." [370]
In 2013, YouTube teamed up with satirical newspaper company The Onion to claim that the video sharing website was launched as a contest which had finally come to an end, and would announce a winner of the contest when the site went back up in 2023. A video of two presenters announcing the nominees streamed live for twelve hours. [371]
In 2014, YouTube announced that it was responsible for the creation of all viral video trends, and revealed previews of upcoming memes, such as "Clocking", "Kissing Dad", and "Glub Glub Water Dance". [372]
In 2015, YouTube added a music button to the video bar that played samples from " Sandstorm " by Darude . Additionally, when users searched for a song title, a message would appear saying "Did you mean: Darude – Sandstorm by Darude". [373]
In 2016, YouTube announced "SnoopaVision Beta", telling their users that soon they would have the option to watch every video on the platform in 360 degree mode with Snoop Dogg . [374]

See also
General:
WebPage index: 00090
Italy
WebPage index: 00091
United States presidential election, 2008
The United States presidential election of 2008 was the 56th quadrennial presidential election . It was held on Tuesday, November 4, 2008. Democratic Party nominees Barack Obama , a U.S. Senator from Illinois , and his running mate Joe Biden , a long-time U.S. Senator from Delaware , defeated Republican Party nominees John McCain , a long-time and current U.S. Senator from Arizona , and his running mate Sarah Palin , a Governor of Alaska . Obama became the first African American ever to be elected president of the United States, and Joe Biden became the first Roman Catholic ever elected vice president.
The incumbent president , George W. Bush , of the Republican Party , was ineligible to be elected to a third term due to term limits in the Twenty-second Amendment to the United States Constitution . McCain secured the Republican nomination by March 2008, but the Democratic nomination was marked by a sharp contest between Obama and initial front-runner Senator Hillary Clinton , with Obama not securing the nomination until early June. Early campaigning had focused heavily on the Iraq War and the unpopularity of outgoing Republican President George W. Bush, but all candidates focused on domestic concerns as well, which grew more prominent as the economy experienced the onset of the Great Recession and a major financial crisis that peaked in September 2008 .
Obama would go on to win a decisive victory over McCain, winning both the popular vote and the electoral college , with 365 electoral votes to McCain's 173; he received the largest percentage of the popular vote for a Democrat since Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964 . Obama's total vote amount of 69.5 million votes is the highest number ever won by a presidential candidate. Obama's successes in obtaining a major party's nomination and winning the general election were both firsts for the African American community. Although Hillary Clinton did not win the Democratic nomination, she was the first woman to win a major American party's presidential primary for the purposes of delegate selection when she won the primary in New Hampshire on January 8. She later went on to win the Democratic nomination but lose the general election to Donald Trump in 2016 . [2] [3] [nb 1] She also was the first woman to be an American presidential candidate in every primary and caucus in every state. [2] Similarly, Sarah Palin became the first woman to appear on a Republican presidential ticket, and the second woman overall to appear on a major party's presidential ticket (after Geraldine Ferraro in 1984 ).
This was also the first election in which neither candidate was born in the contiguous United States . Obama was born in Hawaii and McCain was born at Coco Solo Naval Air Station in the Panama Canal Zone . This election also made McCain currently the only Senator who previously served as a presidential nominee and still remains incumbent, after John Kerry 's resignation from the U.S. Senate in 2013.
As of 2017, this is the last time Nebraska (2nd congressional district only), Indiana , and North Carolina voted for the Democratic candidate. This election also became the first time that Missouri backed the losing candidate since 1956, with both Kentucky & Tennessee failing to do the same since 1960. Likewise, this would also be the first time both Arkansas & Louisiana did not vote for the winning candidate since 1968, while being among the most recent states which voted third party that same year as well.

Background
In 2004 , President George W. Bush won reelection , defeating the Democratic nominee, Senator John Kerry . After Republican pickups in the House and Senate in the 2004 elections, Republicans maintained control of the executive and legislative branches of the federal government.
Bush's approval ratings had been slowly declining from their high point of almost 90% after the September 11 attacks , [6] and they barely reached 50% by his reelection. Although Bush was reelected with a larger Electoral College margin than in 2000 , during his second term, Bush's approval rating dropped more quickly, with the Iraq War and the federal response to Hurricane Katrina in 2005 being most detrimental to the public's perception of his job performance. [7] [8]
By September 2006, Bush's approval rating was below 40%, [9] and in the November United States Congressional elections 2006 , Democrats gained the majority in both houses. Bush's approval ratings dropped for the last two years in office to the 25–37% range. [10] [11] [12]
President George W. Bush , a Republican and former Governor of Texas , was ineligible to seek reelection to a third term due to restrictions of the Twenty-Second Amendment . In accordance with Section I of the Twentieth Amendment , his term expired at 12:00 noon EST on January 20, 2009.

Nominations
In the United States, there are two major political parties , the Democratic Party and the Republican Party . There are also several minor parties, usually called third parties, though most media and public focus is on the two major parties.
Each major party hosts candidates who go through a nomination process to determine the presidential nominee for that party. The nomination process consists of primaries and caucuses, held by the 50 states, as well as Guam , Puerto Rico , Washington, D.C. , U.S. Virgin Islands , American Samoa , and the Northern Mariana Islands . The winner of each of these primary elections usually receives delegates proportional to the percentage of the popular vote that candidate received in each state. In the Democratic Party, high-ranking party members known as superdelegates each receive one vote in the convention. Whichever candidate has the majority of the delegates at the end of the primary elections is designated the presumptive nominee until he or she is formally nominated and endorsed for the presidency by his or her political party. This is done by the aforementioned delegates for each party.

Democratic Party nomination

Candidate

Withdrawn candidates

Before the primaries
Media speculation had begun almost immediately after the results of the 2004 presidential election were released. In the 2006 midterm elections , the Democrats regained majorities in both houses of the U.S. Congress . [13] Early polls taken before anyone had announced a candidacy had shown Senators Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama as the most popular potential Democratic candidates. [14] Nevertheless, the media speculated on several other candidates, including Al Gore , the runner-up in the 2000 election ; John Kerry , the runner-up in the 2004 election ; John Edwards , Kerry's running mate in 2004; Senator from Delaware Joe Biden ; New Mexico Governor Bill Richardson ; Iowa Governor Tom Vilsack ; and Indiana Senator Evan Bayh . [15]
Edwards was one of the first to formally announce his candidacy for the presidency, on December 28, 2006. This run would be his second attempt at the presidency. [16] Clinton announced intentions to run in the Democratic primaries on January 20, 2007. [17] Obama announced his candidacy on February 10 in his home state of Illinois. [17] None of the candidates received a significant bounce in their poll numbers after their official announcements. [18] Through most of 2007, even after it was evident that Al Gore would not run, he and Edwards each hovered between the third and fourth place spots in the polls behind Clinton and Obama. [19]
"Front-runner" status is dependent on the news agency reporting, and by October 2007, the consensus listed the three aforementioned candidates as leading the pack after several debate performances. The Washington Post listed Clinton, Edwards, and Obama as the front runners, "leading in polls and fundraising and well ahead of the other major candidates." [20] Clinton led in nearly all nationwide opinion polling until January 2008. [19]
Actor, comedian, and future Late Show host Stephen Colbert mounted his own campaign for the nomination in his home state of South Carolina . He announced his run for president on his former talk show, The Colbert Report , on October 16, 2007. [21] Public Opinion Strategies conducted a poll and found Colbert nationally in fifth place at 2.3% behind Biden's 2.7%. [22]

Early primaries and caucuses
The early primaries and caucuses were considered the most critical of nomination processes. Most candidates who lacked support dropped out after doing so poorly in the Iowa caucuses and in the New Hampshire primary , and the results from those states often shifted national preferences, according to historical polling data. [23] The states that hold early primaries and caucuses were, chronologically, Iowa, New Hampshire, Nevada, and South Carolina. In 2008, Florida and Michigan moved their primaries into January against the Democratic Party's rules, and their results were discounted and disputed until after the rest of the contests took place. [24]
Early in the year, the support for Barack Obama started to increase in the polls, and he passed Clinton for the top spot in Iowa; he ended up winning the caucus in that state, with John Edwards coming in second and Clinton in third. [25] Obama's win was fueled mostly by first time caucus-goers and Independents and showed voters viewed him as the "candidate of change." [25] Iowa has since been viewed as the state that jump-started Obama's campaign and set him on track to win both the nomination and the presidency. [26] After the Iowa caucus, Joe Biden and Christopher Dodd withdrew from the nomination contest. [25]
Obama became the new front runner in New Hampshire, when his poll numbers skyrocketed after his Iowa victory [27] The Clinton campaign was struggling after a huge loss in Iowa and no strategy beyond the early primaries and caucuses. According to The Vancouver Sun , Campaign strategists had "mapped a victory scenario that envisioned the former first lady wrapping up the Democratic presidential nomination by Super Tuesday on Feb. 5." [28] In what is considered a turning point for her campaign, Clinton had a strong performance at the Saint Anselm College , ABC , and Facebook debates several days before the New Hampshire primary as well as an emotional interview in a public broadcast live on TV. [29] Clinton won that primary by 2% of the vote, contrary to the predictions of pollsters who consistently had her trailing Obama for a few days up to the primary date. [27] Clinton's win was the first time a woman had ever won a major American party's presidential primary for the purposes of delegate selection. [3]
On January 30, 2008, after placing in third in the New Hampshire and South Carolina primaries, Edwards announced that he was suspending his campaign for the presidency, but he did not initially endorse any remaining candidates. [30] [31]

Super Tuesday
Super Tuesday occurred on February 5, 2008, during which the largest-ever number of simultaneous state primary elections was held. [32] Super Tuesday ended up leaving the Democrats in a virtual tie, with Obama amassing 847 delegates to Clinton's 834 from the 23 states that held Democratic primaries. [33]
Earlier, on February 3 at the University of California, Los Angeles , fellow celebrities Oprah Winfrey , Caroline Kennedy , and Stevie Wonder , among others, made appearances to show support for Obama in a rally led by his wife, Michelle Obama . [34] In addition, then-Governor of California Arnold Schwarzenegger 's wife at the time, Maria Shriver , endorsed Obama. [35] California was one of the Super Tuesday states that could provide a large number of delegates to the candidates. Obama trailed in the California polling by an average of 6.0% before the primary; he ended up losing that state by 8.3% of the vote. [36] Some analysts cited a large " Latino " turnout that voted for Clinton as the deciding factor. [37]
The Louisiana , Nebraska , Hawaii , Wisconsin , U.S. Virgin Islands , the District of Columbia, Maryland, and Virginia primaries and the Washington and Maine caucuses all took place after Super Tuesday in February. Obama won all of them, giving him 10 consecutive victories after Super Tuesday. [38] [39]

Ohio, Texas, and Pennsylvania
On March 4, Hillary Clinton carried Ohio and Rhode Island in the Democratic primaries; some considered these wins, especially Ohio, a "surprise upset" by 10%, [40] [41] although she did lead in the polling averages in both states. [36] [42] She also carried the primary in Texas , but Obama won the Texas caucuses held the same day and netted more delegates from the state than Clinton. [43]
Only one state held a primary in April. This was Pennsylvania , on April 22. Although Obama made a strong effort to win Pennsylvania, Hillary Clinton won that primary by nearly 10%, with approximately 55% of the vote. [44] Obama had outspent Clinton three to one in Pennsylvania, but his comment at a San Francisco fundraiser that small-town Americans "cling" to guns and religion drew sharp criticism from the Clinton campaign and may have hurt his chances in the Keystone State. [45] In addition, Clinton had several advantages in Pennsylvania. Throughout the primary process, she relied on the support of older, white, working class voters. Pennsylvania held a closed primary, which means that only registered Democrats could vote, and, according to Ron Elving of NPR , the established Democratic electorate "was older, whiter, more Catholic and more working-class than in most of the primaries to date." [46] After Pennsylvania, Obama had a higher number of delegates and popular votes than Clinton did and was still in a stronger position to win the nomination. Clinton, however, had received the endorsement of more superdelegates than Obama. [44]

Indiana and North Carolina
On May 6, North Carolina and Indiana held their Democratic presidential primaries. Clinton and Obama campaigned aggressively there before the voting took place. The candidates acknowledged the importance of these primaries and said they were turning point states that could make or break either of their campaigns. [47] Polling had shown Obama a few points ahead in North Carolina and Clinton similarly leading in Indiana. [48] [49] In the actual results, Obama outperformed the polls by several points in both states, winning by a significant margin in North Carolina [50] and losing by only 1.1% in Indiana (50.56% to 49.44%). [51] After these primaries, most pundits declared that it had become "increasingly improbable," if not impossible, for Clinton to win the nomination. [52] The small win in Indiana barely kept her campaign alive for the next month. [53] Although she did manage to win the majority of the remaining primaries and delegates, it was not enough to overcome Obama's substantial delegate lead.
Scandal surrounded the primary in Indiana because a Democratic State Committee member and county chair led a "forgery ring" to get all of the Democratic candidates on the ballot. [54] This Democratic State Committee member, Owen "Butch" Morgan was convicted of felonies regarding the forgeries and sentenced to a year in prison, community corrections, and probation. [55]

Florida and Michigan
During late 2007, the two parties adopted rules against states' moving their primaries to an earlier date in the year. For the Republicans, the penalty for this violation was supposed to be the loss of half the state party's delegates to the convention. The Democratic penalty was the complete exclusion from the national convention of delegates from states that broke these rules. The Democratic Party allowed only four states to hold elections before February 5, 2008. Initially, the Democratic leadership said it would strip all delegates from Florida and Michigan , which had moved their primaries into January. In addition, all major Democratic candidates agreed officially not to campaign in Florida or Michigan, and Edwards and Obama removed their names from the Michigan ballot. Clinton won a majority of delegates and popular votes from both states (though 40% voted uncommitted in Michigan) and subsequently led a fight to seat all the Florida and Michigan delegates. [56]
Political columnist Christopher Weber noted that while her action was self-serving, it was also "pragmatic to forestall" Florida or Michigan voters becoming so disaffected they did not vote for Democrats in the general election. [57] There was some speculation that the fight over the delegates could last until the convention in August. On May 31, 2008, the Rules and Bylaws Committee of the Democratic Party reached a compromise on the Florida and Michigan delegate situation. The committee decided to seat delegate from Michigan and Florida at the convention in August, but to only award each a half-vote. [58]

Clinching the nomination
The major political party nomination process (technically) continues through June of an election year. In previous cycles, the candidates were effectively chosen by the end of the primaries held in March, but, in this cycle, however, Barack Obama did not win enough delegates to secure the nomination until June 3, after a 17-month campaign against Hillary Clinton. He had a wide lead in states won, while Clinton had won majorities in several of the larger states. Now, because a form of proportional representation and popular vote decided Democratic state delegate contests, numbers were close between Clinton and Obama. [60] By May, Clinton claimed to hold a lead in the popular vote, but the Associated Press found that her numbers were "accurate only" in one close scenario. [61]
In June, after the last of the primaries had taken place, Obama secured the Democratic nomination for President, with the help of multiple super delegate endorsements (most of the super delegates had refused to declare their support for either candidate until the primaries were completed). [62] He was the first African American to win the nomination of a major political party in the United States. [63] For several days, Clinton refused to concede the race, although she signaled her presidential campaign was ending in a post-primary speech on June 3 in her home state of New York. [64] She finally conceded the nomination to Obama on June 7. She pledged her full support to the presumptive nominee and vowed to do everything she could to help him get elected. [65]

Republican Party nomination
Not only was the 2008 election the first time since 1952 that neither the incumbent president nor the incumbent vice president was a candidate in the general election, but it was also the first time since the 1928 election that neither sought his party's nomination for president; as Bush was term-limited from seeking another nomination, the unique aspect was Vice President Cheney's decision not to seek the Republican nomination. [66] [67] This left the Republican field just as open to a wide field of new candidates as the Democratic field.

Candidate

Withdrawn candidates

Before the primaries
Immediately after the 2006 midterm elections, media pundits began speculating, as they did about the Democrats, about potential Republican candidates for President in 2008. [14] In November 2006, Former New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani led in the polls, followed closely by Arizona Senator John McCain . [68] The media speculated that Giuliani's pro-choice stance on abortion and McCain's age and support of the unpopular Iraq War would be detriments to their candidacies. [14] Giuliani remained the frontrunner in the polls throughout most of 2007, with McCain and former Tennessee Senator Fred Thompson fighting for second place. [69] Arkansas Governor Mike Huckabee , Giuliani, Former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney , and Texas Representative Ron Paul announced their candidacies on January 28, February 5, February 13, and March 12, respectively. [70] [71] [72] [73] McCain officially announced his candidacy on March 1, 2007, after several informal announcements. [74] In the third quarter of 2007, the top four GOP (Republican) fundraisers were Romney, Giuliani, Thompson, and Ron Paul . [75] MSNBC's Chuck Todd christened Giuliani and John McCain the front runners after the second Republican presidential debate in early 2007. [76]

Early primaries/caucuses
Huckabee, winner of Iowa, had little to no money and hoped for at least a third-place finish in New Hampshire. McCain eventually displaced Rudy Giuliani and Romney as the front runner in New Hampshire . McCain staged a turnaround victory, [77] having been written off by the pundits and polling in single digits less than a month before the race. [78]
With the Republicans stripping Michigan and Florida of half their delegates for moving their primaries into January 2008 against party rules, the race for the nomination was based there. McCain meanwhile managed a small victory over Huckabee in South Carolina , [79] setting him up for a larger and more important victory over Romney in Florida , which held a closed primary on January 29. [80] By this time, after several scandals, no success in the early primaries, and a third-place finish in Florida, Giuliani conceded from the nomination race and endorsed John McCain the next day. [81]

Super Tuesday
McCain was also endorsed in February by California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger before the California primary took place on Super Tuesday. This gave him a significant boost in the polls for the state's primary, [82] which awarded the greatest number of delegates of all the states. On Super Tuesday, McCain won his home state of Arizona, taking all 53 delegates. He also won nearly all of California's 173 delegates, the largest of the Super Tuesday prizes. McCain also scored wins in seven other states, picking up 574 delegates. [83] Huckabee was the "surprise performer", winning 5 states and 218 delegates. [83] Romney won 7 states and 231 delegates. [83] Two days later, Romney suspended his presidential campaign, saying that if he stayed in the race, he would "forestall the launch of a national campaign and be making it easier for Senator Clinton or Obama to win". [84] His departure left Huckabee and Paul as McCain's only major challengers in the remaining primaries and caucuses. Romney endorsed McCain on February 14. [85]
Louisiana, the District of Columbia , Kansas , Wisconsin , and Washington held primaries in February after Super Tuesday. Despite McCain picking up big victories, Huckabee won Louisiana and Kansas. McCain narrowly carried the Washington caucuses over Huckabee and Paul, who amassed a large showing. [39] The Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico closed February for the Republicans. After Super Tuesday, John McCain had become the clear front runner, but by the end of February, he still had not acquired enough delegates to secure the nomination. In March, John McCain clinched the Republican nomination after sweeping all four primaries, Texas , Ohio , Vermont , and Rhode Island , putting him over the top of the 1,191 delegates required to win the GOP nomination. [42] Mike Huckabee then conceded the race to McCain, leaving Ron Paul, who had just 16 delegates, as his only remaining opponent. [86]

Other nominations
Along with the Democratic and Republican parties, three other parties nominated candidates with ballot access in enough states to win the minimum 270 electoral votes needed to win the election. These were the Constitution Party , the Green Party , and the Libertarian Party . In addition, independent candidate Ralph Nader ran his own campaign.
The Constitution Party nominated writer, pastor, and conservative talk show host Chuck Baldwin for President, and attorney Darrell Castle from Tennessee for Vice President. [87] [88] While campaigning, Baldwin voiced his opposition to the Iraq war , the Sixteenth Amendment , Roe v. Wade , the IRS , and the Federal Reserve . [89]
The Green Party nominated former Democratic Representative Cynthia McKinney from Georgia for President, and political activist Rosa Clemente from New York for Vice President. McKinney campaigned on a platform that supported single-payer universal health care , the withdrawal of American troops from Iraq and Afghanistan, reparations for African Americans, and the creation of a Department of Peace. [90]
The Libertarian Party nominated former Republican Representative Bob Barr from Georgia for President, and his former rival for the Libertarian nomination Wayne Allyn Root from Nevada, for Vice President. During the 2008 presidential campaign, Barr advocated a reworking or abolition of the income tax [91] and opposed the war in Iraq [92] and the Patriot Act . [93]

Candidates gallery

Party conventions

General election campaign
An issue in the election was Obama's possible, [94] [95] [96] and then actual, [97] [98] nomination by the Democratic Party. On August 28, 2008, when Obama formally accepted the Democratic nomination for President, he became the first African American to be nominated for President by a major political party. [97] The television audiences for both McCain's and Obama's acceptance speeches broke records, according to Nielsen ratings . [99]

Issues

Iraq
The unpopular war in Iraq was a key issue during the campaign before the economic crisis . John McCain supported the war while Barack Obama opposed it (Obama's early and strong opposition to the war helped him stand out against the other Democratic candidates during the primaries, as well as stand out to a war-weary electorate during the general campaign). Though McCain meant it as a peacetime presence like the United States maintained in Germany and Japan after World War II , [100] his statement that the United States could be in Iraq for as much as the next 50 to 100 years would prove costly. Obama used it against him as part of his strategy to tie him to the unpopular President Bush.
John McCain's support for the troop 'surge' employed by General David Petraeus , which was one of several factors credited with improving the security situation in Iraq, may have boosted McCain's stance on the issue in voters' minds. McCain (who supported the invasion) argued that his support for the successful surge showed his superior judgment. However, Obama was quick to remind voters that there would have been no need for a "surge" had there been no war at all, thus questioning McCain's judgment.

Bush's unpopularity
George W. Bush had become increasingly unpopular by 2006. Polls consistently showed that his approval ratings among American voters had averaged around 30 percent. [10] [101] [102] In March 2008, Bush endorsed McCain at the White House, [103] but Bush did not make a single appearance for McCain during the campaign. Bush appeared at the 2008 GOP convention only through a live video broadcast. He chose not to appear in person due to disaster events in the Gulf of Mexico in the aftermath of Hurricane Gustav . Although he supported the war in Iraq, McCain made an effort to show that he had disagreed with Bush on many other key issues such as climate change. During the entire general election campaign, Obama countered by pointing out in ads and at numerous campaign rallies that McCain had claimed in an interview that he voted with Bush 90% of the time, and congressional voting records supported this for the years Bush was in office. [104]

Change vs. experience
Before the Democratic primaries began, the dichotomy of change versus experience had already become a common theme in the presidential campaign, with Senator Hillary Clinton positioning herself as the candidate with experience and Obama embracing the characterization as the candidate most able to bring change to Washington. Before the official launch of her campaign , aides for Clinton were already planning to position her as the 'change' candidate, as strategist Mark Penn made clear in an October 2006 memo titled "The Plan." [105] In his presidential run announcement, Obama framed his candidacy by emphasizing that "Washington must change." [106] In response to this, Clinton adopted her experience as a major campaign theme. [107] By early and mid-2007, polls regularly found voters identifying Clinton as the more experienced candidate and Obama as the "fresh" or "new" candidate. [108] [109] Exit polls on Super Tuesday found that Obama won voters who thought that the ability to bring change was the most important quality in a candidate, who made up a majority of the Democratic electorate. By a margin of about 2-1, Clinton was able to make up for this deficiency by an almost total domination among voters who thought experience was the most important quality. [110] These margins generally remained the same until Obama clinched the Democratic nomination on June 3.
Similar to Senator Bob Dole 's 1996 presidential campaign, one of the more widely leveled charges against McCain was the issue of his age—he turned 72 in August and there was widespread concern about the idea of electing a man who would be 80 years old if he completed two full terms in office (the oldest president, Ronald Reagan , had been a month shy of 78 when he left office in January 1989). In addition, McCain suffered from the ill effects of his captivity in North Vietnam and reportedly had difficulty lifting his arms above his head. His age in particular was considered a liability against the youthful Senator Obama, who was the first Generation Xer to run for president on a major party ticket. McCain for comparison was born before World War II and belonged to the generation preceding the baby boomers. Much like Bob Dole, McCain attempted to counter these charges by releasing all of his medical records, something Obama did not do. McCain's wife Cindy dismissed concerns about his health by arguing that "We went hiking the Grand Canyon last summer and [John] did great and had no trouble keeping up with us." McCain also appeared at several campaign stops with his still-active 95-year-old mother. In a speech on the House floor, Pennsylvania Congressman John Murtha criticized McCain's age by saying "Seven presidents have come and gone since I've been in Congress, and I saw the toll the job took on each one of them." If elected, McCain would have been the first, and only, President born in the decade of the 1930s.
Like the Clinton campaign in 1996, Obama avoided discussing McCain's age directly, instead preferring to simply call his ideas and message "old" and "old hat". He also made a strong appeal to youth voters and back during his primary contest with Hillary Clinton, had stated "When I watched the feud between the Clintons and [Newt Gingrich] unfold during the 1990s, I was reminded of old quarrels started on college campuses long ago. It's time for a new generation to take over." Obama's active use of a Blackberry and other modern technology also stood in contrast to the Arizona Senator's admission that he did not use a computer or a cell phone. McCain's service in Vietnam, while marketable to baby boomers, was referred to as "unimportant" to younger voters.
Obama promised "universal health care, full employment, a green America, and an America respected instead of feared by its enemies". [111]
He used new media to "form a bond with his supporters" which helped him "appeal to the youth audience's need to feel special, in-the-know, empowered and special". This was best displayed in his text message announcement of Joe Biden as the vice-presidential candidate. [112] He has also declared, in his book The Audacity of Hope , that he did not experience a religious upbringing. Rather he developed his faith due to the church's ability to motivate social change. [113] Bowdern wrote, "This is best exemplified in his "50 state strategy", meaning that he campaigned in states that historically would never vote for a Democrat. The 2008 presidential election saw a large youth turn out, up to 51%." [114]
John McCain quickly adopted similar campaign themes against Obama at the start of the general election campaign. Polls regularly found the general electorate as a whole divided more evenly between 'change' and 'experience' as candidate qualities than the Democratic primary electorate, which split in favor of 'change' by a nearly 2-1 margin. [115] Advantages for McCain and Obama on experience and the ability to bring change, respectively, remained steady through the November 4 election. However, final pre-election polling found that voters considered Obama's inexperience less of an impediment than McCain's association with sitting President George W. Bush, [116] an association which was rhetorically framed by the Obama campaign throughout the election season as "more of the same".
McCain appeared to undercut his line of attack by picking first-term Alaska governor Sarah Palin to be his running mate. [117] Palin had been governor only since 2006, and before that had been a council member and mayor of Wasilla . The choice of Palin was controversial, however it appeared to solve two pressing concerns—McCain's age and health since a youthful vice president would succeed him to office if he died or became incapacitated, and appealing to right-wing conservatives, a group that had been comparatively unmoved by McCain. Palin also came off as more down-to-earth and relatable to average Americans than McCain, widely tarbrushed as a "Beltway insider". [118] However, media interviews suggested that Palin lacked knowledge on certain key issues, and they cast doubt among many voters about her qualifications to be Vice President or President. In this regard, her inexperience was also a liability when McCain's age and health were factored in—there was a higher-than-normal probability of Palin succeeding to the presidency and many moderates and independents chafed at this idea. "One 72 year old heartbeat away from the presidency" became a popular anti-GOP slogan. Late night TV host David Letterman jokingly referred to Palin as resembling "a slutty flight attendant" and even Obama himself on a September 9 speech referred to the Alaska governor as "the equivalent of putting lipstick on a pig". She also came under attack on everything from her 17-year-old daughter giving birth to a child out of wedlock to actively participating in hunting moose and other animals. [119] Because of Palin's conservative views, there was also concern that she would alienate independents and moderates, two groups that pundits observed McCain would need to win the election. [120]

Economy
Polls taken in the last few months of the presidential campaign and exit polls conducted on Election Day showed the economy as the top concern for voters. [121] [122] In the fall of 2008, many news sources were reporting that the economy was suffering its most serious downturn since the Great Depression . [123] During this period, John McCain's election prospects fell with several politically costly comments about the economy.
On August 20, John McCain said in an interview with Politico that he was uncertain how many houses he and his wife, Cindy, owned; "I think—I'll have my staff get to you," he told the media outlet. [124] Both on the stump and in Obama's political ad, "Seven", the gaffe was used to portray McCain as somebody unable to relate to the concerns of ordinary Americans. This out-of-touch image was further cultivated when, on September 15, the day of the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy , at a morning rally in Jacksonville, Florida , McCain declared that "the fundamentals of our economy are strong," despite what he described as "tremendous turmoil in our financial markets and Wall Street." [125] With the perception among voters to the contrary, the comment appeared to cost McCain politically.
On September 24, 2008, after the onset of the 2008 global financial crisis , McCain announced that he was suspending his campaign to return to Washington so he could help craft a $700 billion bailout package for the troubled financial industry, and he stated that he would not debate Obama until Congress passed the bailout bill. [126] Despite this decision, McCain was portrayed as somebody not playing a significant role in the negotiations for the first version of the bill, which fell short of passage in the House. He eventually decided to attend the first presidential debate on September 26, despite Congress' lack of immediate action on the bill. His ineffectiveness in the negotiations and his reversal in decision to attend the debates were seized upon to portray McCain as erratic in his response to the economy. Days later, a second version of the original bailout bill was passed by both the House and Senate, with Obama, his vice presidential running mate Joe Biden , and McCain all voting for the measure (Hillary Clinton would as well). [127]
All the aforementioned remarks and campaign issues hurt McCain's standing with voters. All these also occurred after the economic crisis and after McCain's poll numbers had started to fall. Although sound bites of all of these "missteps" were played repeatedly on national television, many pundits and analysts say that the actual financial crisis and economic conditions caused McCain's large drop in support in mid-September and severely damaged his campaign. [128] [129]

Health care
John McCain 's proposals focused on open-market competition rather than government funding or control. At the heart of his plan were tax credits – $2,500 for individuals and $5,000 for families who do not subscribe to or do not have access to health care through their employer. To help people who are denied coverage by insurance companies due to pre-existing conditions, McCain proposed working with states to create what he calls a "Guaranteed Access Plan". [130]
Barack Obama called for universal health care . His health care plan proposed creating a National Health Insurance Exchange that would include both private insurance plans and a Medicare-like government run option. Coverage would be guaranteed regardless of health status, and premiums would not vary based on health status either. It would have required parents to cover their children, but did not require adults to buy insurance.
The Philadelphia Inquirer reported that the two plans had different philosophical focuses. They described the purpose of the McCain plan as to "make insurance more affordable," while the purpose of the Obama plan was for "more people to have health insurance." [131] The Des Moines Register characterized the plans similarly. [132] The Commonwealth Fund concluded that, compared with McCain's approach, Obama's plan could provide more people with affordable health insurance that covers essential services, achieve greater equity in access to care, realize efficiencies and cost savings in the provision of coverage and delivery of care, and redirect incentives to improve quality. [133]
Critics of McCain's plan argued that it would not significantly reduce the number of uninsured Americans, would increase costs, reduce consumer protections and lead to less generous benefit packages. [134] Critics of Obama's plan argued that it would increase federal regulation of private health insurance without addressing the underlying incentives behind rising health care spending. [135] [136] Mark Pauly suggested that a combination of the two approaches would work better than either one alone. [137]
Various analyses of the two candidates' plans came to widely varying predictions of their costs and effects. A comparison by The Tax Policy Center, a project of the Brookings Institution and the Urban Institute estimated that Obama's proposals could cost $1.6 trillion over 10 years, while the tax-related provisions of McCain's proposals could cost $1.3 trillion over the same period. A comparison by The Lewin Group, a subsidiary of UnitedHealth Group , published in October 2008, found that the McCain plan would reduce the number of uninsured by 21.1 million and cost $2.05 trillion over 10 years, while the Obama plan would reduce the uninsured by 26.6 million and increase federal spending by $1.17 trillion over the same period. [138] Estimates prepared by HSI Networks found that the McCain plan would reduce the uninsured by 27.5 million at an annual cost of $287 billion, [139] and the Obama plan would reduce the uninsured by 25.5 million at an annual cost of $452 billion. [140]
A poll released in early November 2008 found that voters supporting Obama listed health care as their second priority; voters supporting McCain listed it as fourth, tied with the war in Iraq. Affordability was the primary health care priority among both sets of voters. Obama voters were more likely than McCain voters to believe government can do much about health care costs. [141]

Race
In an October 17–20, 2008 NBC News / Wall Street Journal poll of registered voters, 2% said race made them more likely to vote for Barack Obama, 4% said it made them less likely to do so, and 2% were not sure. The other 92% of respondents said race was not a major factor in their vote (margin of error was ±2.9%). [142]
A July 18–21, 2008 NBC News/ Wall Street Journal poll showed that 20% of African American registered voters and 8% of white registered voters considered race the single most important factor when voting (margin of error was ±3.1%). This percentage increased in both groups from previous polls. [143]
A June 6–9, 2008 NBC News/ Wall Street Journal poll showed that 17% were enthusiastic about Obama being the first African American president, 70% were comfortable or indifferent, and 13% had reservations or were uncomfortable (margin of error was ±3.1%). [144]
Obama generally avoided racial issues in his campaign. He would often place white people behind him when in a hall speaking to a large black group in order to avoid racial imagery. [145] On June 11, 2008, Fox News Channel used the phrase "Outraged liberals: Stop picking on Obama's baby mama " in an on screen graphic in a discussion as to whether U.S. presidential candidate Barack Obama 's wife, Michelle , was being unfairly criticized. A senior vice president of programming at Fox said in a statement that a producer "exercised poor judgment" during the segment. [146] There were also attempts to interpret a fist tap as either a racial move, or a "terrorist fist jab". [147]

Debates
The Commission on Presidential Debates announced four debates: [148]
Another debate was sponsored by the Columbia University political union and took place there on October 19. All candidates who could theoretically win the 270 electoral votes needed to win the election were invited, and Ralph Nader , Cynthia McKinney , and Chuck Baldwin agreed to attend. Amy Goodman , principal host of Democracy Now! , moderated. It was broadcast on cable by C-SPAN and on the Internet by Break-the-Matrix. [152]

Campaign costs
The reported cost of campaigning for president has increased significantly in recent years. One source reported that if the costs for both Democratic and Republican campaigns were added together (for the presidential primary election, general election, and the political conventions), the costs have more than doubled in only eight years ($448.9 million in 1996, $649.5 million in 2000, and $1.01 billion in 2004). [153] In January 2007, Federal Election Commission Chairman Michael E. Toner estimated that the 2008 race would be a $1 billion election, and that to be taken seriously, a candidate would have needed to raise at least $100 million by the end of 2007. [154]
Although he had said he would not be running for president, published reports in 2007 indicated that billionaire and New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg had been considering a presidential bid as an independent with up to $1 billion of his own fortune to finance it. [155] Bloomberg ultimately ended this speculation by unequivocally stating that he would not run. [156]
With the increase in money expenditures, many candidates did not use the public financing system funded by the presidential election campaign fund checkoff . John McCain, [157] Tom Tancredo, [158] John Edwards, [159] Chris Dodd, [160] and Joe Biden [161] qualified for and elected to take public funds throughout the primary process. Major Democratic candidates Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama chose not to participate in the public financing system. [162]

Expense summary
According to required campaign filings as reported by the Federal Election Commission (FEC), 148 candidates for all parties collectively raised $1,644,712,232 and spent $1,601,104,696 for the primary and general campaigns combined through November 24, 2008. The amounts raised and spent by the major candidates, according to the same source, were as follows:

Notable expressions and phrases

Internet campaigns

Fundraising
Howard Dean collected large contributions through the Internet in his 2004 primary run. In 2008, candidates went even further to reach out to Internet users through their own sites and such sites as YouTube , MySpace , and Facebook . [165] [166]
On December 16, 2007, Ron Paul collected $6 million , more money on a single day through Internet donations than any presidential candidate in US history. [167] [168] [169]

Promotion
Not only did the Internet allow candidates to raise money, but also it gave them a tool to appeal to newer and younger demographics. Political pundits were now evaluating candidates based on their social media following. Senator Barack Obama's victory is credited to his competitive edge in social media and Internet following. Obama had over 2 million American supporters on Facebook and 100,000 followers on Twitter , while McCain attracted only 600,000 Facebook supporters (likes) and 4,600 followers on Twitter. Obama's YouTube channel held 115,000 subscribers and more than 97 million video views. Obama had maintained a similar advantage over Senator Hillary Clinton in the Democratic Primary. [170]
Obama's edge in social media was crucial to the election outcome. According to a study by the Pew Internet and American Life project, 35 percent of Americans relied on online video for election news. Ten percent of Americans used social networking sites to learn about the election. [171] The 2008 election showed huge increases in Internet use.
Another study done after the election gave a lot of insight on young voters. Thirty-seven percent of Americans ages 18–24 got election news from social networking sites. Almost a quarter of Americans saw something about the election in an online video. [172] YouTube and other online video outlets allowed candidates to advertise in ways like never before. The Republican Party in particular was criticized for not adequately using social media and other means to reach young voters.
Social media allowed voters to share their voting experience. On November 4, 2008 at 10:30 p.m., 4.9 million Facebook users had already posted an announcement that they had voted, simply by checking a box on the site. Various websites allowed voters to share concerns over voting malfunctions, ballot shortages and other problems. Social media and the Internet provided a new and interactive voting experience. [173]
Democratic Party candidate Barack Obama created a broad popular movement and a new method of campaigning by courting and mobilizing activists, donations, and voters through the Internet. It was part of a campaign that mobilized grassroots workers in every state. Obama also set fundraising records in more than one month by gaining support from a record-breaking number of individual small donors. [174]
Anonymous and semi-anonymous smear campaigns , traditionally done with fliers and push calling , also spread to the Internet. [175] Organizations specializing in the production and distribution of viral material, such as Brave New Films , emerged; such organizations have been said to be having a growing influence on American politics. [176]

News
YouTube was considered to be a valuable asset for free advertising. Joe Trippi, the manager of Howard Dean's presidential campaign, claimed that Obama's YouTube campaign material was watched for 14.5 million hours, a viewing that would have cost $47 million for broadcast television. [172] YouTube and other online video outlets allowed candidates to advertise in ways like never before.
The percentage of Americans who regularly rely on the Internet for campaign news almost doubled (13 to 24 percent) from 2004 to 2008, according to a 2008 study from the Pew Research Center. Americans who relied on traditional news sources rate was either stagnant or declining. [177]
A 2011 study by Ad Age magazine shows that 39 percent of voting-age social media users repost and share political messages. The study also recorded 1/3 of Facebook friends opening video or article links. The 2008 election was a catalyst for Internet use in American politics. Jay Samit, a writer at Ad Age magazine, predicted the 2012 election to be "the most participatory election in our nation's history" because of social media. [178]

Controversies

Voter suppression
Some pre-election controversies in the election revolved around challenges to voter registration lists, involving techniques such as caging lists alleged to constitute voter suppression .
Allegations of voter list purges using unlawful criteria caused controversy in at least six swing states : Colorado , Indiana , Ohio , Michigan , Nevada and North Carolina . [179] On October 5, 2008 the Republican Lt. Governor of Montana, John Bohlinger , accused the Montana Republican Party of vote caging to purge 6,000 voters from three counties which trend Democratic. [180] Allegations arose in Michigan that the Republican Party planned to challenge the eligibility of voters based on lists of foreclosed homes. [181] The campaign of Democratic presidential nominee Barack Obama filed a lawsuit challenging this. The House Judiciary Committee wrote to the Department of Justice requesting an investigation. [182]
Virginia election authorities were ordered by a federal judge to preserve late-arriving absentee ballots sent by active-duty military personnel following a suit by the McCain campaign. It alleged that the state sent absentee ballots late to service members. [183] According to federal law, absentee ballots must be mailed to troops in foreign countries at least 45 days before an election. The charge against Virginia was that the ballots were not printed until after the deadline and therefore were mailed late to soldiers abroad. [184]
Guam 's 173,000 residents are U.S. citizens, and must obey U.S. laws passed in Washington, yet they have neither a voting member of Congress, nor votes in the Electoral College. [185] Since 1980, they have held a straw poll for president at the same time as the U.S. national elections. In 2007, Guam's legislature voted to move the straw poll up to September to draw attention to the choices of Guam's population and their continued disfranchisement, [185] but the governor vetoed the bill. [186] Obama won the 2008 Guam straw poll with 20,120 votes to McCain's 11,940. [187]
Libertarian candidate Bob Barr filed a lawsuit in Texas to have Obama and McCain removed from the ballot in that state. [188] His campaign alleged that both the candidates had missed the August 26 deadline to file, and were present on the ballot contrary to Texas election law. Neither Obama, or McCain at the time of the deadline had been confirmed as the candidate for their respective parties. The Texas Supreme Court dismissed the lawsuit without explanation. [189]
In Ohio , identified by both parties as a key state, allegations surfaced from both Republicans and Democrats that individuals from out of state were moving to the state temporarily and attempting to vote despite not meeting the state's requirement of permanent residency for more than 29 days. The Franklin County Board of Elections referred 55 cases of possible voting irregularities to the local prosecutor. [190] Three groups attracted particular notice: 'Vote from Home,' 'Vote Today Ohio,' and 'Drop Everything and Come to Ohio.' Vote from Home attracted the most attention when thirteen of the group's members moved to the same location in eastern Columbus. Members of the group organized by Marc Gustafson, including several Marshall and Rhodes scholars studying at Oxford University , settled with Franklin County Prosecutor Ron O'Brien to have their challenged ballots withdrawn. [191] [192] The Obama campaign and others alleged that members of the McCain campaign had also voted without properly establishing residency. [190] Since 1953, only six people in Ohio have gone to prison for illegal voting. [193]

Media bias
Republicans and independents leveled significant criticism at media outlets' coverage of the presidential election season. An October 22, 2008 Pew Research Center poll estimated 70% of registered voters believed journalists wanted Barack Obama to win the election, as opposed to 9% for John McCain. [194] Another Pew survey, conducted after the election, found that 67% of voters thought that the press fairly covered Obama, versus 30% who viewed the coverage as unfair. Regarding McCain, 53% of voters viewed his press coverage as fair versus 44% who characterized it as unfair. Among affiliated Democrats, 83% believed the press fairly covered Obama; just 22% of Republicans thought the press was fair to McCain. [195]
At the February debate, Tim Russert of NBC News was criticized for what some perceived as disproportionately tough questioning of Democratic presidential contender Hillary Clinton . [196] Among the questions, Russert had asked Clinton, but not Obama, to provide the name of the new Russian President ( Dmitry Medvedev ). [196] This was later parodied on Saturday Night Live . In October 2007, liberal commentators accused Russert of harassing Clinton over the issue of supporting drivers' licenses for illegal immigrants . [197]
On April 16, ABC News hosted a debate in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania . Moderators Charles Gibson and George Stephanopoulos were criticized by viewers, bloggers and media critics for the poor quality of their questions. [196] [197] Many viewers said they considered some of the questions irrelevant when measured against the importance of the faltering economy or the Iraq war . Included in that category were continued questions about Obama's former pastor, Senator Hillary Clinton's assertion that she had to duck sniper fire in Bosnia more than a decade ago, and Senator Obama's not wearing an American flag pin. [196] The moderators focused on campaign gaffes and some believed they focused too much on Obama. [197] Stephanopoulos defended their performance, saying "Senator Obama was the front-runner" and the questions were "not inappropriate or irrelevant at all." [196] [197]
In an op-ed published on April 27, 2008 in The New York Times , Elizabeth Edwards wrote that the media covered much more of "the rancor of the campaign" and "amount of money spent" than "the candidates' priorities, policies and principles." [198] Author Erica Jong commented that "our press has become a sea of triviality, meanness and irrelevant chatter." [199] A Gallup poll released on May 29, 2008 also estimated that more Americans felt the media was being harder on Hillary Clinton than they were towards Barack Obama. Time Magazine columnist Mark Halperin stated that the media during the 2008 election had a "blind, almost slavish" worship of Obama. [200]
The Project for Excellence in Journalism and Harvard University 's Joan Shorenstein Center on the Press, Politics and Public Policy conducted a study of 5,374 media narratives and assertions about the presidential candidates from January 1 through March 9, 2008. The study found that Obama received 69% favorable coverage and Clinton received 67%, compared to only 43% favorable media coverage of McCain. [201] Another study by the Center for Media and Public Affairs at George Mason University found the media coverage of Obama to be 72% negative from June 8 to July 21 compared to 57% negative for McCain. [202] An October 29 study found 29% of stories about Obama to be negative, compared to 57% of stories about McCain being negative. [203]

Conduct
Election Day was on November 4, 2008. The majority of states allowed early voting, with all states allowing some form of absentee voting. [204] Voters cast votes for listed presidential candidates but were actually selecting representatives for their state's Electoral College slate.
A McCain victory quickly became improbable as Obama amassed early wins in his home state of Illinois , the Northeast , and the critical battleground states of Ohio (which no Republican has ever been elected President without winning) and Pennsylvania by 9:30 PM Eastern Standard Time. [205] Obama won the entire Northeast by comfortable margins and the Great Lakes states of Michigan , Wisconsin , and Minnesota by double digits. McCain held on to traditionally Republican states like North Dakota , South Dakota , Nebraska , Kansas , Oklahoma , Montana , Utah , Idaho , Wyoming , and his home state of Arizona . McCain, unlike Bush in 2000 and 2004, failed to win all the southern states: Obama won Florida , North Carolina , and Virginia . Obama also won the hotly contested states of Iowa and New Mexico , which Al Gore had won in 2000 and George W. Bush in 2004. Also, for only the second time since 1940 ( 1964 being the other), Indiana went Democratic, giving Obama all eight Great Lakes states, the first time a presidential candidate had won all of them since Richard Nixon in 1972 .
CNN and Fox News called Virginia for Obama shortly before 11:00 PM, leaving him only 50 electoral votes shy of victory with only six West Coast states ( California , Oregon , Washington , Idaho , Alaska , and Hawaii ) still voting. All American networks called the election in favor of Obama at 11:00 PM as the polls closed on the West Coast. Obama was immediately declared the winner in California, Oregon, Washington, and Hawaii, McCain won Idaho, and the Electoral College totals were updated to 297 for Obama and 146 for McCain (270 are needed to win). McCain gave a concession speech half an hour later in his hometown of Phoenix, Arizona . [206] Obama appeared just before midnight Eastern Time in Grant Park , Chicago , in front of a crowd of 250,000 people to deliver his victory speech . [207]
Following Obama's speech, spontaneous street parties broke out in cities across the United States including Philadelphia , Houston , Las Vegas , Miami , Chicago, Columbus , Detroit , Boston , Los Angeles , Portland , Washington, D.C. , San Francisco , Denver , Atlanta , Madison , and New York City [208] and around the world in London ; Bonn ; Berlin ; Obama, Japan ; Toronto ; Rio de Janeiro ; Sydney ; and Nairobi . [209]
Later on election night, after Obama was named the winner, he picked up several more wins in swing states in which the polls had shown a close race. These included Florida , Indiana , Virginia , and the western states of Colorado and Nevada . All of these states had been carried by Bush in 2004 . North Carolina and the bellwether state of Missouri remained undecided for several days. Eventually Obama was declared the winner in North Carolina and McCain in Missouri, with Obama pulling out a rare win in Nebraska's 2nd congressional district . This put the projected electoral vote count at 365 for Obama and 173 for McCain. Obama's victories in the populous swing states of Florida, Ohio, Pennsylvania, North Carolina, and Virginia contributed to his decisive win. The presidential electors cast their ballots for President and Vice President, and Congress tallied these votes on January 8, 2009. [210]

Turnout
The voter turnout for this election was broadly predicted to be high by American standards, [211] [212] and a record number of votes were cast. [213] The final tally of total votes counted was 131.3 million, compared to 122.3 million in 2004 (which also boasted the highest record since 1968 , the last presidential election before the voting age was lowered to 18). Expressed as a percentage of eligible voters, 131.2 million votes could reflect a turnout as high as 63.0% of eligible voters, which would be the highest since 1960 . [214] [215] This 63.0% turnout rate is based on an estimated eligible voter population of 208,323,000. [215] Another estimate puts the eligible voter population at 213,313,508, resulting in a turnout rate of 61.6%, which would be the highest turnout rate since 1968. [216]
Broken down by age group, voters under 35 voted for Obama by a large majority with McCain most popular among voters over 60. Voters between 35 and 59 were nearly split 50/50 between the two candidates.
American University 's Center for the Study of the American Electorate released a report on November 6, 2008, two days after the election, which concluded that the anticipated increase in turnout had failed to materialize. [214] That report was the basis for some news articles that indicated voter turnout failed to meet expectations. [217] [218] When the remaining votes were counted after the release of the report, the total number of votes cast in the presidential election was raised to 131.2 million, which surpassed the American University report's preliminary estimate of 126.5 to 128.5 million voters by a factor of between 2% and 4%.
The election saw increased participation from African Americans , who made up 11.1% of the electorate in 2004, versus 13.0% in 2008. [219] According to exit polls, over 95% of African Americans voted for Obama. This played a critical role in Southern states such as North Carolina. 74% of North Carolina's registered African American voters turned out, as opposed to 69% of North Carolinians in general, with Obama carrying 100% (with rounding) of African-American females and African Americans age 18 to 29, according to exit polling. [220] This was the case in Virginia as well where much higher turnout among African Americans propelled Obama to victory in the former Republican stronghold. [221] Even in southern states where Obama was unsuccessful, such as Georgia and Mississippi, due to large African American turnout he was much more competitive than John Kerry in 2004. [222] [223]

Ballot access
No other candidate had ballot access in enough states to win 270 electoral votes. All six candidates appeared on the ballot for a majority of the voters, while the 17 other listed candidates were available to no more than 30% of the voters. [225]
The following candidates (and/or parties) had ballot listing and/or write-in status in more than one state: [226]
The following candidates (parties) were listed on the ballot in only one state:
In Nevada, 6,267 votes were cast for "None Of These Candidates". [228] In the three states that officially keep track of "blank" votes for President, 103,193 votes were recorded as "blank". [229] More than 100,000 write-in votes were cast and recorded for a scattering of other candidates, including 62 votes for " Santa Claus " (in ten states) and 11 votes for " Mickey Mouse " (in five states). [230]
According to the Federal Election Commission, an unusually high number of "miscellaneous" write-ins were cast for president in 2008, including 112,597 tallied in the 17 states that record votes for non-listed candidates. [231] There were more presidential candidates on the ballot than at any other time in U. S. history, except for the 1992 election , which also had 23 candidates listed in at least one state.

Results
Popular vote totals are from the official Federal Election Commission report . The results of the electoral vote were certified by Congress on January 8, 2009. [210]

Results by state
The following table records the official vote tallies for each state for those presidential candidates who were listed on ballots in enough states to have a theoretical chance for a majority in the Electoral College. State popular vote results are from the official Federal Election Commission report . The column labeled "Margin" shows Obama's margin of victory over McCain (the margin is negative for states and districts won by McCain).
★ Maine and Nebraska each allow for their electoral votes to be split between candidates. In both states, two electoral votes are awarded to the winner of the statewide race and one electoral vote is awarded to the winner of each congressional district. The following table records the official presidential vote tallies for Maine and Nebraska's congressional districts. [232] [233]

Close states/districts
Red font color denotes states won by Republican John McCain; blue denotes those won by Democrat Barack Obama.
States/districts in which the margin of victory was under 1% (26 electoral votes):
States/districts in which the margin of victory was under 5% (62 electoral votes):
States/districts in which margin of victory was more than 5% but less than 10% (73 electoral votes):

International reaction
The American presidential election was followed closely internationally. [235] When it was clear that Obama was victorious, many world leaders sent congratulations and well wishes to the President-elect. [236]

Voter demographics
Source: Exit polls conducted by Edison Research of Somerville, New Jersey , for the National Election Pool, a consortium of ABC News, Associated Press, CBS News, CNN, Fox News, and NBC News. [237]

Analysis
Obama, having a Caucasian mother and Kenyan father of the Luo ethnic group , [238] became the first African American as well as the first bi-racial president. [239] Although he may have been the first black president to win an election, Obama was not the first African American to run for president. Shirley Chisolm, Jesse Jackson, Lenora Fulani, Carol Moseley Braun, Alan Keyes, and Al Sharpton all at some point were in the process for presidential nomination. [240] The Obama-Biden ticket was also the first winning ticket in American history on which neither candidate was a White Anglo-Saxon Protestant ; Biden is Roman Catholic and is the first Roman Catholic to be elected Vice President; all other tickets with Catholic vice presidential candidates had been defeated ( 1964 , 1972 , 1984 ). [241] Obama and Biden were the first President and Vice President elected from the Senate since 1960 ( John F. Kennedy / Lyndon B. Johnson ) (in the previous election cycle ( 2004 ) Democrats also nominated two sitting Senators, John Kerry of Massachusetts and John Edwards of North Carolina , but they lost to incumbents Bush and Cheney), Obama became the first Northern Democratic president since Kennedy, and the Obama-Biden ticket was the first winning Democratic ticket to feature two Northerners since 1940 ( Franklin D. Roosevelt / Henry A. Wallace ). Also, Obama became the first Democratic candidate to win a majority of the popular vote since Jimmy Carter in 1976 , the first to win a majority of both votes and states since Lyndon Johnson in 1964 , and the first Northern Democrat to win a majority of both votes and states since Franklin Roosevelt in 1944 . This was the first presidential election since 1952, where neither of the major party candidates was either the incumbent President or Vice-President.
Prior to the election, commentators discussed whether Senator Obama would be able to redraw the electoral map by winning states that had been voting for Republican candidates in recent decades. [242] In many ways, he was successful. He won every region of the country by double digits except the South, which John McCain won by nine percent. Obama won Delaware , the District of Columbia , Maryland , North Carolina , Florida , and Virginia in the South (region as defined by the US Census Bureau ). McCain won most of the Deep South, where white voters have supported Republican candidates by large margins in the last few decades. [243] Obama also defied political bellwethers, becoming the first person to win the presidency while losing Missouri since 1956 (as well as the first Democrat ever to do so) and while losing Kentucky and Tennessee since 1960 . He was the first Democrat to win without Arkansas since that state joined the Union in 1836 and the first Democrat to win the presidency without winning West Virginia since 1916 . Because one West Virginia elector voted for the Democrat in 1916, Obama was the first Democrat to win without any electors from the state since its founding in 1863. Indiana and Virginia voted for the Democratic nominee for the first time since 1964 . Although Obama did not win other normally Republican states such as Georgia and Montana (which were won by Bill Clinton in 1992 ), he nonetheless was competitive in both. He lost Montana by just under 3% and Georgia by slightly more than 5%. Also notably, Barack Obama won all of the 2004 swing states (states that either Kerry or Bush won by less than 5%) by a margin of 8.5 percent or more except for Ohio, which the Democrat carried by 4.5 percent.
Obama was the first presidential candidate to split the electoral votes from Nebraska . Together with Maine , which would not split its votes until 2016 , Nebraska is one of two states that split their electoral votes, two going to the statewide popular vote winner and the rest going to the winner of each respective congressional district (Nebraska has three, and Maine has two). Obama won the electoral vote from Nebraska's 2nd congressional district , which contains the city of Omaha . Nebraska's other four electoral votes went to John McCain.
As of 2016, this election is the last time that Indiana and North Carolina voted Democratic.
This election exhibited the continuation of some of the polarization trends evident in the 2000 and 2004 elections. [244] McCain won whites 55–43 percent, while Obama won blacks 95–4 percent, [245] Hispanics 67–31 percent, and Asians 62–35 percent. Voters aged 18–29 voted for Obama by 66–32 percent while elderly voters backed McCain 53–45 percent. [246] The 25-year age gap between McCain and Obama was the widest in U.S. presidential election history among the top two candidates. [247]

See also

Opinion polling

Notes
WebPage index: 00092
Austria
Coordinates : 47°20′N 13°20′E ﻿ / ﻿ 47.333°N 13.333°E ﻿ / 47.333; 13.333
Austria ( i / ˈ ɒ s t r i ə , ˈ ɔː - / ; [7] [8] German: Österreich [ˈøːstɐˌʁaɪç] ( listen ) ), officially the Republic of Austria (German: Republik Österreich , listen ( help · info ) ), is a federal republic and a landlocked country of over 8.7 million people [2] in Central Europe . It is bordered by the Czech Republic and Germany to the north, Hungary and Slovakia to the east, Slovenia and Italy to the south, and Switzerland and Liechtenstein to the west. The territory of Austria covers 83,879 km 2 (32,386 sq mi). The terrain is highly mountainous, lying within the Alps ; only 32% of the country is below 500 m (1,640 ft), and its highest point is 3,798 m (12,461 ft). [9] The majority of the population speaks local Bavarian dialects of German as their native language, [10] and Austrian German in its standard form is the country's official language . [11] Other local official languages are Hungarian , Burgenland Croatian , and Slovene . [9]
The origins of modern-day Austria date back to the time of the Habsburg dynasty , when the vast majority of the country was a part of the Holy Roman Empire . From the time of the Reformation , many northern German princes, resenting the authority of the Emperor, used Protestantism as a flag of rebellion. The Thirty Years War , the influence of the Kingdom of Sweden and Kingdom of France , the rise of the Kingdom of Prussia , and the Napoleonic invasions all weakened the power of the Emperor in the north of Germany, but in the south, and in non-German areas of the Empire, the Emperor and Catholicism maintained control. During the 17th and 18th centuries, Austria retained its position as one of the great powers of Europe [12] [13] and, in response to the coronation of Napoleon as the Emperor of the French , the Austrian Empire was officially proclaimed in 1804. Following Napoleon's defeat, Prussia emerged as Austria's chief competitor for rule of a greater Germany. Austria's defeat by Prussia at the Battle of Königgrätz , during the Austro-Prussian War of 1866, cleared the way for Prussia to assert control over the rest of Germany. In 1867, the empire was reformed into Austria-Hungary . After the defeat of France in the 1870-1 Franco-Prussian War , Austria was excluded from the new German Empire , although in the following decades, its politics, and its foreign policy, increasingly converged with those of the Prussian-led Empire. During the 1914 July Crisis that followed the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria on June 28, Austria-Hungary, emboldened by a pledge of German support, on July 28 declared war on Serbia because that country had not fully complied with an Austrian ultimatum . Austria was thus the first to go to war in the July Crisis, which would ultimately escalate into World War I .
After the collapse of the Habsburg (Austro-Hungarian) Empire in 1918 at the end of World War I, Austria adopted and used the name the Republic of German-Austria ( Deutschösterreich ), later changed to Österreich , in an attempt at union with Germany , but this was forbidden under the Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1919) . The First Austrian Republic was established in 1919. In 1938 Nazi Germany annexed Austria in the Anschluss . [14] This lasted until the end of World War II in 1945, after which Germany was occupied by the Allies and Austria's former democratic constitution was restored. In 1955, the Austrian State Treaty re-established Austria as a sovereign state, ending the occupation. In the same year, the Austrian Parliament created the Declaration of Neutrality which declared that the Second Austrian Republic would become permanently neutral .
Today, Austria is a parliamentary representative democracy comprising nine federal states . [9] [15] The capital and largest city, with a population exceeding 1.7 million, is Vienna . [9] [16] Other major urban areas of Austria include Graz , Linz , Salzburg and Innsbruck . Austria is one of the richest countries in the world , with a nominal per capita GDP of $43,724 [ when? ] . The country has developed a high standard of living and in 2014 was ranked 21st in the world for its Human Development Index . Austria has been a member of the United Nations since 1955, [17] joined the European Union in 1995, [9] and is a founder of the OECD . [18] Austria also signed the Schengen Agreement in 1995, [19] and adopted the euro currency in 1999.

Etymology
The German name for Austria, Österreich , meant "eastern realm" in Old High German , and is cognate with the word Ostarrîchi , which first appears in the "Ostarrîchi document" of 996. [20] This word is probably a translation of Medieval Latin Marchia orientalis into a local (Bavarian) dialect. Austria was a prefecture of Bavaria created in 976. The word "Austria" is a Latinisation of the German name and was first recorded in the 12th century. At the time, the Danube basin of Austria ( Upper and Lower Austria ) was the easternmost extent of Bavaria, and in fact of all the Germans , as at the time the territory of the former East Germany was populated by Slavic Sorbs and Polabians .
Friedrich Heer , a 20th-century Austrian historian, stated in his book Der Kampf um die österreichische Identität ( The Struggle Over Austrian Identity ), [21] that the Germanic form Ostarrîchi was not a translation of the Latin word, but both resulted from a much older term originating in the Celtic languages of ancient Austria: more than 2,500 years ago, the major part of the actual country was called Norig by the Celtic population ( Hallstatt culture ); according to Heer, no- or nor- meant "east" or "easterns", whereas -rig is related to the modern German Reich , meaning "realm". Accordingly, Norig would essentially mean the same as Ostarrîchi and Österreich , thus Austria . The Celtic name was eventually Latinised to Noricum after the Romans conquered the area that encloses most of modern-day Austria, around 15 BC. Noricum later became a Roman province in the mid-first century AD. [22] Heer's hypothesis is not accepted by linguists.

History
Settled in ancient times, [15] the Central European land that is now Austria was occupied in pre-Roman times by various Celtic tribes. The Celtic kingdom of Noricum was later claimed by the Roman Empire and made a province. Present-day Petronell- Carnuntum in eastern Austria was an important army camp turned capital city in what became known as the Upper Pannonia province. Carnuntum was home for 50,000 people for nearly 400 years. [23]
After the fall of the Roman Empire, the area was invaded by Bavarians , Slavs , and Avars . [24] Charlemagne , King of the Franks, conquered the area in AD 788, encouraged colonization, and introduced Christianity. [24] As part of Eastern Francia , the core areas that now encompass Austria were bequeathed to the house of Babenberg . The area was known as the marchia Orientalis and was given to Leopold of Babenberg in 976. [25]
The first record showing the name Austria is from 996, where it is written as Ostarrîchi , referring to the territory of the Babenberg March. [25] In 1156, the Privilegium Minus elevated Austria to the status of a duchy. In 1192, the Babenbergs also acquired the Duchy of Styria . With the death of Frederick II in 1246, the line of the Babenbergs was extinguished. [26]
As a result, Ottokar II of Bohemia effectively assumed control of the duchies of Austria, Styria, and Carinthia . [26] His reign came to an end with his defeat at Dürnkrut at the hands of Rudolph I of Germany in 1278. [27] Thereafter, until World War I, Austria's history was largely that of its ruling dynasty, the Habsburgs .

Middle Ages
In the 14th and 15th centuries, the Habsburgs began to accumulate other provinces in the vicinity of the Duchy of Austria. In 1438, Duke Albert V of Austria was chosen as the successor to his father-in-law, Emperor Sigismund . Although Albert himself only reigned for a year, henceforth every emperor of the Holy Roman Empire was a Habsburg, with only one exception.
The Habsburgs began also to accumulate territory far from the hereditary lands. In 1477, Archduke Maximilian , only son of Emperor Frederick III , married the heiress Maria of Burgundy , thus acquiring most of the Netherlands for the family. [28] [29] His son Philip the Fair married Joanna the Mad , the heiress of Castile and Aragon , thus acquired Spain and its Italian, African, and New World appendages for the Habsburgs. [28] [29]
In 1526, following the Battle of Mohács , Bohemia and the part of Hungary not occupied by the Ottomans came under Austrian rule. [30] Ottoman expansion into Hungary led to frequent conflicts between the two empires, particularly evident in the Long War of 1593 to 1606. The Turks made incursions into Styria nearly 20 times, [31] of which some are cited as "burning, pillaging, and taking thousands of slaves". [32]

17th and 18th centuries
During the long reign of Leopold I (1657–1705) and following the successful defence of Vienna in 1683 (under the command of the King of Poland, John III Sobieski ), [33] a series of campaigns resulted in bringing most of Hungary to Austrian control by the Treaty of Karlowitz in 1699.
Emperor Charles VI relinquished many of the gains the empire made in the previous years, largely due to his apprehensions at the imminent extinction of the House of Habsburg. Charles was willing to offer concrete advantages in territory and authority in exchange for recognition of the Pragmatic Sanction that made his daughter Maria Theresa his heir. With the rise of Prussia , the Austrian–Prussian dualism began in Germany. Austria participated, together with Prussia and Russia, in the first and the third of the three Partitions of Poland (in 1772 and 1795).

19th century
Austria later became engaged in a war with Revolutionary France , at the beginning highly unsuccessfully, with successive defeats at the hands of Napoleon, meaning the end of the old Holy Roman Empire in 1806. Two years earlier, [34] the Empire of Austria was founded. In 1814, Austria was part of the Allied forces that invaded France and brought to an end the Napoleonic Wars.
It emerged from the Congress of Vienna in 1815 as one of the continent's four dominant powers and a recognised great power . The same year, the German Confederation ( Deutscher Bund ) was founded under the presidency of Austria. Because of unsolved social, political, and national conflicts, the German lands were shaken by the 1848 revolution aiming to create a unified Germany. [35]
The various different possibilities for a united Germany were: a Greater Germany , or a Greater Austria or just the German Confederation without Austria at all. As Austria was not willing to relinquish its German-speaking territories to what would become the German Empire of 1848 , the crown of the newly formed empire was offered to the Prussian King Friedrich Wilhelm IV . In 1864, Austria and Prussia fought together against Denmark and secured the independence from Denmark of the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein . As they could not agree on how the two duchies should be administered, though, they fought the Austro-Prussian War in 1866. Defeated by Prussia in the Battle of Königgrätz , [35] Austria had to leave the German Confederation and subsequently no longer took part in German politics. [36] [37]
The Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867 , the Ausgleich , provided for a dual sovereignty, the Austrian Empire and the Kingdom of Hungary , under Franz Joseph I . [38] The Austrian-Hungarian rule of this diverse empire included various Slavic groups, including Croats, Czechs, Poles, Rusyns , Serbs, Slovaks, Slovenes, and Ukrainians, as well as large Italian and Romanian communities.
As a result, ruling Austria–Hungary became increasingly difficult in an age of emerging nationalist movements, requiring considerable reliance on an expanded secret police. Yet, the government of Austria tried its best to be accommodating in some respects: The Reichsgesetzblatt , publishing the laws and ordinances of Cisleithania , was issued in eight languages; all national groups were entitled to schools in their own language and to the use of their mother tongue at state offices, for example.

20th century
As the Second Constitutional Era began in the Ottoman Empire , Austria-Hungary took the opportunity to annex Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1908. [39] The assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo in 1914 by Bosnian Serb Gavrilo Princip [40] was used by leading Austrian politicians and generals to persuade the emperor to declare war on Serbia, thereby risking and prompting the outbreak of World War I, which eventually led to the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. Over one million Austro-Hungarian soldiers died in World War I. [41]
On 21 October 1918, the elected German members of the Reichsrat (parliament of Imperial Austria) met in Vienna as the Provisional National Assembly for German Austria ( Provisorische Nationalversammlung für Deutschösterreich ). On 30 October the assembly founded the State of German Austria by appointing a government, called Staatsrat . This new government was invited by the Emperor to take part in the decision on the planned armistice with Italy, but refrained from this business. [ citation needed ]
This left the responsibility for the end of the war, on 3 November 1918, solely to the emperor and his government. On 11 November, the emperor, advised by ministers of the old and the new governments, declared he would not take part in state business any more; on 12 November, German Austria, by law, declared itself to be a democratic republic and part of the new German republic. The constitution, renaming the Staatsrat as Bundesregierung (federal government) and Nationalversammlung as Nationalrat (national council) was passed on 10 November 1920. [ citation needed ]
The Treaty of Saint-Germain of 1919 (for Hungary the Treaty of Trianon of 1920) confirmed and consolidated the new order of Central Europe which to a great extent had been established in November 1918, creating new states and altering others. Over 3 million German-speaking Austrians found themselves living outside the new Austrian Republic as minorities in the newly formed or enlarged states of Czechoslovakia , Yugoslavia , Hungary , and Italy. [42] These included the provinces of South Tyrol (which became part of Italy) and German Bohemia (Czechoslovakia). The status of German Bohemia (Sudetenland) later played a role in sparking the Second World War. [43]
The status of South Tyrol was a lingering problem between Austria and Italy until it was officially settled by the 1980s with a great degree of autonomy being granted to it by the Italian national government. Between 1918 and 1919, Austria was known as the State of German Austria ( Staat Deutschösterreich ). Not only did the Entente powers forbid German Austria to unite with Germany, but they also rejected the name German Austria in the peace treaty to be signed; it was, therefore, changed to Republic of Austria in late 1919. [43]
The border between Austria and the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes (later Yugoslavia) was settled with the Carinthian Plebiscite in October 1920 and allocated the major part of the territory of the former Austro-Hungarian Crownland of Carinthia to Austria. This set the border on the Karawanken mountain range, with many Slovenes remaining in Austria.

Interwar period and World War II
After the war, inflation began to devalue the Krone, which was still Austria's currency. In autumn 1922, Austria was granted an international loan supervised by the League of Nations . [44] The purpose of the loan was to avert bankruptcy, stabilise the currency, and improve Austria's general economic condition. The loan meant that Austria passed from an independent state to the control exercised by the League of Nations. In 1925, the Schilling was introduced, replacing the Krone at a rate of 10,000:1. Later, it was nicknamed the "Alpine dollar" due to its stability. From 1925 to 1929, the economy enjoyed a short high before nearly crashing [ clarification needed ] after Black Tuesday .
The First Austrian Republic lasted until 1933, when Chancellor Engelbert Dollfuss , using what he called "self-switch-off of Parliament" , established an autocratic regime tending towards Italian fascism . [45] [46] The two big parties at this time, the Social Democrats and the Conservatives, had paramilitary armies; [47] the Social Democrats' Schutzbund was now declared illegal, but was still operative [47] as civil war broke out. [45] [46] [48]
In February 1934, several members of the Schutzbund were executed, [49] the Social Democratic party was outlawed, and many of its members were imprisoned or emigrated. [48] On 1 May 1934, the Austrofascists imposed a new constitution ("Maiverfassung") which cemented Dollfuss's power, but on 25 July he was assassinated in a Nazi coup attempt. [50] [51]
His successor Kurt Schuschnigg struggled to keep Austria independent as "the better German state". He announced a referendum on 9 March 1938, to be held on 13 March, concerning Austria's independence from Germany. On 12 March 1938, Austrian Nazis took over government, while German troops occupied the country, which prevented Schuschnigg's referendum from taking place. [52] On 13 March 1938, the Anschluss of Austria was officially declared. Two days later, Austrian-born Hitler announced what he called the "reunification" of his home country with the "rest of the German Reich " on Vienna's Heldenplatz . He established a plebiscite confirming the union with Germany in April 1938.
Parliamentary elections were held in Germany (including recently annexed Austria) on 10 April 1938. They were the final elections to the Reichstag during Nazi rule, and took the form of a single-question referendum asking whether voters approved of a single Nazi-party list for the 813-member Reichstag, as well as the recent annexation of Austria (the Anschluss). Turnout in the election was officially 99.5%, with 98.9% voting "yes". In the case of Austria, Adolf Hitler's native soil, 99.71% of an electorate of 4,484,475 officially went to the ballots, with a positive tally of 99.73%. [53] Although the ballot result was undoubtedly rigged, there undoubtedly was massive genuine support for Hitler for fulfilling the Anschluss , [54] since many Germans from both Austria and Germany saw it as completing the long overdue German unification of all Germans united into one-state. [55]
Austria was incorporated into the Third Reich and ceased to exist as an independent country. The Aryanisation of the wealth of Jewish Austrians started immediately in mid-March, with a so-called "wild" (i.e. extra-legal) phase, but was soon structured legally and bureaucratically to strip Jewish citizens of any assets they possessed. The Nazis called Austria " Ostmark " [52] until 1942, when it was again renamed and called "Alpen-Donau-Reichsgaue".
Though Austrians made up only 8% of the population of the Third Reich, [56] some of the most prominent Nazis were native Austrians, including Adolf Hitler, Ernst Kaltenbrunner , Arthur Seyss-Inquart , Franz Stangl , and Odilo Globocnik , [57] as were over 13% of the SS and 40% of the staff at the Nazi extermination camps . [56] Vienna fell on 13 April 1945, during the Soviet Vienna Offensive , just before the total collapse of the Third Reich. The invading Allied powers, in particular the Americans, planned for the supposed "Alpine Fortress Operation" of a national redoubt, that was largely to have taken place on Austrian soil in the mountains of the eastern Alps. However, it never materialised because of the rapid collapse of the Reich.
Karl Renner and Adolf Schärf (Socialist Party of Austria [Social Democrats and Revolutionary Socialists]), Leopold Kunschak (Austria's People's Party [former Christian Social People's Party]), and Johann Koplenig (Communist Party of Austria) declared Austria's secession from the Third Reich by the Declaration of Independence on 27 April 1945 and set up a provisional government in Vienna under state Chancellor Renner the same day, with the approval of the victorious Red Army and backed by Joseph Stalin . [58] (The date is officially named the birthday of the second republic.) At the end of April, most of western and southern Austria were still under Nazi rule. On 1 May 1945, the federal constitution of 1929, which had been terminated by dictator Dollfuss on 1 May 1934, was declared valid again.
Total military deaths from 1939 to 1945 are estimated at 260,000. [59] Jewish Holocaust victims totalled 65,000. [60] About 140,000 Jewish Austrians had fled the country in 1938–39. Thousands of Austrians had taken part in serious Nazi crimes (hundreds of thousands died in Mauthausen-Gusen concentration camp alone), a fact officially recognised by Chancellor Franz Vranitzky in 1992.

Contemporary era
Much like Germany, Austria was divided into American, British, French, and Soviet zones and governed by the Allied Commission for Austria . [61] As forecast in the Moscow Declaration in 1943, a subtle difference was seen in the treatment of Austria by the Allies. [58] The Austrian government, consisting of Social Democrats, Conservatives, and Communists (until 1947), and residing in Vienna, which was surrounded by the Soviet zone, was recognised by the Western Allies in October 1945 after some doubts that Renner could be Stalin's puppet. Thus, the creation of a separate Western Austrian government and the division of the country was avoidable. Austria, in general, was treated as though it had been originally invaded by Germany and liberated by the Allies. [62]
On 15 May 1955, after talks which lasted for years and were influenced by the Cold War , Austria regained full independence by concluding the Austrian State Treaty with the Four Occupying Powers. On 26 October 1955, after all occupation troops had left, Austria declared its "permanent neutrality" by an act of parliament. [63]
The political system of the Second Republic is based on the constitution of 1920 and 1929, which was reintroduced in 1945. The system came to be characterised by Proporz , meaning that most posts of political importance were split evenly between members of the Social Democratic Party of Austria (SPÖ) and the Austrian People's Party (ÖVP). [64] Interest group "chambers" with mandatory membership (e.g. for workers, business people, farmers) grew to considerable importance and were usually consulted in the legislative process, so hardly any legislation was passed that did not reflect widespread consensus. [65]
Since 1945, governing via a single-party government has occurred twice: 1966–1970 (ÖVP) and 1970–1983 (SPÖ). During all other legislative periods, either a grand coalition of SPÖ and ÖVP or a "small coalition" (one of these two and a smaller party) ruled the country.
Kurt Waldheim , an SS intelligence officer in the Second World War accused of war crimes , was elected President of Austria from 1986 to 1992. (Waldheim was member of the NSDAP, he was officer in the army, but was he in the SS? a citation is needed)
Following a referendum in 1994 , at which consent reached a majority of two-thirds, the country became a member of the European Union on 1 January 1995. [66]
The major parties SPÖ and ÖVP have contrary opinions about the future status of Austria's military nonalignment: While the SPÖ in public supports a neutral role, the ÖVP argues for stronger integration into the EU's security policy; even a future NATO membership is not ruled out by some ÖVP politicians (ex. Dr Werner Fasslabend (OVP) in 1997). In reality, Austria is taking part in the EU's Common Foreign and Security Policy , participates in peacekeeping and peace creating tasks, and has become a member of NATO 's "Partnership for Peace"; the constitution has been amended accordingly. Since Liechtenstein joined the Schengen Area in 2011, none of Austria's neighbouring countries performs border controls towards it anymore.

Politics
The Parliament of Austria is located in Vienna , the country's largest city and capital. Austria became a federal , representative democratic republic through the Federal Constitution of 1920. The political system of the Second Republic with its nine states is based on the constitution of 1920, amended in 1929, which was reenacted on 1 May 1945. [67]
The head of state is the Federal President ( Bundespräsident ), who is directly elected by popular vote. The chairman of the Federal Government is the Federal Chancellor , who is appointed by the President. The government can be removed from office by either a presidential decree or by vote of no confidence in the lower chamber of parliament, the Nationalrat . Voting for the Federal President and for the Parliament used to be compulsory in Austria, but this was abolished in steps from 1982 to 2004. [68]
The Parliament of Austria consists of two chambers. The composition of the Nationalrat (183 seats) is determined every five years (or whenever the Nationalrat has been dissolved by the federal president on a motion by the federal chancellor, or by Nationalrat itself) by a general election in which every citizen over 16 years (since 2007) has voting rights . While there is a general threshold of 4% for all parties at federal elections (Nationalratswahlen), there remains the possibility to gain a direct seat, or Direktmandat , in one of the 43 regional election districts.
The Nationalrat is the dominant chamber in the formation of legislation in Austria. However, the upper house of parliament, the Bundesrat , has a limited right of veto (the Nationalrat can—in almost all cases—ultimately pass the respective bill by voting a second time. This is referred to as ' Beharrungsbeschluss , lit. "vote of persistence"). A convention, called the Österreich -Konvent [69] was convened on 30 June 2003 to decide upon suggestions to reform the constitution, but failed to produce a proposal that would receive the two-thirds of votes in the Nationalrat necessary for constitutional amendments and/or reform.
With legislative and executive, the courts are the third column of Austrian state powers. Notably the Constitutional Court ( Verfassungsgerichtshof ) may exert considerable influence on the political system by ruling out laws and ordinances not in compliance with the constitution. Since 1995, the European Court of Justice may overrule Austrian decisions in all matters defined in laws of the European Union. Austria also implements the decisions of the European Court of Human Rights , since the European Convention on Human Rights is part of the Austrian constitution.

Since 2006
After general elections held in October 2006, the Social Democratic Party (SPÖ) emerged as the strongest party, and the Austrian People's Party (ÖVP) came in second, having lost about 8% of its previous polling. [70] [71] Political realities prohibited any of the two major parties from forming a coalition with smaller parties. In January 2007 the People's Party and SPÖ formed a grand coalition with the social democrat Alfred Gusenbauer as Chancellor. This coalition broke up in June 2008.
Elections in September 2008 further weakened both major parties (SPÖ and ÖVP) but together they still held 70% of the votes, with the Social Democrats holding slightly more than the other party. They formed a coalition with Werner Faymann from the Social Democrats as Chancellor. The Green Party came in third with 11% of the vote. The FPÖ and the deceased Jörg Haider 's new party Alliance for the Future of Austria , both on the political right, were strengthened during the election but taken together received less than 20% of the vote.
In the legislative elections of 2013 , the Social Democratic Party received 27% of the vote and 52 seats; People's Party 24% and 47 seats, thus controlling together the majority of the seats. The Freedom Party received 40 seats and 21% of the votes, while the Greens received 12% and 24 seats. Two new parties, Stronach and the NEOS, received less than 10% of the vote, and 11 and nine seats respectively.

Foreign relations
The 1955 Austrian State Treaty ended the occupation of Austria following World War II and recognised Austria as an independent and sovereign state. On 26 October 1955, the Federal Assembly passed a constitutional article in which "Austria declares of her own free will her perpetual neutrality". The second section of this law stated that "in all future times Austria will not join any military alliances and will not permit the establishment of any foreign military bases on her territory". Since then, Austria has shaped its foreign policy on the basis of neutrality, but rather different from the neutrality of Switzerland.
Austria began to reassess its definition of neutrality following the fall of the Soviet Union , granting overflight rights for the UN-sanctioned action against Iraq in 1991, and since 1995, it has developed participation in the EU's Common Foreign and Security Policy. Also in 1995, it joined NATO 's Partnership for Peace and subsequently participated in peacekeeping missions in Bosnia. Meanwhile, the only part of the Constitutional Law on Neutrality of 1955 still fully valid is not to allow foreign military bases in Austria.
Austria attaches great importance to participation in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and other international economic organisations, and it has played an active role in the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). As an OSCE-participating State, Austria's international commitments are subject to monitoring under the mandate of the U.S. Helsinki Commission .

Military
The manpower of the Austrian Armed Forces (German: Bundesheer ) mainly relies on conscription . All males who have reached the age of eighteen and are found fit have to serve a six months compulsory military service , followed by an eight-year reserve obligation. Both males and females at the age of sixteen are eligible for voluntary service. [9] Conscientious objection is legally acceptable and those who claim this right are obliged to serve an institutionalised nine months civilian service instead. Since 1998, women volunteers have been allowed to become professional soldiers.
The main sectors of the Bundesheer are Joint Forces (Streitkräfteführungskommando, SKFüKdo) which consist of Land Forces (Landstreitkräfte), Air Forces (Luftstreitkräfte), International Missions (Internationale Einsätze) and Special Forces (Spezialeinsatzkräfte), next to Joint Mission Support Command (Kommando Einsatzunterstützung; KdoEU) and Joint Command Support Centre (Führungsunterstützungszentrum; FüUZ). Austria is a landlocked country and has no navy.
In 2012, Austria's defence expenditures corresponded to approximately 0.8% of its GDP. The Army currently has about 26,000 [72] soldiers, of whom about 12,000 are conscripts. As head of state, Austrian President is nominally the Commander-in-Chief of the Bundesheer. Command of the Austrian Armed Forces is exercised by the Minister of Defence, currently Hans Peter Doskozil .
Since the end of the Cold War , and more importantly the removal of the former heavily guarded " Iron Curtain " separating Austria and its Eastern Bloc neighbours ( Hungary and former Czechoslovakia ), the Austrian military has been assisting Austrian border guards in trying to prevent border crossings by illegal immigrants . This assistance came to an end when Hungary and Slovakia joined the EU Schengen Area in 2008, for all intents and purposes abolishing "internal" border controls between treaty states. Some politicians have called for a prolongation of this mission, but the legality of this is heavily disputed. In accordance with the Austrian constitution, armed forces may only be deployed in a limited number of cases, mainly to defend the country and aid in cases of national emergency, such as in the wake of natural disasters . [73] They may generally not be used as auxiliary police forces.
Within its self-declared status of permanent neutrality, Austria has a long and proud tradition of engaging in UN-led peacekeeping and other humanitarian missions. The Austrian Forces Disaster Relief Unit (AFDRU), in particular, an all-volunteer unit with close ties to civilian specialists (e.g. rescue dog handlers) enjoys a reputation as a quick (standard deployment time is 10 hours) and efficient SAR unit. Currently, larger contingents of Austrian forces are deployed in Bosnia and Kosovo .

Administrative divisions
As a federal republic , Austria is divided into nine states (German: Bundesländer ). [9] These states are then divided into districts ( Bezirke ) and statutory cities ( Statutarstädte ). Districts are subdivided into municipalities ( Gemeinden ). Statutory Cities have the competencies otherwise granted to both districts and municipalities. The states are not mere administrative divisions but have some legislative authority distinct from the federal government, e.g. in matters of culture, social care, youth and nature protection, hunting, building, and zoning ordinances. In recent years, it has been discussed whether today it is appropriate for a small country to maintain ten parliaments.
[74]

Geography
Austria is a largely mountainous country due to its location in the Alps . [75] The Central Eastern Alps , Northern Limestone Alps and Southern Limestone Alps are all partly in Austria. Of the total area of Austria (84,000 km 2 or 32,433 sq mi), only about a quarter can be considered low lying, and only 32% of the country is below 500 metres (1,640 ft). The Alps of western Austria give way somewhat into low lands and plains in the eastern part of the country.
Austria lies between latitudes 46° and 49° N , and longitudes 9° and 18° E .
It can be divided into five areas, the biggest being the Eastern Alps , which constitute 62% of the nation's total area. The Austrian foothills at the base of the Alps and the Carpathians account for around 12% and the foothills in the east and areas surrounding the periphery of the Pannoni low country amount to about 12% of the total landmass. The second greater mountain area (much lower than the Alps) is situated in the north. Known as the Austrian granite plateau , it is located in the central area of the Bohemian Mass and accounts for 10% of Austria. The Austrian portion of the Vienna basin comprises the remaining 4%.
The six highest mountains in Austria are:
Phytogeographically , Austria belongs to the Central European province of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom . According to the WWF , the territory of Austria can be subdivided into four ecoregions: the Central European mixed forests, Pannonian mixed forests, Alps conifer and mixed forests and Western European broadleaf forests.

Climate
The greater part of Austria lies in the cool/temperate climate zone , where humid westerly winds predominate. With nearly three-quarters of the country dominated by the Alps, the alpine climate is predominant. In the east—in the Pannonian Plain and along the Danube valley —the climate shows continental features with less rain than the alpine areas. Although Austria is cold in the winter (−10 – 0 °C), summer temperatures can be relatively high, [76] with average temperatures in the mid-20s and a highest temperature of 40.5 °C (105 °F) in August 2013. [77]
According to the Koppen Climate Classification Austria has the following climate types: Oceanic (Cfb) , Cool/Warm-summer humid continental (Dfb) , Subarctic/Subalpine (Dfc) , Tundra/Alpine (ET) and Ice-Cap (EF) . Its important to note though that Austria in general does not get very cold in winter but rather cool in summer at higher altitudes. The subarctic and tundra climates seen around the Alps are much warmer in winter than what is normal elsewhere, this has partly to do with the Oceanic influence on this part of Europe. [77] [78] [79]

Economy
Austria is the 12th richest country in the world in terms of GDP (Gross domestic product) per capita, [80] has a well-developed social market economy , and a high standard of living . Until the 1980s, many of Austria's largest industry firms were nationalised; in recent years, however, privatisation has reduced state holdings to a level comparable to other European economies. Labour movements are particularly strong in Austria and have large influence on labour politics. Next to a highly developed industry, international tourism is the most important part of the national economy.
Germany has historically been the main trading partner of Austria, making it vulnerable to rapid changes in the German economy . Since Austria became a member state of the European Union , it has gained closer ties to other EU economies, reducing its economic dependence on Germany. In addition, membership of the EU has drawn an influx of foreign investors attracted by Austria's access to the single European market and proximity to the aspiring economies of the European Union. Growth in GDP reached 3.3% in 2006. [81] At least 67% of Austria's imports come from other European Union member states. [82]
Austria indicated on 16 November 2010 that it would withhold the December installment of its contribution to the EU bailout of Greece, citing the material worsening of the Greek debt situation and the apparent inability of Greece to collect the level of tax receipts it had previously promised. [83]
The Eurozone crisis dented the economy of Austria in other ways as well. It caused, for example, the Hypo Alpe-Adria-Bank International to be purchased in December 2009 by the government for 1 euro owing to credit difficulties, thus wiping out the euro 1.63bn of BayernLB . As of February 2014, the HGAA situation was unresolved, [84] causing Chancellor Werner Faymann to warn that its failure would be comparable to the 1931 Creditanstalt event. [85]
Since the fall of communism, Austrian companies have been quite active players and consolidators in Eastern Europe. Between 1995 and 2010, 4,868 mergers and acquisitions with a total known value of 163 bil. EUR with the involvement of Austrian firms have been announced. [86] The largest transactions with involvement of Austrian companies [87] have been: the acquisition of Bank Austria by Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank for 7.8 billion EUR in 2000, the acquisition of Porsche Holding Salzburg by Volkswagen Group for 3.6 billion EUR in 2009, [88] and the acquisition of Banca Comercială Română by Erste Group for 3.7 bil. EUR in 2005. [89]
Tourism accounts for almost 9% of the Austrian gross domestic product. [90] In 2007, Austria ranked 9th worldwide in international tourism receipts, with 18.9 billion US$. [91] In international tourist arrivals , Austria ranked 12th with 20.8 million tourists. [91]

Infrastructure
In 1972, the country began construction of a nuclear-powered electricity-generation station at Zwentendorf on the River Danube , following a unanimous vote in parliament. However, in 1978, a referendum voted approximately 50.5% against nuclear power, 49.5% for, [92] and parliament subsequently unanimously passed a law forbidding the use of nuclear power to generate electricity although the nuclear power plant was already finished.
Austria currently produces more than half of its electricity by hydropower . [93] Together with other renewable energy sources such as wind , solar and biomass powerplants, the electricity supply from renewable energy amounts to 62.89% [94] of total use in Austria, with the rest being produced by gas and oil power plants.

Demographics
Austria's population was estimated to be 8.72 million in April 2016 by the Statistik Austria . [95] The population of the capital, Vienna , exceeds 1.8 million [16] (2.6 million, including the suburbs), representing about a quarter of the country's population. It is known for its cultural offerings and high standard of living.
Vienna is by far the country's largest city. Graz is second in size, with 265,778 inhabitants, followed by Linz (191,501), Salzburg (145,871), and Innsbruck (122,458). All other cities have fewer than 100,000 inhabitants.
According to Eurostat , in 2010 there were 1.27 million foreign-born residents in Austria, corresponding to 15.2% of the total population. Of these, 764,000 (9.1%) were born outside the EU and 512,000 (6.1%) were born in another EU Member State. [96]
Statistik Austria estimated in 2011 that 81% or 6.75 million residents [1] had no migration background and more than 19% or 1.6 million inhabitants [1] had at least one or more parents of migration background. There are more than 415,000 descendants of foreign-born immigrants [1] residing in Austria, the great majority of whom have been naturalised.
185,592 Turks [1] (including a minority of Turkish Kurds ) make up the second biggest single ethnic minority in Austria after Germans (2.5%), representing 2.2% of the total population. 13,000 Turks were naturalised in 2003 and an unknown number have arrived in Austria at the same time. While 2,000 Turks left Austria in the same year, 10,000 immigrated to the country, confirming a strong trend of growth. [97] Together, Serbs , Croats , Bosniaks and Slovenes make up about 5.1% of Austria's total population.
The total fertility rate (TFR) in 2013 was estimated at 1.42 children born per woman, [98] which is lower than the replacement rate of 2.1. In 2014, 41.7% of births were to unmarried women. [99] The life expectancy in 2013 was estimated at 80.04 years (77.13 years male, 83.1 years female). [98]
Foreign-born population – top 15 countries: [100]

Largest cities

Language
Austrian German is Austria's official language and, according to the 2001 census, is spoken natively by 88.6% of the population (including the 2.5% Germans who reside in Austria) — followed by Turkish (2.28%), Serbian (2.21%), Croatian (1.63%), English (0.73%), Hungarian (0.51%), Bosnian (0.43%), Polish (0.35%), Albanian (0.35%), Slovenian (0.31%), Czech (0.22%), Arabic (0.22%), Romanian (0.21%), etc. [10]
The official language used in education, publications, announcements and websites is Austrian German , which is mostly identical to the German used in Germany but with some vocabulary differences. The German language is standardised between countries of German mother tongue, i.e., Germany, Austria, Switzerland and Liechtenstein, as well as those with significant German speaking minorities: Italy, Belgium and Denmark. (The German dialect speaking population in Alsace-Lorraine in France has no minority rights.) Many local dialects are spoken in Austria, and though their base is Austrian German, their corresponding speakers have certain degrees of difficulty when trying to understand each other.
The Austrian federal states of Carinthia and Styria are home to a significant indigenous Slovene-speaking minority while in the easternmost state, Burgenland (formerly part of the Hungarian portion of Austria–Hungary ), there are significant Hungarian - and Croatian -speaking minorities. Of the remaining number of Austria's people that are of non-Austrian descent, many come from surrounding countries, especially from the former East Bloc nations. Guest workers (Gastarbeiter) and their descendants, as well as refugees from the Yugoslav wars and other conflicts, also form an important minority group in Austria. Since 1994 the Roma – Sinti (gypsies) have been an officially recognised ethnic minority in Austria.
According to census information published by Statistik Austria for 2001 [10] there were a total of 710,926 foreign nationals living in Austria. Of these, the largest by far are 283,334 foreign nationals from the former Yugoslavia (of whom 135,336 speak Serbian; 105,487 Croatian; 31,591 Bosnian – i.e. 272,414 Austrian resident native speakers in total, plus 6,902 Slovenian and 4,018 Macedonian speakers).
The second largest population of linguistic and ethnic groups are the Turks (including minority of Kurds ) with a number of 200,000 to 300,000 who currently live in Austria. The Turks and the Kurds are the largest single immigrant group in Austria, [101] closely followed by the Serbs . [102]
The next largest population of linguistic and ethnic groups are the 124,392 who speak German as their mother tongue even though they hail from outside of Austria (mainly immigrants from Germany, some from Switzerland, South Tyrol in Italy, Romania , or the former Soviet Union ); 123,417 English; 24,446 Albanian; 17,899 Polish; 14,699 Hungarian; 12,216 Romanian; 10,000 Malayali; 7,982 Arabic; 6,891 Slovak; 6,707 Czech; 5,916 Persian; 5,677 Italian; 5,466 Russian; 5,213 French; 4,938 Chinese; 4,264 Spanish; 3,503 Bulgarian. The numbers for other languages fall off sharply below 3,000.
In 2006, some of the Austrian states introduced standardised tests for new citizens, to assure their language ability, cultural knowledge and accordingly their ability to integrate into the Austrian society. [103] For the national rules, see Austrian nationality law – Naturalisation .

Ethnic groups
Historically Austrians were regarded as ethnic Germans and viewed themselves as such, although this national identity was challenged by Austrian nationalism in the decades after the end of World War I and even more so after World War II. [104] [105] [106] Austria was part of the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation until its ending in 1806 and had been part of the German Confederation , a loose association of 39 separate German-speaking countries, until the Austro-Prussian war in 1866, which resulted in the exclusion of Austria from the German Confederation and the creation of the North German Confederation led by Prussia. In 1871, Germany was founded as a nation-state , Austria was not a part of it . After World War I and the breakup of the Austrian monarchy, politicians of the new republic declared its name to be "Deutschösterreich" ( Republic of German-Austria ) and that it was part of the German Republic . A unification of the two countries was forbidden by the treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye as one of the conditions imposed by the victorious Allies of World War I upon the vanquished nation, to prevent the creation of a territorially extensive German state. Along with the events of World War II and Nazism Austria as a country has made efforts to develop its own distinct national identity among its populace [ citation needed ] , and nowadays most do not consider themselves Germans, [107] while a minority still feels German, a movement historically known as "Grossdeutsch", pointing to the fact that they consider historic boundaries of the German people going beyond the boundaries of the actual states. Today 91.1% of the population are regarded as ethnic Austrians. [108]
Serbs form one of the largest ethnic groups in Austria, numbering around 300,000 people. [109] [110] [111] Historically, Serbian immigrants moved to Austria during the time of the Austro-Hungarian Empire , when Vojvodina was under Imperial control. Following World War II the number of Serbs expanded again, and today the community is very large. The Austrian Serbian Society was founded in 1936. Today, Serbs in Austria are mainly found in Vienna , Salzburg , and Graz .
An estimated 13,000 to 40,000 Slovenes in the Austrian state of Carinthia (the Carinthian Slovenes ) as well as Croats (around 30,000) [112] and Hungarians in Burgenland were recognised as a minority and have had special rights following the Austrian State Treaty ( Staatsvertrag ) of 1955. [63] The Slovenes in the Austrian state of Styria (estimated at a number between 1,600 and 5,000) are not recognised as a minority and do not have special rights, although some believe the State Treaty of 27 July 1955 states otherwise. [ citation needed ]
The right for bilingual topographic signs for the regions where Slovene and Croat Austrians live alongside the German-speaking population (as required by the 1955 State Treaty) is still to be fully implemented in the view of some, while others believe that the treaty-derived obligations have been met (see below). Many Carinthians are afraid of Slovenian territorial claims, [ citation needed ] pointing to the fact that Yugoslav troops entered the state after each of the two World Wars and considering that some official Slovenian atlases show parts of Carinthia as Slovene cultural territory. The recently deceased governor, Jörg Haider , has made this fact a matter of public argument in autumn 2005 by refusing to increase the number of bilingual topographic signs in Carinthia. A poll by the Kärntner Humaninstitut conducted in January 2006 states that 65% of Carinthians are not in favour of an increase of bilingual topographic signs, since the original requirements set by the State Treaty of 1955 have already been fulfilled according to their point of view.
Another interesting phenomenon is the so-called " Windischen-Theorie " stating that the Slovenes can be split in two groups: actual Slovenes and Windische (a traditional German name for Slavs), based on differences in language between Austrian Slovenes, who were taught Slovene standard language in school and those Slovenes who spoke their local Slovene dialect but went to German schools. The term Windische was applied to the latter group as a means of distinction. This politically influenced theory, dividing Slovene Austrians into the "loyal Windische" and the "national Slovenes", was never generally accepted and fell out of use some decades ago.

Religion
In 2001, about 74% of Austria's population were registered as Roman Catholic, [115] while about 5% considered themselves Protestants . [115] Austrian Christians, both Catholic and Protestant, [116] are obliged to pay a mandatory membership fee (calculated by income—about 1%) to their church; this payment is called "Kirchenbeitrag" ("Ecclesiastical/Church contribution"). Since the second half of the 20th century, the number of adherents and churchgoers has declined. Data for the end of 2016 from the Austrian Roman Catholic church lists 5,162,622 members, or 58.8% of the total Austrian population. Sunday church attendance was 605,828 or 7% of the total Austrian population in 2015. [117] The Lutheran church also recorded a loss of 74,421 adherents between 2001 and 2016.
About 12% of the population declared that they have no religion . [115] in 2001; this share had grown to 20% by 2015. [118] Of the remaining people, around 340,000 are registered as members of various Muslim communities, mainly due to the influx from Turkey , Bosnia-Herzegovina and Kosovo . [115] About 180,000 are members of Orthodox Churches (mostly Serbs ), about 21,000 people are active Jehovah's Witnesses [119] and about 8,100 are Jewish . [115]
According to the most recent Eurobarometer Poll 2010, [120]

Education
Education in Austria is entrusted partly to the Austrian states (Bundesländer) and partly to the federal government. School attendance is compulsory for nine years, i.e. usually to the age of fifteen.
Pre-school education (called Kindergarten in German), free in most states, is provided for all children between the ages of three and six years and, whilst optional, is considered a normal part of a child's education due to its high takeup rate. Maximum class size is around 30, each class normally being cared for by one qualified teacher and one assistant.
Primary education, or Volksschule , lasts for four years, starting at age six. The maximum class size is 30, but may be as low as 15. It is generally expected that a class will be taught by one teacher for the entire four years and the stable bond between teacher and pupil is considered important for a child's well-being. The 3Rs (Reading, wRiting and aRithmetic) dominate lesson time, with less time allotted to project work than in the UK. Children work individually and all members of a class follow the same plan of work. There is no streaming .
Standard attendance times are 8 am to 12 pm or 1 pm, with hourly five- or ten-minute breaks. Children are given homework daily from the first year. Historically there has been no lunch hour, with children returning home to eat. However, due to a rise in the number of mothers in work, primary schools are increasingly offering pre-lesson and afternoon care.
As in Germany, secondary education consists of two main types of schools, attendance at which is based on a pupil's ability as determined by grades from the primary school. The Gymnasium caters for the more able children, in the final year of which the Matura examination is taken, which is a requirement for access to university. The Hauptschule prepares pupils for vocational education but also for various types of further education ( Höhere Technische Lehranstalt HTL = institution of higher technical education; HAK = commercial academy; HBLA = institution of higher education for economic business; etc.). Attendance at one of these further education institutes also leads to the Matura . Some schools aim to combine the education available at the Gymnasium and the Hauptschule, and are known as Gesamtschulen . In addition, a recognition of the importance of learning English has led some Gymnasiums to offer a bilingual stream, in which pupils deemed able in languages follow a modified curriculum, a portion of the lesson time being conducted in English.
As at primary school, lessons at Gymnasium begin at 8 am and continue with short intervals until lunchtime or early afternoon, with children returning home to a late lunch. Older pupils often attend further lessons after a break for lunch, generally eaten at school. As at primary level, all pupils follow the same plan of work. Great emphasis is placed on homework and frequent testing. Satisfactory marks in the end-of-the-year report ("Zeugnis") are a prerequisite for moving up ("aufsteigen") to the next class. Pupils who do not meet the required standard re-sit their tests at the end of the summer holidays; those whose marks are still not satisfactory are required to re-sit the year ("sitzenbleiben").
It is not uncommon for a pupil to re-sit more than one year of school. After completing the first two years, pupils choose between one of two strands, known as "Gymnasium" (slightly more emphasis on arts) or "Realgymnasium" (slightly more emphasis on science). Whilst many schools offer both strands, some do not, and as a result, some children move schools for a second time at age 12. At age 14, pupils may choose to remain in one of these two strands, or to change to a vocational course, possibly with a further change of school.
The Austrian university system had been open to any student who passed the Matura examination until recently. A 2006 bill allowed the introduction of entrance exams for studies such as Medicine. In 2001, an obligatory tuition fee (" Studienbeitrag ") of €363.36 per term was introduced for all public universities. There are some non-state exceptions to this, where students can still study for a subsidized education, for example within the campus system of the English Teacher Training College . Since 2008, for all EU students the studies have been free of charge, as long as a certain time-limit is not exceeded (the expected duration of the study plus usually two terms tolerance). [121] When the time-limit is exceeded, the fee of around €363.36 per term is charged. Some further exceptions to the fee apply, e.g. for students with a year's salary of more than about €5000. In all cases, an obligatory fee of €17 is charged for the student union and insurance.

Culture

Music
Austria's past as a European power and its cultural environment generated a broad contribution to various forms of art, most notably among them music. Austria was the birthplace of many famous composers such as Joseph Haydn , Michael Haydn , Franz Liszt , Franz Schubert , Anton Bruckner , Johann Strauss, Sr. and Johann Strauss, Jr. as well as members of the Second Viennese School such as Arnold Schoenberg , Anton Webern and Alban Berg . Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart was born in Salzburg , then an independent Church Principality of the Holy Roman Empire , which later became part of Austria, and much of Mozart's career was spent in Vienna.
Vienna was for a long time an important centre of musical innovation. 18th- and 19th-century composers were drawn to the city due to the patronage of the Habsburgs, and made Vienna the European capital of classical music. During the Baroque period , Slavic and Hungarian folk forms influenced Austrian music.
Vienna's status began its rise as a cultural centre in the early 16th century, and was focused around instruments, including the lute . Ludwig van Beethoven spent the better part of his life in Vienna. Austria's current national anthem , attributed to Mozart, was chosen after World War II to replace the traditional Austrian anthem by Joseph Haydn.
Austrian Herbert von Karajan was principal conductor of the Berlin Philharmonic for 35 years. He is generally regarded as one of the greatest conductors of the 20th century, and he was a dominant figure in European classical music from the 1960s until his death. [122]

Art and architecture
Among Austrian Artists and architects one can find the painters Ferdinand Georg Waldmüller , Rudolf von Alt , Hans Makart , Gustav Klimt , Oskar Kokoschka , Egon Schiele , Carl Moll , and Friedensreich Hundertwasser , the photographers Inge Morath and Ernst Haas , and architects like Johann Bernhard Fischer von Erlach , Otto Wagner , Adolf Loos , and Hans Hollein (recipient of the 1985 Pritzker Architecture Prize ). Contemporary artist Herbert Brandl.

Cinema and theatre
Sascha Kolowrat was an Austrian pioneer of filmmaking. Billy Wilder , Fritz Lang , Josef von Sternberg , and Fred Zinnemann originally came from Austria before establishing themselves as internationally relevant movie makers. Willi Forst , Ernst Marischka , or Franz Antel enriched the popular cinema in German language speaking countries. Michael Haneke became internationally known for his disturbing cinematic studies, before receiving a Golden Globe for his critically acclaimed film The White Ribbon in 2010.
The first Austrian film director to receive an Academy Award was Stefan Ruzowitzky . A number of Austrian actors were able to pursue a career, the impact of which was sensed beyond national borders. Among them were Peter Lorre , Helmut Berger , Curd Jürgens , Senta Berger , Oskar Werner , and Klaus Maria Brandauer . Hedy Lamarr and Arnold Schwarzenegger became American as well as international movie stars. The latter also became the 38th Governor of California. Christoph Waltz rose to international fame with his performance in Inglourious Basterds , earning the Best Actor Award at Cannes in 2009, and the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor in 2010 and finally two Oscars. Max Reinhardt was a master of spectacular and astute theatre productions. Otto Schenk not only excelled as a stage actor, but also as an opera director.

Science and philosophy
Austria was the cradle of numerous scientists with international reputation. Among them are Ludwig Boltzmann , Ernst Mach , Victor Franz Hess and Christian Doppler , prominent scientists in the 19th century. In the 20th century, contributions by Lise Meitner , Erwin Schrödinger and Wolfgang Pauli to nuclear research and quantum mechanics were key to these areas' development during the 1920s and 1930s. A present-day quantum physicist is Anton Zeilinger , noted as the first scientist to demonstrate quantum teleportation .
In addition to physicists , Austria was the birthplace of two of the most noteworthy philosophers of the 20th century, Ludwig Wittgenstein and Karl Popper . In addition to them, biologists Gregor Mendel and Konrad Lorenz as well as mathematician Kurt Gödel and engineers such as Ferdinand Porsche and Siegfried Marcus were Austrians.
A focus of Austrian science has always been medicine and psychology, starting in medieval times with Paracelsus . Eminent physicians like Theodore Billroth , Clemens von Pirquet , and Anton von Eiselsberg have built upon the achievements of the 19th century Vienna School of Medicine. Austria was home to Sigmund Freud , founder of psychoanalysis , Alfred Adler , founder of Individual psychology , psychologists Paul Watzlawick and Hans Asperger , and psychiatrist Viktor Frankl .
The Austrian School of Economics, which is prominent as one of the main competitive directions for economic theory, is related to Austrian economists Carl Menger , Joseph Schumpeter , Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk , Ludwig von Mises , and Friedrich Hayek . Other noteworthy Austrian-born émigrés include the management thinker Peter Drucker , sociologist Paul Felix Lazarsfeld and scientist Sir Gustav Nossal .

Literature
Complementing its status as a land of artists and scientists, Austria has always been a country of poets, writers, and novelists. It was the home of novelists Arthur Schnitzler , Stefan Zweig , Thomas Bernhard , and Robert Musil , of poets Georg Trakl , Franz Werfel , Franz Grillparzer , Rainer Maria Rilke , Adalbert Stifter , Karl Kraus and children's author Eva Ibbotson .
Famous contemporary playwrights and novelists are Nobel prize winner Elfriede Jelinek , Peter Handke and Daniel Kehlmann .

Food and beverages
Austria's cuisine is derived from that of the Austro-Hungarian Empire . Austrian cuisine is mainly the tradition of Royal-Cuisine ("Hofküche") delivered over centuries. It is famous for its well-balanced variations of beef and pork and countless variations of vegetables. There is also the "Mehlspeisen" Bakery, which created particular delicacies such as Sachertorte, "Krapfen" which are doughnuts usually filled with apricot jam or custard, and "Strudel" such as " Apfelstrudel " filled with apple, "Topfenstrudel" filled with a type of cheese curd called "topfen", and " Millirahmstrudel " (milk-cream strudel).
In addition to native regional traditions, the cuisine has been influenced by Hungarian , Bohemia Czech , Jewish , Italian, Balkan and French cuisine, from which both dishes and methods of food preparation have often been borrowed. The Austrian cuisine is therefore one of the most multicultural and transcultural in Europe.
Typical Austrian dishes include Wiener Schnitzel , Schweinsbraten, Kaiserschmarren , Knödel , Sachertorte and Tafelspitz . There are also Kärntner Kasnudeln, which are pockets of dough filled with Topfen, potatoes, herbs and peppermint which are boiled and served with a butter sauce. Kasnudeln are traditionally served with a salad. Eierschwammerl dishes are also popular. The sugar block dispenser Pez was invented in Austria, as well as Mannerschnitten . Austria is also famous for its Mozartkugeln and its coffee tradition.
Beer is sold in 0.2 litre (a Pfiff ), 0.3 litre (a Seidel , kleines Bier or Glas Bier ) and 0.5 litre (a Krügerl or großes Bier or Halbe ) measures. At festivals one litre Maß and two litre Doppelmaß in the Bavarian style are also dispensed. The most popular types of beer are lager (known as Märzen in Austria), naturally cloudy Zwicklbier and wheat beer . At holidays like Christmas and Easter bock beer is also available.
The most important wine-producing areas are in Lower Austria , Burgenland , Styria and Vienna. The Grüner Veltliner grape provides some of Austria's most notable white wines [123] and Zweigelt is the most widely planted red wine grape. [124]
In Upper Austria , Lower Austria, Styria and Carinthia , Most , a type of cider or perry is widely produced.
Schnapps of typically up to 60% alcohol or fruit brandy is drunk, which in Austria is made from a variety of fruits, for example apricots and rowanberries . The produce of small private schnapps distilleries , of which there are around 20,000 in Austria, is known as Selbstgebrannter or Hausbrand .
Local soft drinks such as Almdudler are very popular around the country as an alternative to alcoholic beverages. Another popular drink is the so-called "Spetzi", a mix between Coca-Cola and the original formula of Orange Fanta or the more locally renowned Frucade . Red Bull , the highest-selling energy drink in the world, was invented in Austria. [ citation needed ]

Sports
Due to the mountainous terrain, alpine skiing is a prominent sport in Austria and is extremely valuable in the promotion and economic growth of the country. [125] Similar sports such as snowboarding or ski-jumping are also widely popular. Austrian athletes such as Annemarie Moser-Pröll , Franz Klammer , Hermann Maier , Toni Sailer , Benjamin Raich , Marlies Schild & Marcel Hirscher are widely regarded as some of the greatest alpine skiers of all time, Armin Kogler , Andreas Felder , Ernst Vettori , Andreas Goldberger , Andreas Widhölzl , Thomas Morgenstern & Gregor Schlierenzauer as some of the greatest ski jumpers of all time. Bobsleigh , luge , and skeleton are also popular events with a permanent track located in Igls , which hosted bobsleigh and luge competitions for the 1964 and 1976 Winter Olympics held in Innsbruck . The first Winter Youth Olympics in 2012 were held in Innsbruck as well. [126]
A popular team sport in Austria is football , which is governed by the Austrian Football Association . [127] Austria was among the most successful football playing nations on the European continent placing 4th at the 1934 FIFA World Cup , 3rd at the 1954 FIFA World Cup and 7th at the 1978 FIFA World Cup . However, recently Austrian football has not been internationally successful. It also co-hosted the 2008 UEFA European Football Championship with Switzerland. The national Austrian football league is the Austrian Bundesliga , which includes teams such as record-champions SK Rapid Wien , FK Austria Wien , Red Bull Salzburg and Sturm Graz .
Besides football, Austria also has professional national leagues for most major team sports, including the Austrian Hockey League for ice hockey , and the Österreichische Basketball Bundesliga for basketball. Horseback riding is also popular; the famed Spanish Riding School of Vienna is located in Vienna.
Niki Lauda is a former Formula One driver who was three times F1 World Champion, winning in 1975, 1977 and 1984. He is currently the only driver to have been champion for both Ferrari and McLaren, the sport's two most successful constructors. Other known Austrian F1 drivers are for example Gerhard Berger and Jochen Rindt . Austria also hosts F1 races ( Austrian Grand Prix ); now held at Red Bull Ring , in the past also at Österreichring and Zeltweg Airfield .
Thomas Muster is a former tennis player and one of the greatest clay courters of all time. He won the 1995 French Open and in 1996 he was ranked number 1 in the ATP Ranking . Other known Austrian tennis players are for example Horst Skoff , Jürgen Melzer and Dominic Thiem .
Sport played a significant role in developing national consciousness and boosting national self-confidence in the early years of the Second Republic after World War II, through events such as the Tour of Austria cycle race and through sporting successes such as the national football team's run to third at the 1954 World Cup and the performances of Toni Sailer and the rest of the "Kitzbühel Miracle Team" in the 1950s. [128] [129]

See also
WebPage index: 00093
David Weinberger
David Weinberger (born 1950) is an American technologist, professional speaker, [1] and commentator, probably best known as co-author of the Cluetrain Manifesto (originally a website, and eventually a book, which has been described as "a primer on Internet marketing" [2] ). Weinberger's work focuses on how the Internet is changing human relationships, communication, knowledge and society.
A philosopher by training, he holds a Ph.D. from the University of Toronto and taught college from 1980-1986. He was a gag writer for the comic strip " Inside Woody Allen " from 1976-1983. [3] He became a marketing consultant and executive at several high-tech companies, and currently serves as a fellow at the Berkman Center for Internet and Society at Harvard Law School , where he co-teaches a class on "The Web Difference" with John Palfrey . In addition, he is Co-Director of the Harvard Library Innovation Lab [4] at Harvard Law School . He had the title Senior Internet Advisor to Howard Dean 's 2004 presidential campaign , and provided technology policy advice to John Edwards ' 2008 presidential campaign. [5]
He is the author of several books including The Cluetrain Manifesto , [6] Small Pieces Loosely Joined: A Unified Theory of the Web , [7] Everything is Miscellaneous: The Power of the New Digital Disorder [8] and 2012 Too Big to Know: Rethinking Knowledge Now That the Facts Aren't the Facts, Experts Are Everywhere, and the Smartest Person in the Room Is the Room . [9]

Other works
WebPage index: 00094
The Onion
The Onion is an American digital media company and news satire organization that publishes articles on international, national, and local news. Based in Chicago , the company originated as a weekly print publication on August 29, 1988 in Madison, Wisconsin . [1] In the spring of 1996 The Onion began publishing online. In 2007, the organization began publishing satirical news audio and video online, as the Onion News Network . In 2013, The Onion ceased publishing its print edition and launched Onion Labs, an advertising agency. [4] [5]
The Onion ' s articles cover current events, both real and fictional, satirizing the tone and format of traditional news organizations with stories, editorials, op-ed pieces, and man-in-the-street interviews using a traditional news website layout and an editorial voice modeled after that of the Associated Press . The publication's humor often depends on presenting mundane, everyday events as newsworthy, surreal or alarming. In 1999, comedian Bob Odenkirk praised the publication stating, "It's the best comedy writing in the country, and it has been since it started." [6]
The Onion also runs The A.V. Club and ClickHole . Initially created in 1993 as a supplement to the parent publication, The A.V. Club is an entertainment and pop culture publication that contains interviews and reviews of newly released media and other weekly features. ClickHole is a satirical website from The Onion founded in 2014 that parodies clickbait websites such as BuzzFeed and Upworthy . In 2017 the site would briefly transition to PatriotHole , [7] [8] parodying sites like Breitbart with a far right stance by running articles with an extremist view, though these articles were still fake. [9] This was a full takeover of the site but this would only last a few days, before the site transitioned back to its previous state, running PatriotHole as a sub segment as of May 2017.

History

Publication's name
Reportedly, it was co-founder Chris Johnson's uncle—Nells Johnson—who came up with the idea to name the paper The Onion . "People always ask questions about where the name The Onion came from", said former President Sean Mills in an interview with Wikinews ; "and, when I recently asked (co-founder) Tim Keck, who was one of the founders, he told me...literally that his uncle said he should call it The Onion when he saw him and Chris Johnson eating an onion sandwich. They had literally just cut up the onion and put it on bread." According to former editorial manager, Chet Clem, their food budget was so low when they started the paper that they were down to white bread and onions. This account was recently disputed by an editor of The Onion , Cole Bolton, during an event at the University of Chicago . Bolton called Mills's account "the dumbest explanation" and asserted that it is likely wrong. According to Bolton, the most plausible explanation is that The Onion was mocking a campus newsletter called The Union . [10] [11] [12]

Madison (1988–2001)
The Onion was founded in 1988 in Madison, Wisconsin by Tim Keck and Christopher Johnson, students at the University of Wisconsin . In 1988 Scott Dikkers — The Onion ' s longest-serving editor-in-chief (1988–1999, 2005–2008)—joined the two-person staff to draw comic strips. "By issue three, I was de facto editor." In 1989, Keck and Johnson sold it to Dikkers and advertising sales manager Peter Haise for less than $20,000, although also quoted as $16,000 in The Washington Post , and $19,000 in a 2003 Business 2.0 article. After the sale, founders Keck and Johnson became publishers of other, similar alternative weeklies : Keck of the Seattle weekly The Stranger and Johnson of the Albuquerque Weekly Alibi . [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18]
In its earlier years The Onion was successful in a number of university locations (e.g. Madison, Wisconsin , Champaign–Urbana, Illinois ). Originally the bottom three inches of the newspaper could be cut off for coupons to local establishments, such as inexpensive student-centered eateries and video rental stores. For a time The Onion was primarily a hodgepodge of Dikkers's cartoons, Spy magazine -like satire and short fiction. [18] [19]
The June 16, 1993 issue of The Daily Iowan ran a profile of Dikkers, in which it stated that "Dikkers still lives in Madison, spending about five hours a week on Jim's Journal and the rest of the time as co-owner of a satirical newspaper called The Onion ." [20]
In the November/December 1994 issue of U. The National College Magazine , Dikkers discussed The Comedy Castaways , The Onion ' s sketch comedy show, which the publication hoped to pitch to NBC , Fox , and HBO . "I think what sets us apart is we've intentionally formed a tightly knit group of funny performers", said Dikkers of the show and the two pilot episodes the publication had produced. [21]
In the spring of 1996, Ben Karlin and Dikkers collaborated with Robert Smigel and Dana Carvey to create four short news segments for The Dana Carvey Show . " Bob Odenkirk had showed me The Onion about a year earlier, and it jumped out at me as something completely original and great, and I really wanted to use it on the show", said Smigel. While four fake news segments were recorded—with Stephen Colbert performing as anchor—only one of the segments actually aired. One of the missing segments was to prominently feature The Onion headline, "Mr. T To Pity Fool." [22] [23]
In 1996, the widely popular—and unattributed—dissemination of a December 1995 pre-Web article written by Robert D. Siegel titled "Clinton Deploys Vowels to Bosnia" [24] helped spur the creation of The Onion ' s website (www.theonion.com). The website allowed The Onion to properly claim credit for that article—and others—that were being passed around in an unattributed form online in various forums, Usenet posts and mailing lists [25] and the publication received expanded global recognition as a result. [5] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] In a 2002 interview, Siegel described the difference between online/website readership and the print publication, [29] "If you look at the breakdown of people who read The Onion online, it's like Microsoft , Dell Computers , the Department of Justice and then, like, University of Wisconsin. So it's a combination of students and pretty impressive people. I get the feeling that the print version is read by people hanging out in bars." [5] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28]
In the fall of 1996, Karlin—who had been a writer/editor for the publication since graduating from the University of Wisconsin in 1993—moved to Los Angeles and joined other former Onion staffers to create a news parody television pilot titled Deadline: Now for the Fox Network. While the 15-minute pilot—which was completed in 1997—was never picked up as a series for production, its creation lead to steady writing work for Karlin and other former Onion staffers, such as writing some episodes of Space Ghost Coast to Coast on the Cartoon Network . In the wake of Karlin's departure, long time staff writer Robert Siegel [30] assumed the publication's duties as editor of the publication. [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] [36]
Sometime after The Onion appeared online in 1996, the publication was threatened with a lawsuit from Janet Jackson because of the article "Dying Boy Gets Wish: To Pork Janet Jackson." "We were very nearly sued out of existence by Janet Jackson", said Siegel, adding that in the past he was forbidden to talk about the legal matter and the celebrity involved. [37] [38] [39]
On January 27, 1998, MTV premiered Virtual Bill , a collaboration between writers of The Onion and 3-D character studio Protozoa. The titular "Virtual Bill" character was a quasi-realistic CGI version of Bill Clinton created by studio Protozoa who introduced music videos and told jokes written by the staff of The Onion . The voice of Virtual Bill was provided by then editor Dikkers. After the initial premiere, Virtual Bill returned to MTV on December 17, 1998 with another TV special and an interactive web special produced by Pulse that ported the 3D data into a web compatible format using Pulse's proprietary plug-in. [40] [41] [42] [43] [44]
In January 1999, when Jon Stewart became the host of The Daily Show he tapped former Onion writer/editor Karlin to be head writer of the newly restructured show. "He had heard about this group of Onion people in L.A. and, in a weird way, I was the de facto ringleader of our group in L.A. I came to New York. Jon and I connected. It was kind of like a slightly awkward, but successful, first date. When I got back to Los Angeles, they offered me the head writer job." [31] [32] [33] [34] [35]
From March 3 to March 7, 1999, writers and editors of The Onion attended U.S. Comedy Arts Festival in Aspen, Colorado in part to promote the forthcoming Our Dumb Century anthology and were met with effusive praise for their work from notable comedians such as Conan O'Brien , Dave Foley and Dave Thomas as well as cartoonist Peter Bagge and musician Andy Prieboy . [26] [45]
On March 18, 1999, The Onion ' s website won its first Webby Award in the category of "Humor." [46] [47]
On March 23, 1999, The Onion ' s first fully original book, Our Dumb Century was released. The book featured mocked-up newspaper front pages from the entire 20th century, presented under the premise that the publication had been continuously in print since before 1900. [48] [49] [50] In the wake of the book's success, networks such as HBO and NBC were in talks to bring The Onion to TV with a special based on Our Dumb Century . [18] Regardless of the nearly two years of work spent on conceiving and producing Our Dumb Century , the writers only received bonuses of a few thousand dollars, despite the fact that the two-book publishing deal netted The Onion $450,000. [18] [48] [49] [50]
In April 2000, DreamWorks Studios optioned two stories from the satirical newspaper, "Canadian Girlfriend Unsubstantiated"—which was to be written by former Onion editor and writer Rich Dahm—and "Tenth Circle Added to Rapidly Growing Hell" with an eye towards producing the later as a family comedy. "The story is so dark and hate filled—I was shocked", said head writer Todd Hanson. "It's like an Onion joke. I mean, what are they going to do? Add a sickly-but-adorable moppet?" added editor Robert Siegel. DreamWorks planned for the finished "Tenth Circle Added to Rapidly Growing Hell" to involve animation as well as musical singalongs. [51] [52] [53] [54]
In June 2000, writers and editors of The Onion participated in Comedy Central panel discussion moderated by Jeff Greenfield titled "The State of The Onion " during the "Toyota Comedy Festival 2000." [55] [56] [57] [58]
In July 2000, The Onion ' s editor Robert Siegel was named one of People magazine's most eligible bachelors. "If a person is beautiful on the inside", Siegel said, "looks don't really matter." [29] [59]

New York City (2001–2012)
Beginning in the fall of 2000 to early 2001, the company relocated its editorial offices from Madison, Wisconsin to a renovated warehouse in the Chelsea neighborhood of Manhattan (New York City) to raise the The Onion ' s profile, expand the publication from being simply a humor newspaper into a full production company, as well as develop editorial content in other media—including books, television and movies—and engage more directly with Internet companies as far as advertising revenue goes. [60] [61] [62] [63] [64] [65]
In February 2001, Miramax Films head Harvey Weinstein announced they had reached a first look agreement to develop scripts and features with The Onion . "As lifelong New Yorkers, we're proud to welcome The Onion to our city with this first-look deal", said Harvey Weinstein. "With their witty, sophisticated humor, they will undoubtedly soon be the toast of the town." Weinstein added. [66] [67] [68]
On September 27, 2001, The Onion debuted its New York City print edition with an issue focused on the September 11th attacks . The popularity—and critical praise—of the issue resulted in The Onion ' s website's online traffic nearly doubling in the weeks following the attacks. [69] [70]
In November 2002, a humorous op-ed piece in The Onion that was satirically bylined by filmmaker Michael Bay titled "Those Chechen Rebels Stole My Idea" [71] was removed from the site without explanation. Entertainment industry trade magazine Variety theorized, "It's not clear if Bay—a frequent object of The Onion ' s satire—requested the move." [71] [72] [73] [74]
In 2003, The Onion was purchased by David Schafer—a businessman who had managed the $2.5 billion investment fund—from previous long time owners Peter Haise and Scott Dikkers. The sale was a process that had been in the works since July 2001 and according to a memo from then owner Haise, "[Schafer] understands our quirky company and knows that we need some time to get to a higher level of operations and sales." [70] In a 2003 CNN profile of The Onion , Schafer stated with regards to the company and the purchase, " The Onion ' s strong point was never accounting, financial management, or business. Buying it was a bit of a shot in the dark, but we felt we could get a handle on it." Also in 2003, editor Robert Siegel quit his day-to-day role at The Onion [37] to focus on writing screenplays full-time. [75] [76] "After the 14,000th headline I felt the itch to use a different part of my brain", he said. "You can go mad thinking in headline form." In the wake of his departure, long time staff writer Carol Kolb [77] assumed the publication's duties as editor of the publication. [16] [54] [75] [76] [77] [78] [79] [80]
In 2005, The Onion moved its New York City offices from its initial Chelsea location to downtown on Broadway in the SoHo neighborhood of Manhattan (New York City). [81]
In 2006, The Onion launched a YouTube channel, which was structured as a parody of modern American television news programs. [82] In June 2006, it was also announced that former editor Robert D. Siegel was tapped by Miramax Films to write the screenplay for a comedy titled "Homeland Insecurity" which was slated to be about a pair of Arab-Americans who are mistaken for terrorists while traveling to Texas. [83] Additionally, rumors of a potential sale of The Onion to media conglomerate Viacom began appearing in various news outlets during July 2006 with The New York Times: DealBook expanding on the discussion by stating, "While a source tells DealBook that such a deal has indeed been discussed, it is in very early stages and may never happen." [82] [83] [84] [85] [86] [87] [88]
In April 2007, The Onion launched the Onion News Network , a parody of "the visual style and breathless reporting of 24-hour cable news networks like CNN ." [89]
In 2008 Carol Kolb became the head writer of the Onion News Network with the role of the publication's editor being taken over by writer Joe Randazzo . Randazzo first became a writer for The Onion in 2006 and—in his role as an editor—became the first editor of the publication that had no connection to The Onion during the publication's initial Madison, Wisconsin era. [15] [90] [91] [92] [93]
In April 2009, The Onion was awarded a 2008 Peabody Award noting that the publication provides "...ersatz news that has a worrisome ring of truth." [94] [95]
In November 2009, The Onion released Our Front Pages: 21 Years of Greatness, Virtue, and Moral Rectitude From America's Finest News Source which was notable in not only compiling dozens of front pages from the publication's history as a news parody but also showcasing front pages from the publication's early, more casual campus humor focused era during the 1980s when the publication featured headlines such as, "Depressed? Try Liposuction on that Pesky Head." [96]
In July 2009, various news outlets began reporting rumors of an impending sale of The Onion with further details of the sale to be made on Monday, July 20, 2009. [97] [98] The purported sale was revealed as fictional Publisher Emeritus T. Herman Zweibel stating he'd sold the publication to a Chinese company—Yu Wan Mei Corporation—resulting in a week-long series of Chinese-related articles and features throughout the publication's website and print editions. [99] [100] On Wednesday, July 22, 2009, the publication's editor ( Joe Randazzo ) clarified the issue on National Public Radio 's All Things Considered , stating: "I'm sure there are many Chinese conglomerates out there that would love to buy The Onion . We are, in fact, still a solvent independently owned American company." [101]
In August 2011, The Onion ' s website began testing a paywall model requiring a $2.95 monthly—or $29.95 annual charge—from non-U.S. visitors who want to read more than about five stories within 30 days."We are testing a meter internationally as readers in those markets are already used to paying directly for some (other) content, particularly in the UK where we have many readers", said the company's CTO Michael Greer. [102] [103] [104]
In September 2011, it was announced that The Onion would move its entire editorial operation to Chicago by the summer of 2012. The news of the move left many of the writers—who moved with the publication from Madison to New York City in 2000—"blindsided", putting them in a position to decide whether to uproot themselves from New York City and follow the publication to Chicago, which was already home to the company's corporate headquarters. At a comedy show on September 27, 2011, then editor Joe Randazzo announced that he would not be joining the staff in Chicago. [105] [106] [107] [108] [109] [110]

Chicago (2012–present)
With the publication's core editorial staff now based in Chicago, in March 2012 Cole Bolton—a Brown University graduate of business economics, former associate economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and research associate at Harvard Business School [111] [112] —was named the new editor-in-chief of The Onion . "I was never in an improv group, never in a sketch group, never wrote for an Onion parody in college", said Bolton in a 2014 interview with comedy publication Splitsider . [111] "It was just sort of a decision that I decided, two years out of college, that I didn’t like where I was going in my life, and I wanted to do something that I cared about more, so I ended up just sending stuff in to The Onion ." [12] [111] [112] [113]
Additionally, in March 2012 more insight into the internal issues surrounding the Chicago move—including an attempt made by the writers to find a new owner—are explored by articles in The Atlantic Wire [114] and New York magazine's Daily Intelligencer . [115] According to an article in the Chicago Tribune , [116] founding editor Scott Dikkers returned to the publication in light of the Chicago move stating that he hopes to find a "younger and hungrier" pool of talent in Chicago than what was available in New York City. " The Onion is obviously always going to draw talent from wherever it is", Dikkers said. "In Madison, people used to just come in off the street [...] and we'd give them a shot. The Onion has always thrived on the youngest, greenest people." [110] [114] [115] [116] [117]
In August 2012, it was announced that a group of former The Onion writers had teamed up with Adult Swim to create comedy content on a website called Thing X . According to the comedy website Splitsider , " The Onion writers had nothing else going on, and AdultSwim.com wanted to take advantage of that. But only because they smelled a business opportunity. Adult Swim is just looking at it from a business standpoint." [118] [119] In June 2013, it was announced that Thing X would be shutting down with some staff moving over to parent website adultswim.com on June 18, 2013. [120] [121]
In February 2013 The Onion was added to Advertising Age ' s "Digital A-List 2013" because the publication "...has not just survived, it's thrived..." since the publication's 2012 move to consolidate operations and staff in Chicago. [122]
In November 2013, the publication announced in Crain's Chicago Business that The Onion would move to an all-digital format by December 2013, citing a 30% year-over-year growth in pageviews to the publication's website. [123]
In June 2014, The Onion launched the spinoff website ClickHole , which satirizes and parodies so-called " clickbait " websites such as BuzzFeed and Upworthy that capitalize on viral content to drive traffic. [124]
In November 2014, Bloomberg News reported that The Onion had hired a financial adviser for a possible sale. [125] [126] Additionally, in a memo addressing potential sale rumors provided to Walt Mossberg's tech site Re/code Onion CEO Steve Hannah states, "We have had follow-up conversations with numerous parties in recent months. Our advisors will continue to have those conversations and, hopefully, they will lead to the right outcome." [127]
In June 2015 Steve Hannah—the publication's CEO since 2004—announced he would be stepping down from the position with the new CEO role to be passed onto current president of the organization, Mike McAvoy. [128] [129]
On September 21, 2015, StarWipe —a spinoff sister site of The A.V. Club centered on celebrity culture—was launched . [130] It was closed on June 17, 2016. [131]
In October 2015, CEO Mike McAvoy announced a restructuring of the organization, layoffs as well as a series of management changes. "But even though we’ve done well, we have not been able to keep pace with our ambitious goals for Onion Inc." Kurt Mueller—the company's COO—elaborated on the details stating, "We were overstaffed for the non-media-agency part of the business. We have less demand for a ton of new content for a brand. There's demand, but we just overestimated what the demand is." [132]
In January 2016, CEO Mike McAvoy announced that Univision Communications had purchased a 40% stake in Onion, Inc. “As an independent media company, we’ve always been forced to run a tight financial ship, which has made us smart and lean, but not always ready to invest in the great new ideas that we come up with,” Mr. McAvoy said in a memo to staff. “I’m excited to see what we can do with Univision behind us.” [3] [133]
In January 2017, it was announced that The Onion was partnering with Lionsgate Films and production company Serious Business to develop multiple film projects. “We’ve plotted our takeover of the film industry for some time,” said Kyle Ryan, vice president of Onion Studios, in a wry statement. “With the help of Serious Business and Lionsgate, we’ll make room on our award shelf for some Oscars. To the basement you go, Pulitzers.” Serious Business is a production company run by former UTA Online co-founder Jason U. Nadler, @midnight co-creator Jon Zimelis and writer/producer Alex Blagg. [134]

Print Edition (1988–2013)
During The Onion print edition's 25-year run—from the publication's initial creation in 1988 to the end of the print edition in 2013—it was distributed for free in various cities across the United States and Canada as well as via paid mail order subscription to subscribers around the world. By the time the print edition of The Onion ceased publication in December 2013, it was only available in Chicago, Milwaukee and Providence. At its peak, The Onion had a print circulation of about 500,000 while the publication's websites brought in more than 10 million unique monthly visitors. Below is a list of all of the cities in which The Onion was distributed freely at different points from 1988 to 2013. [116] [135] [136] [137]

Regular features
Regular features of The Onion include:

Editors and writers
As of June 2016, the current editor of The Onion is Cole Bolton. [2] Past editors and writers have included:

Books, video, film and audio

Books
Since the first publication of Our Dumb Century in 1999, The Onion has produced various books that often compile already produced material into collected volumes. The 2007 publication of Our Dumb World and the 2012 publication of The Onion Book Of Known Knowledge are the only other fully original books content-wise—other than Our Dumb Century —that The Onion has released.

Onion News Network
In April 2007, The Onion launched Onion News Network —a daily web video broadcast—with a story about an illegal immigrant taking an executive's $800,000-a-year job for $600,000 a year. The publication reportedly initially invested about $1 million in the production and initially hired 15 new staffers to focus on the production of this video broadcast. On February 3, 2009, The Onion launched a spin-off of the Onion News Network called the Onion Sports Network. [89]
In a Wikinews interview in November 2007, former Onion President Mills said the Onion News Network had been a huge hit. "We get over a million downloads a week, which makes it one of the more successful produced-for-the-Internet videos", said Mills. "If we're not the most successful, we're one of the most.' [11]
In January 2011, The Onion launched two TV shows on cable networks: Onion SportsDome premiered January 11 on Comedy Central. [140] and the Onion News Network premiered January 21 on Independent Film Channel (IFC) . [141] Later in the year IFC officially announced the renewal of the Onion News Network for a second season in March 2011 while Comedy Central officially announced the cancellation of Onion SportsDome in June 2011. [142] [143]
In August 2011, the Writers Guild of America, East , AFL-CIO , announced the unionization of the Onion News Network writing staff, averting a potential strike which hinged on pay and benefits. It is also not the first time Onion, Inc. has been criticized for the way it treats its employees: In June 2011 A.V. Club Philadelphia city editor Emily Guendelsberger was the victim of an attack and—according to the Philadelphia Daily News —her job did not provide health insurance to cover hospital bills. According to the WGA, Onion News Network was the only scripted, live-action program that had employed non-union writers. "The ONN writers stood together and won real improvements", said WGAE Executive Director Lowell Peterson. "We welcome them into the WGAE and we look forward to a productive relationship with the company." Peterson noted that more than 70 Guild members from all of the New York-based comedy shows signed a letter supporting the Onion News Network writers, and hundreds of Guild members sent emails to the producers. [144] [145] [146] [147] [148] [149]
In March 2012, IFC officially announced the cancellation of the Onion News Network . After the show's cancellation, a pilot for a new comedy series titled Onion News Empire premiered on Amazon.com in April 2013, which presented as a behind-the-scenes look of The Onion ' s newsroom. The pilot was one of several candidates for production on Amazon, but was not ultimately selected. [150] [151] [152]

YouTube original programming
In 2012, The Onion launched a series of YouTube videos produced by its Onion Digital Studios division, funded in part by a grant from YouTube and exclusive to the site. Series produced so far:

The Onion Movie
The Onion Movie is a direct-to-video film written by then- Onion editor Robert D. Siegel and writer Todd Hanson and directed by Tom Kuntz and Mike Maguire. [154] Created in 2003, Fox Searchlight Pictures was on board to release the movie, originally called The Untitled Onion Movie , but at some point in the process, directors Kuntz and Maguire—as well as writer Siegel—walked away from the project. In 2006, New Regency Productions took over the production of the troubled project. After two years of being in limbo , the film was released directly on DVD on June 3, 2008. Upon its release it was credited as being directed under the pseudonym of James Kleiner but is still directed by Kuntz and Maguire. [155]
In the spring of 2014, former president, publisher, and CEO of The Onion Peter Haise filed a lawsuit Palm Beach County court against the publication's current chairman David K. Schafer with regards to a missing " Executive Producer " credit on the failed film. As stated in the lawsuit, "Onion, Inc. has admitted that Haise was involved in and should have been named as an Executive Producer of the Film, and that the omission in the credits listed for the Film was an error." [156]

Onion Radio News
The Onion Radio News was an audio podcast / radio show produced by The Onion from 1999 and 2009. The core voice of the podcast was that of a fictional newsreader named "Doyle Redland" who was voiced by Pete S. Mueller . At its peak Onion Radio News was picked up by the Westwood One radio network as well as Audible.com . [157] [158] [159]

The Onion

Taken seriously
Occasionally, the straight-faced manner in which The Onion reports non-existent events, happenings and ideas has resulted in third parties mistakenly citing The Onion stories as real news.

As a political actor
Several commentators have characterized The Onion as being more overtly political. Noreen Malone characterized the publication as having a left-leaning outlook by stating:
Malone—like other pundits—specifically noted the publication's sharp take on the Syrian Civil War , with David Weigel characterizing the publication's stance as effectively being "…advocacy for intervention in Syria ." [184] Weigel attributed the trend toward more news satire—including political news satire—as being a byproduct of the publication's shorter turnaround times after the Internet edition became the main outlet for the publication's voice, endangering The Onion of becoming a "…hivemind version of Andy Borowitz , telling liberals that what they already think is not only true but oh-so-arch." Slate's Farhad Manjoo similarly attributed the publication's "…faster, bigger, more strident, and, to me, a little inconsistent…" vibe to the exigencies of the Internet. [5] [184] [185]
Conversely, conservative political pundit website Breitbart has long condemned the publication's political stance with writer Christian Toto attributing the publication's approach to Barack Obama as a part of "…the left's inability to mock one of their own." [186] [187]
Emmett Rensin claimed The Onion is an important if unintentional fomenter of Marxist thought in America:
According to Rensin, examples of indictments of false consciousness , commodity fetishization and valorization of the invisible hand also abound. Rensin attributes the material to the humorists' need to work from "obvious, intuitive truth—the kind necessary for any kind of broadly appealing humor" rather than a conscious decision to promote Marxism. [188]
In 2017 President Donald Trump expressed confidence that his son-in-law Jared Kushner, whom he had just appointed as an advisor on foreign affairs, could bring peace to the Middle East. An Onion article then made fun of the starry-eyed way in which Trump treated the long, complicated and bloody conflict as a mere organisational issue he could delegate, reporting that peace between Israel and Arabia was just too big for Kusnher to achieve within the already started office week and now had to be shifted into the subsequent week. The article was then passed around by White House staffers who were apparently alienated by Kushner's appointment. [189]

Controversies

U.S. Presidential Seal dispute
In September 2005, the assistant counsel to President George W. Bush , Grant M. Dixton, wrote a cease-and-desist letter to The Onion , asking the publication to stop using the presidential seal , which it used in an online parody of Bush.
By executive order , President Richard Nixon had enumerated the allowed uses of the seal ( Executive Order 11649 ), which are more restrictive than the federal statute, but which allows for exceptions to be granted upon formal request. [190]
The Onion responded with a formal request to use the seal in accordance with the executive order, while maintaining that its use was legitimate. The letter stated, "It is inconceivable that anyone would think that, by using the seal, The Onion intends to 'convey... sponsorship or approval' by the president", but then went on to ask that the letter be considered a formal application requesting permission to use the seal. [81] [191] [192]

85th Academy Awards controversy
During the 85th Academy Awards , a post on The Onion ' s Twitter account called 9-year-old Best Actress nominee Quvenzhané Wallis "a cunt ". The post was deleted within an hour, but not before hundreds of angry responses. [193] CEO Steve Hannah issued an apology to Wallis and the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences , calling the remarks "crude and offensive" and "No person should be subjected to such a senseless, humorless comment masquerading as satire." [194] Scott Dikkers—who was Vice President Creative Development for the publication at the time—said in an interview with NBC 5 Chicago that the publication had sent an apology note to Quvenzhané and her family but also stated, "She's a big star now. I think she can take it." [195] The publication's public apology was denounced by some two former Onion writers, with one stating, "It wasn't a great joke, but big deal." [193] [194] [195] [196]

See also
WebPage index: 00095
Scrubs (TV series)
Scrubs (stylized as [scrubs] ) is an American medical comedy-drama television series created by Bill Lawrence that aired from October 2, 2001, to March 17, 2010, on NBC and later ABC . The series follows the lives of employees at the fictional Sacred Heart teaching hospital . The title is a play on surgical scrubs and a term for a low-ranking person because at the beginning of the series, most of the main characters are medical interns .
The series is fast-paced, with slapstick and surreal vignettes presented mostly as the daydreams of the central character, Dr. John "J.D." Dorian , who is played by Zach Braff . The main cast for all but its last season consisted of Braff, Sarah Chalke , Donald Faison , Neil Flynn , Ken Jenkins , John C. McGinley , and Judy Reyes . The series featured multiple guest appearances by film actors, such as Brendan Fraser , Heather Graham , and Colin Farrell .
Although season 8 's " My Finale " was conceived and filmed as a series finale, the show was eventually rebooted for a ninth season , with the setting moved to a medical school, and new cast members introduced. Of the original cast, only Braff, Faison, and McGinley remained regular cast members, while the others, with the exception of Reyes, made guest appearances; Kerry Bishé , Eliza Coupe , Dave Franco , and Michael Mosley became series regulars, with Bishé becoming the show's new narrator.
Scrubs , produced by the television production division of Disney–ABC Television Group , premiered on October 2, 2001, on NBC . The series received a Peabody Award in 2006 . During the seventh season , NBC announced that it would not renew the show; ABC announced it had picked up the eighth season of the series, which began January 6, 2009. The ninth season premiered on December 1, 2009, and on May 14, 2010, ABC officially cancelled the series.

Overview
Scrubs focuses on the unique point of view of its main character and narrator, Dr. John Michael "J.D." Dorian ( Zach Braff ) for the first eight seasons, with season nine being narrated by the new main character Lucy Bennett ( Kerry Bishé ). Most episodes feature multiple story lines thematically linked by voice-overs done by Braff, as well as the comical daydreams of J.D. According to Bill Lawrence , "What we decided was, rather than have it be a monotone narration, if it's going to be Zach's voice, we're going to do everything through J.D.'s eyes. It opened up a visual medium that those of us as comedy writers were not used to." [1] Actors were given the chance to improvise their lines on set with encouragement by series creator Bill Lawrence, with Neil Flynn and Zach Braff being the main improvisors. [2] [3]
Almost every episode title for the first eight seasons begins with the word "My". Bill Lawrence says this is because each episode is Dr. John Dorian writing in his diary (revealed in the commentary on the DVD of the first-season episode " My Hero "). A few episodes are told from another character's perspective and have episode titles like "His Story" or "Her Story". Apart from a brief period of narration from J.D. at the beginning and the end, these episodes primarily contain internal narration from other characters besides J.D. The transfer of the narration duties usually occurs at a moment of physical contact between two characters. Starting with season nine, the episode titles start with "Our..." as the focus has shifted from the perspective of J.D. to a new group of medical students. The webisodes that accompanied season eight, Scrubs: Interns , also were named "Our...".

Cast and characters
For the first eight seasons, the series featured seven main cast members, with numerous other characters recurring throughout the course of the series. Starting with the ninth season, many of the original cast left as regular characters, while four new additions were made to the main cast.

Episodes
The first season introduces John Michael "J.D." Dorian and his best friend Christopher Turk in their first year out of medical school as interns at Sacred Heart Hospital. J.D. meets his reluctant mentor Dr. Perry Cox; an attractive female intern named Elliot, on whom he develops a crush; the hospital's janitor, who goes out of his way to make J.D.'s life difficult; Chief of Medicine Dr. Bob Kelso, who is more concerned about the budget than the patients; and Carla Espinosa, the head nurse who eventually becomes Turk's girlfriend. The characters face romance and relationship issues, family obligations, overwhelming paperwork, long shifts, dealing with death of patients and conflicting pressures from senior doctors.
The second season follows J.D.'s second year practicing medicine at Sacred Heart where Elliot, Turk, and he are now residents. As the season develops, money issues affect the three of them, especially Elliot, whose dad cut her off and J.D.'s older brother Dan ( Tom Cavanagh ) comes to visit, as does Turk's brother Kevin ( D.L. Hughley ). Season two focuses on the romantic relationships of the main characters: Turk proposes to an indecisive Carla, who has doubts about if Turk is mature enough, Elliot dates nurse Paul Flowers ( Rick Schroder ), Dr. Cox dates pharmaceutical rep Julie ( Heather Locklear ) before reigniting a relationship with his pregnant ex-wife Jordan ( Christa Miller ). J.D., meanwhile, attempts a relationship with Elliot, and later falls for Jamie ( Amy Smart ), the wife of one of his coma patients.
As the third season opens, Elliot decides to change her image with some help from the Janitor. J.D.'s undeniable crush on Elliot emerges again, but J.D. instead begins a relationship with Jordan's sister Danni ( Tara Reid ), who is also dealing with feelings for her ex. Turk and Carla are engaged and planning their wedding. Turk, along with the Todd and the other surgical residents, deal with new attending surgeon Dr. Grace Miller ( Bellamy Young ), who dislikes Turk and considers him sexist. Dr. Cox and Jordan are doing well with their relationship and their son Jack, although Dr. Cox develops a schoolboy crush on Dr. Miller. He also struggles with the death of his best friend. Elliot gets into a serious relationship with Sean Kelly ( Scott Foley ) and tries to maintain a long-distance relationship while he is in New Zealand for six months. J.D. eventually convinces Elliot to break up with Sean to date him, only to realize, once he has her, that he does not actually love her. Their relationship lasts three days. The season ends with Turk and Carla's wedding, which Turk misses due to surgery and a church mix-up.
In season four , J.D. finishes his residency and becomes a full-blown colleague of Dr. Cox, although their dynamic does not change much. As the season opens, Turk arrives from his honeymoon with Carla, but they soon start having issues when Carla tries to change many things about her new husband. Their marriage and Turk's friendship with J.D. experience friction when J.D. and Carla share a drunken kiss. Dr. Cox and Jordan learn that their divorce was not final, but this is not necessarily all good news. Elliot is still angry with J.D. for breaking her heart, and the situation becomes more uncomfortable still when she dates J.D.'s brother. J.D. has a new love interest of his own when a new and very attractive psychiatrist, Dr. Molly Clock ( Heather Graham ), arrives at Sacred Heart. Molly also serves as Elliot's mentor during her time at the hospital.
Season five starts with J.D. living in a hotel, sorting out apartment issues. Elliot has taken a new fellowship in another hospital. Turk and Carla are trying to have a baby, despite Turk still having doubts. Finally, new interns have arrived to Sacred Heart, chief among them being Keith Dudemeister ( Travis Schuldt ), who soon becomes Elliot's new boyfriend, much to J.D.'s dissatisfaction. J.D. is cast in the role of expecting father, discovering at the very end of the season that his girlfriend, Dr. Kim Briggs ( Elizabeth Banks ), is pregnant with his child.
The sixth season has J.D. and the other characters mature to fill the different roles required of them. Turk and Carla become parents when Carla gives birth to their daughter Isabella. Elliot plans her wedding to Keith, although J.D. and she still harbor feelings for each other. Dr. Cox, as father of two children with Jordan, struggles to prevent his foul disposition from affecting his parenting.
In season seven , J.D. and Elliot struggle once again to deny their feelings for each other, despite Elliot soon to be marrying Keith and J.D. to have his first son with Kim, while the Janitor may have a new girlfriend. Bob Kelso's job is put on the line as he turns 65 years old. J.D.'s brother Dan also returns to town.
The eighth season has Dr. Kelso's replacement, Dr. Taylor Maddox ( Courteney Cox ), arrive; she quickly makes a lot of changes, affecting the way doctors treat patients. Elliot and J.D. finally discuss their true feelings for each other and again become a couple. Janitor and Lady ( Kit Pongetti ) marry, while Dr. Cox is promoted to chief of medicine to replace the dismissed Dr. Maddox, with some encouragement from Dr. Kelso. Dr. Kelso and Dr. Cox becomes friends and J.D. prepares to leave Sacred Heart to move closer to his son, with Elliot. Turk is promoted to chief of surgery at Sacred Heart.
Coinciding with season eight, the webisode series Scrubs: Interns was launched, focusing around the eighth season's medical interns, Sonja "Sunny" Dey ( Sonal Shah ), Denise ( Eliza Coupe ), Katie (Betsy Beutler), and Howie ( Todd Bosley ). The interns learn from various characters of the show about life in the hospital.
The ninth season takes place over a year after season eight's finale. The old Sacred Heart hospital has been torn down and rebuilt. Doctors Cox, Dorian, and Turk are now Winston University medical school professors whose students occasionally rotate through the new Sacred Heart. Between the end of season eight and the beginning of season nine, the Janitor has left the hospital after being told that J.D. was not returning, and Elliot and J.D. have married and are expecting their first child. J.D.'s stay at the university is short and he leaves the series after six episodes, reappearing in episode 9, "Our Stuff Gets Real", as a secondary character. Kelso's wife passes away and Ted quits Sacred Heart to travel around the U.S. with his girlfriend.

Production
The origin for the show is loosely based on Dr. Jonathan Doris' experiences as a resident in internal medicine at Brown Medical School , which served as inspiration for college friend and show creator Bill Lawrence . [15]
Scrubs was produced by ABC, through its production division , though it was aired by rival broadcaster NBC. [16] According to show runner Lawrence, the arrangement is unusual, at least for 2007: "The show is a dinosaur, on one network and completely owned by another" and, since it is now in syndication , making a "ton of money for Touchstone." [17] Lawrence confirmed ABC would have broadcast the seventh season had NBC refused to do so. [17]

Title sequence
The chest X-ray featured at the end of the title sequence was hung backwards for most of the first five seasons. Lawrence has stated that having the X-ray backwards was intentional as it signified that the new interns were inexperienced. [18] During Zach Braff's audio commentary on " My Last Chance ", he states that the error was actually unintentional. The error became somewhat infamous and was even parodied in " My Cabbage ".
An attempt was made to fix the error in the extended title sequence used at the beginning of season two that included Neil Flynn , but the extended sequence (including corrected X-ray) was soon scrapped due to fan and network request. Finally, in " My Urologist ", Dr. Kim Briggs steps into the credits and switches the X-ray around, saying, "That's backwards; it's been bugging me for years". At the beginning of season eight, when the series switched to ABC, the chest X-ray was once again backwards.
The ninth season features a new title sequence with a new version of the theme song "Superman" performed by WAZ. [19] The new title sequences features the four new characters–Denise, Lucy, Drew, and Cole, as well as Dr. Cox and Turk, while J.D. is seen at the end placing the chest X-ray. In all season nine episodes that do not feature J.D., he is absent from the title sequence and Lucy is the one placing the X-ray. The X-ray at the end of the sequence is also not backwards and the subtitle "Med School" appears at the end of the sequence.

Main crew
The show's creator, Bill Lawrence, was also an executive producer and the showrunner. He wrote 14 episodes and directed 17. Neil Goldman and Garrett Donovan co-wrote 13 episodes during their eight-year run on the show, starting as co-producers on the show and ending as executive producers ; they left the show after the eighth season. [20] Mike Schwartz , who also played Lloyd the Delivery Guy , wrote 13 episodes during the first eight seasons; he started out as a story editor and became co-executive producer in season six. [21] Janae Bakken and Debra Fordham were writers and producers during the first eight seasons, each writing 16 episodes. Other notable writers who started in the first season include Mark Stegemann, who wrote 14 episodes and directed two episodes during the first eight seasons; Gabrielle Allan, who wrote 11 episodes during the first four seasons and was co-executive producer; Eric Weinberg , who wrote 11 episodes during the first six seasons and was co-executive producer; Matt Tarses, who wrote eight episodes during the first four seasons and was co-executive producer. Notable writers who joined in the second season include Tim Hobert, who wrote 11 episodes from seasons two to six, and became executive producer in season five. Angela Nissel wrote 10 episodes from seasons two to eight, starting out as a staff writer and became supervising producer in season seven. Bill Callahan joined the show in season four, writing eight episodes from seasons four to eight; he became executive producer in season six.
Adam Bernstein , who directed the pilot episode, "My First Day", also directed 11 episodes up until season seven. Michael Spiller directed the most episodes, 20 during the entire series run. Ken Whittingham and Chris Koch both directed 12 episodes from seasons two to nine. Comedian Michael McDonald , who also appeared on the show, directed five episodes. Show star Zach Braff directed seven episodes of the show, including the landmark 100th episode " My Way Home ", which won a Peabody Award in April 2007. In 2009, Josh Bycel , a writer and supervising producer for the animated comedy American Dad! , joined the crew as a new executive producer for the ninth season. [20]

Medical advisors
Scrubs writers worked with several medical advisors, including doctors Jonathan Doris, Jon Turk, and Dolly Klock. Their names serve as the basis for the names of characters John Dorian, Chris Turk, and Molly Clock (played by Braff, Faison, and Heather Graham, respectively). In the season eight finale " My Finale ", the "real J.D.", Jonathan Doris, made a cameo appearance as the doctor who said "adios" to J.D. [22]

Filming location and Sacred Heart Hospital
In the show, Sacred Heart is an inner-city teaching hospital located in California. The first eight seasons of Scrubs were filmed on location at the North Hollywood Medical Center , a decommissioned hospital located at 12629 Riverside Drive in North Hollywood , but the location of Sacred Heart Hospital within the fictional world of Scrubs is left ambiguous. Cast and crew on the show refer to the location as "San DiFrangeles"—a portmanteau of San Diego , San Francisco , and Los Angeles that is meant to encompass a large part of California. [23] In season four's episode nine, "My Malpractice Decision", Turk's new phone number has the Sacramento area code 916 . For the ninth season, the show moved to Culver Studios . [24] The building used for the exteriors of the new Sacred Heart Hospital is located at the intersection of Ince Boulevard and Lindblade Street in Culver City, California ( 34°01′26″N 118°23′29″W ﻿ / ﻿ 34.023988°N 118.391414°W ﻿ / 34.023988; -118.391414 ). [25]

WGA strike and network change
On November 5, 2007, the Writers Guild of America went on strike , which put the production of the show's seventh season on hold. When the strike started, only 11 of Scrubs ' 18 planned seventh-season episodes had been finished. [26] Lawrence refused to cross any WGA picket lines to serve any of his duties for the show, so ABC Studios had non-WGA members finish episode 12, which the studio had unsuccessfully pressured Lawrence to rewrite as a series finale prior to the strike. [26]
During the strike, NBC announced that The Office and Scrubs would be replaced by Celebrity Apprentice . NBC later announced that they would leave Scrubs on hiatus for the time being and fill the 8–9 pm timeslot with various specials and repeats. [27]
Episode 11, " My Princess ", was eventually filmed, [28] although Lawrence was absent. Filming of episode 11 was disrupted by picketers. It was believed that Lawrence had tipped the picketers off about the filming schedule, although these beliefs turned out to be false as Lawrence quickly drove to the set to "keep the peace". [28] After the strike ended, Lawrence announced that the final episodes of Scrubs would be produced, although at the time, he was unsure where or how they would be distributed. [29]

Switch to ABC
Amid strike-induced doubt involving the final episodes of Scrubs , on February 28, 2008, The Hollywood Reporter reported that ABC was in talks with corporate sibling ABC Studios with the aim of bringing Scrubs to ABC for an eighth season of 18 episodes, [30] despite Lawrence and Braff's protests that the seventh season would definitely be the last. [28] Just hours later, Variety reported that NBC was lashing out and threatening legal action against ABC Studios. [31] McGinley confirmed that he had been told to report back to work on March 24, 2008, to begin production for another season. [32] On March 12, 2008, McGinley was also quoted as saying that the show's long-rumored move from NBC to ABC was a done deal, [33] and that Scrubs would air on ABC during the 2008–09 TV season as a midseason replacement. [32]
On March 19, 2008, Michael Ausiello of TV Guide reported that although nothing was "official", the Scrubs cast was to report back to work the following Wednesday for work on a season "unofficial" as yet. [34] Zach Braff posted in his blog on MySpace, on April 28, 2008, that an eighth season consisting of 18 episodes was under production, but that he could not say where it will be aired. [35] He then stated, on May 7, 2008, that the May 8 episode would be the final NBC-aired episode of Scrubs , [36] which was followed by a bulletin on his MySpace, on May 12, confirming that Scrubs ' s eighth season would be moving to ABC.

Season eight
On May 13, 2008, ABC announced that Scrubs would be a midseason replacement , airing Tuesday nights at 9:00 pm EST. [37] [38] Steve McPherson, ABC's President of Entertainment, also stated that additional seasons of Scrubs beyond the eighth could be produced if it performs well. [39] In late November, ABC announced Scrubs would resume with back-to-back episodes on January 6, 2009, at 9:00 pm EST. [40]
Creator Bill Lawrence described season eight as more like the first few seasons in tone, with increased focus on more realistic storylines, accompanied by the introduction of new characters. [41] Courteney Cox joined the cast as the new chief of medicine, Dr. Maddox, for a three-episode arc. [42] [43] The eighth season includes webisodes and is the first Scrubs season broadcast in high definition . [44]
Sarah Chalke was hoping that J.D. and Elliot would end up back together, comparing them to Friends characters Ross and Rachel , which has been addressed a few times on the show. In the early episodes of the season, they did rekindle their relationship, and continued dating through the end of the season. Several actors who guest starred as patients at Sacred Heart during the course of Scrubs returned for the finale. [45]
The double-length season eight finale, "My Finale", aired May 6, 2009, and was expected to be the series finale, as well. However, it soon became clear that the show would return for a ninth season.

Season nine
On April 16, 2009, Bill Lawrence wrote on the ABC.com message boards that a season nine of Scrubs was still "50/50". [46] On April 28, it was announced that ABC was in talks to renew Scrubs for another year. [47]
Bill Lawrence also stated that Scrubs as it was is over, for the show to move forward with a new cast in an ER type role on ABC, or take a new title completely. In response to criticisms that the change would tarnish Scrubs ' legacy, Lawrence defended the decision, as it would allow the Scrubs crew to continue work through a recession : "'Legacy shmegacy.' I'm really proud of the show, I'll continue to be proud of the show, but I love all of those people..." [48]
On June 19, 2009, it was announced that the ninth season of Scrubs would "shift from the hospital to the classroom and make med-school professors of John C. McGinley's Dr. Cox and Donald Faison's Turk." According to Lawrence, the ninth season will "be a lot like Paper Chase as a comedy", with Cox and Turk's students occasionally rotating through the halls of Sacred Heart and encountering former series regulars. McGinley and Faison were joined by "a quartet of newbies (most of them playing students)" as full-time regulars, while one of the freshmen "will be fairly famous". [49]
Of the seven actors who had appeared in the show since the pilot, only Faison and McGinley retained their roles as regulars. Zach Braff returned part-time and was absent for the majority of the season, while retaining lead billing for six episodes. Sarah Chalke returned for four episodes as a guest star; Ken Jenkins , credited as a guest star, appeared in nine of the 13 episodes; Neil Flynn appeared in the season premiere in a brief cameo; Judy Reyes was the only former star not to return to the show.
The new main cast included Eliza Coupe [50] returning to the recurring role of Denise "Jo" Mahoney from season eight, Dave Franco as Cole, a charming, confidently stupid, and incredibly entitled medical student whose family donated the money to build the school, [51] Kerry Bishé as Lucy, who shared the starring role with Braff in the beginning of the season and eventually became the show's new narrator, [24] [52] and Michael Mosley as Drew, a 30-year-old med student on his last attempt at school. [52] [53]
Production for the final season took place at Culver Studios.

Cancellation
On May 14, 2010, it was officially announced that the show was canceled. The season nine finale, titled "Our Thanks", aired March 17, 2010. Five days later, on March 22, 2010, Zach Braff announced, via the official Facebook page, that the ninth season of Scrubs would be the last, commenting that, "Many of you have asked, so here it is: it appears that 'New Scrubs', 'Scrubs 2.0', 'Scrubs with New Kids', 'Scrubbier', 'Scrubs without JD' is no more. It was worth a try, but alas... it didn't work." [54] [55]

Crossovers
Zach Braff, Sarah Chalke, Judy Reyes, John C. McGinley and Neil Flynn reprised their roles as J.D., Elliot Reid, Carla Espinosa, Perry Cox, and the Janitor to make a cameo appearances in the 2003 Muppets film It's a Very Merry Muppet Christmas Movie , trying to reanimate Miss Piggy . Eventually, Piggy and the Scrubs cast break the fourth wall , with the actors portraying themselves and Bill Lawrence appearing as himself/the director of the current episode.
Sam Lloyd reprised his role as Ted Buckland in the season two finale of the Lawrence series Cougar Town . In the episode, written and directed by Lawrence, Ted is in Hawaii and says his girlfriend, Stephanie Gooch , has run off with Dr. Hooch . [56] Lloyd reprised his role again in a season three episode which also featured Ken Jenkins, Robert Maschio, Zach Braff, Christa Miller, Sarah Chalke and the Worthless Peons in cameo appearances at the end of the episode.

Cinematography and delivery format
The show is shot with a single instead of multiple-camera setup more typical for sitcoms. [1] The season four episode "My Life in Four Cameras", has a brief multiple-camera style, since it includes J.D.'s fantasies of life being more like a traditional sitcom.
John Inwood, the cinematographer of the series, shot the series with his own Aaton XTR prod Super16 film camera. Despite the fact that some broadcasters, such as the BBC, consider Super 16 a "non-HD" format, [57] John Inwood believed that footage from his camera was not only sufficient to air in high definition, but it also "looked terrific." [58]
Except for the finale of season five, "My Transition", which was broadcast in high definition , [59] the first seven seasons of the show have been broadcast in standard definition with a 4:3 frame aspect ratio. After the show was moved from NBC to ABC, the broadcast format for new episodes changed to high definition. John Inwood opined that older episodes could be rereleased in HD, as well. From the very beginning, he filmed the show with widescreen delivery in mind so the whole series could be aired in high definition when the market evolved. [58]
All nine seasons have been released on DVD in 4:3 format. However, the eighth season was also released on Blu-ray Disc in the original widescreen format.

Music
Music plays a large role in Scrubs . A wide variety of rock, pop, and indie artists are featured, and almost every episode ends with a musical montage summing up the themes and plot lines of the episode, and the music for these montages is often picked even before the episodes are completely written. [60]
Members of the cast and crew are encouraged to contribute song suggestions, with many ideas coming from series creator Bill Lawrence, writer Neil Goldman , and actors Zach Braff (whose college friends Cary Brothers and Joshua Radin appear on the Scrubs soundtrack) and Christa Miller (who selected Colin Hay and Tammany Hall NYC ). According to Lawrence, "Christa picks so much of the music for the show that a lot of the writers and actors don't even go to me anymore when they have a song. They hand it to her." [60]
In addition to music being featured as a soundtrack to the show, the cast also sings on a frequent basis, such as in the episode " My Best Friend's Mistake " when the entire cast had the Erasure song " A Little Respect " stuck in their heads and would sing it repeatedly. Producers expanded Scrubs' musical emphasis with a musical episode early in the sixth season, called " My Musical ". This episode aired on January 18, 2007. [61]

Theme song
The theme song of the series, performed by Lazlo Bane , is titled " Superman ", and can be found on the album All the Time in the World , as well as on the first Scrubs soundtrack. Lawrence credits Braff for finding and suggesting "Superman" as the theme song, [18] with the specific lyric "I'm no Superman" serving as an allusion to the fallibility of the lead characters.
The Scrubs main title is performed at a faster tempo than the original recording of the song. The original, slower recording was used briefly at the beginning of season two, played during an extended version of the title sequence, as well as the opening for " My Urologist ", and a special edit of the title sequence for resulting in roughly 1–2 seconds of music, followed by the line "I'm no Superman", accompanied by a quick flash of credits. The original introduction from season one was used through most of season three and then used for seasons four through eight. Beginning with season nine, a new version of "Superman" is used which is performed by WAZ. [62]

Soundtracks
Three official soundtracks have been released. The first soundtrack, Music From Scrubs , was released on CD on September 24, 2002. [63] The second soundtrack, Scrubs Original Soundtrack Vol. 2 , was released exclusively on iTunes on May 9, 2006. [64] The third soundtrack, "My Musical" Soundtrack , featured the music composed and performed in musical episode "My Musical"; it was released on Amazon.com and iTunes on August 7, 2007. [65]

Featured musical contributors
Colin Hay , the former frontman of Men at Work , has had music featured in at least seven episodes, and has appeared in the episode " My Overkill ", performing the song " Overkill " as a street musician, and in the episode " My Hard Labor " performing " Down Under ". Hay also sings " Where Everybody Knows Your Name ", the theme from Cheers , in the episode " My Life in Four Cameras " and the episode " My Philosophy " features Hay's song " Waiting For My Real Life To Begin ", sung by several members of the cast. He also appeared in "My Finale".
The music of Joshua Radin , who is a friend of Scrubs star Zach Braff, [66] appeared in six episodes.
Music by Keren DeBerg has featured in 15 episodes, and she appeared in "My Musical" as an extra in the song "All Right". [67]
Clay Aiken appeared in the episode "My Life in Four Cameras" and performed the song " Isn't She Lovely? " by Stevie Wonder .

The Worthless Peons
The Worthless Peons (also known as Ted's Band, The Blanks, or in the " My Way Home " Director's Cut, as " Foghat ") are an a cappella group made up of Sacred Heart hospital employees from different departments. They are a cover band, and often sing songs from a specific genre (for example, cartoon theme songs or commercial jingles).
The Worthless Peons are played by The Blanks , who are a real-life a cappella band made up of Sam Lloyd (who plays Ted), George Miserlis, Paul F. Perry, and Philip McNiven. The Blanks' album, Riding the Wave , features guest appearances from Lawrence and members of the Scrubs cast. This band was put on the show when Sam Lloyd brought his a cappella band to the Scrubs cast Christmas party. Lloyd told Lawrence about his band, and Lawrence got the idea of putting them in the show. [68]
The Worthless Peons also sing the theme song to the web series Scrubs: Interns , which features the new interns from season eight learning about the hospital in the same way that J.D. did in season one. Interns is aired on the ABC website.

Reception

Critical reception

First eight seasons
Throughout its original run, Scrubs received critical acclaim, with many critics praising its cast, characters, and humor (especially J.D.'s fantasy sequences). [69] [70] [71] In 2006, Entertainment Weekly ' s website EW.com gave the overall series (the review was made early after the fifth-season premiere) a grade of "A-", with the author saying " Scrubs is the trickiest comedy on TV [...] A likable, daffy, buoyant series that would be a big annoying mess if it weren't done just right, Scrubs is the very definition of nimble". [69] IGN gave the first season a perfect score of 10. The seven following seasons were rated, respectively, 9, 9, 9, 8, 7.5, 8.3 and 7.5. [72]
Common Sense Media , which mainly rates series in terms of violence, sex, and profanity, gave Scrubs a positive review and awarded it 4 out of 5 stars despite having rated both "Sex", "Language" and "Drinking, drugs, & smoking" 3 out of 5, stating "this show can be screamingly funny but is very adult-oriented". [70] The Truth About Nursing, which checks the realism of the medical series, gave Scrubs a "Nursing rating" of 1.5 out of 4 stars, but an "Artistic rating" of 3 out of 4 stars, praising that "despite the nasty and surreal elements, its characters are not above learning or growing, as they try to cope with the very real stresses of life and death at the hospital". However, the reviewer stated, "The show's portrayal of nursing has been less impressive". [71]
Review aggregate Metacritic only assigned an average score to the eighth and ninth seasons , with the eighth season scored 79/100, based on four reviews only (all positives), indicating "Generally favorable reviews". [73]

Ninth season
The ninth and final season received mixed reviews, with many critics heavily criticizing the new cast; it received a score of 64/100 on Metacritic, indicating "Generally favorable reviews". [74] An IGN editor gave it a positive score of 7 out of 10, stating "even though this was not the best season, I'll always have fond memories of the show". [75]
USA Today reviewer Robert Bianco wrote a negative review, stating "The result is a deadly, deal-driven mistake that takes a network that has made great sitcom strides forward one unfortunate step back". He also noted that the presence of a few members of the original cast (Braff, Faison, and John C. McGinley) "only makes it harder for the new characters to take hold" (despite his additional criticism of Braff's performance). [76] Blogcritics gave it a mixed review, criticizing the new cast, but praising the performances by the original cast members. [77]

Awards and nominations
Scrubs received 17 Emmy nominations, in categories such as casting, cinematography, directing, editing, and writing, winning only two. [78] Its fourth season earned the series its first nomination for Outstanding Comedy Series . Zach Braff was also nominated that year for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series . The series was nominated again the following year for Outstanding Comedy Series. At the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards , the episode "My Musical" was nominated for five awards in four categories: Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series (Will Mackenzie), Outstanding Music Direction (Jan Stevens) and Outstanding Original Music and Lyrics ("Everything Comes Down to Poo" and "Guy Love"); while sharing the award for Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy or Drama Series (Half-Hour) And Animation (Joe Foglia, Peter J. Nusbaum, and John W. Cook II) with Entourage . [79]
Braff was nominated for the Golden Globe award for Best Actor in a Television Series, Comedy or Musical in 2005, 2006, and 2007. [80]
The show won the 2002, 2008, and 2009 Humanitas Prize , an award created for rewarding human dignity, meaning, and freedom. It also won a Peabody Award . [81]

References 

External links
WebPage index: 00096
CollegeHumor
CollegeHumor is a comedy website based in Los Angeles and owned by IAC /InterActiveCorp. The site features daily original comedy videos and articles created by its in-house writing and production team, in addition to user-submitted videos, pictures, articles and links. It was created by Josh Abramson and Ricky Van Veen . In early 2009, CollegeHumor's editorial staff wrote and starred in their own TV show, The CollegeHumor Show , on MTV . CollegeHumor is operated by CHMedia , a New York company that also owns Defunker, Sports Pickle, and Jest (formerly Today's Big Thing, also owned by IAC). [2]
CHMedia is also a partner of the website BustedTees, an online clothing website.
Many of its staff also operate the sister website Dorkly , centering on video games and video game parodies in the vein of CollegeHumor.

History
The site was created in December 1999 by Josh Abramson and Ricky Van Veen , with help from web developer Jakob Lodwick . Abramson and Van Veen were high school friends from Baltimore, Maryland . The site traffic averages over 7 million monthly unique visitors, according to Quantcast direct measurement. [3]
Abramson said in an interview, "[We wanted to start] an advertisement-based business because at the time the advertising market was pretty hot and we’d seen other people develop Web sites that were popular making a lot of money." Their aim was to create a humor site that would appeal to the advertiser-friendly college-aged demographic. [4]
CollegeHumor, along with its parent company, Connected Ventures, was acquired by Barry Diller 's IAC in August 2006. [5]
In recent years, [ when? ] CollegeHumor has become known for its original comedy content. The site has been nominated for the Webby Award in the humor category, [6] and many of their individual videos have been nominated for and/or won Webby Awards. Recent winners include "Pixar Intro Parody" for Best Animation, "Web Site Story" for Best Individual Short or Episode, and " Jake and Amir " for Best Series. Their shorts "Awkward Rap" and "Hand Vagina" were nominated for the Webby Award for Best Comedy: Individual Short or Episode in 2008 and 2009 with other nominees and winners since.
In 2014, the two parts of their short "Furry Force" won the Ursa Major Award for Best Dramatic Series or Short Work.
In 2014, CollegeHumor was listed on New Media Rockstars Top 100 Channels, ranked at number 76. [7]

Features

Videos
CollegeHumor produces original comedy videos under the CH Originals (formerly known as CHTV) banner. In addition, the site hosts a large collection of user-submitted viral videos , encompassing home movies, bizarre sports highlights, sketches, and such. These videos are released one month prior to being posted on YouTube.
The CollegeHumor YouTube channel has reached over 5 billion views, and over 11.4 million subscribers (as of December 2016).

Pictures
CollegeHumor's pictures section features user-submitted photographs. Like the site's videos, CollegeHumor's pictures are of a humorous or bizarre nature. CollegeHumor also occasionally holds photo-based contests for its users.

Articles
CollegeHumor posts original writing from its staff and users, including humorous essays, comics, interviews and weekly columns on sports, video games, college life, and dating. Contributing writers to the site have included notable comedians Steve Hofstetter , Christian Finnegan , Brooks Wheelan , Paul Scheer , Amir Blumenfeld , Alex Figueroa , Justin Johnson, [8] and Judah Friedlander . Andrew Bridgman curates the articles and edits the website's front page. [9]

CH Originals
CH Originals is CollegeHumor's original comedy video section, featuring sketches and short films written and produced by the CollegeHumor staff. The site releases over ten new videos per week. CH Originals videos include sketch comedy, film and television parodies, animation, and music videos. In addition to stand-alone viral comedy shorts or "one-offs", which are usually shot on location and feature hired actors, CH Originals also produces a number of series—notably "Hardly Working", "Jake and Amir", and "Nerd Alert"—which are shot in the CH office and star the CH staff members themselves. [10]
CollegeHumor's original videos average 20 million views per month on the site. In addition, their videos are collected on the CollegeHumor YouTube Channel, which currently has over 11 million subscribers, with over 27,765 new subscribers joining each week. [11]

List of series
CH original sketches, animations, and music
Hardly Working
Jake and Amir
Full Benefits
TV RPG
POV
The Six
Every 7 Seconds
Prank War
CH Live
The All-Nighter
Dire Consequences
IRL Files
Very Mary-Kate
Hello, My Name Is...
Troopers
Dinosaur Office
BearShark
Badman
Precious Plum
The Adventures of Kim Jong Un
If Google was a guy
Past series

The CollegeHumor Show
On December 17, 2008, CollegeHumor.com announced The CollegeHumor Show , a scripted comedy that premiered on MTV on February 8, 2009. [14] The half-hour comedy was written by and starred nine CollegeHumor editorial staff members (Ricky Van Veen, Jake Hurwitz , Amir Blumenfeld , Dan Gurewitch , Patrick Cassels, Sarah Schneider , Streeter Seidell , Sam Reich and Jeff Rubin), who played fictionalized versions of themselves.

Books
WebPage index: 00097
Website
A website [1] is a collection of related web pages , including multimedia content, typically identified with a common domain name , and published on at least one web server . A website may be accessible via a public Internet Protocol (IP) network, such as the Internet , or a private local area network (LAN), by referencing a uniform resource locator (URL) that identifies the site.
Websites have many functions and can be used in various fashions; a website can be a personal website , a commercial website for a company, a government website or a non-profit organization website. Websites are typically dedicated to a particular topic or purpose, ranging from entertainment and social networking to providing news and education. All publicly accessible websites collectively constitute the World Wide Web , while private websites, such as a company's website for its employees, are typically a part of an intranet .
Web pages, which are the building blocks of websites, are documents , typically composed in plain text interspersed with formatting instructions of Hypertext Markup Language ( HTML , XHTML ). They may incorporate elements from other websites with suitable markup anchors . Web pages are accessed and transported with the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), which may optionally employ encryption ( HTTP Secure , HTTPS) to provide security and privacy for the user. The user's application, often a web browser , renders the page content according to its HTML markup instructions onto a display terminal .
Hyperlinking between web pages conveys to the reader the site structure and guides the navigation of the site, which often starts with a home page containing a directory of the site web content . Some websites require user registration or subscription to access content. Examples of subscription websites include many business sites, news websites, academic journal websites, gaming websites, file-sharing websites, message boards , web-based email , social networking websites, websites providing real-time stock market data, as well as sites providing various other services. As of 2016 end users can access websites on a range of devices, including desktop and laptop computers , tablet computers , smartphones and smart TVs .

History
The World Wide Web (WWW) was created in 1990 by the British CERN physicist Tim Berners-Lee . [2] On 30 April 1993, CERN announced that the World Wide Web would be free to use for anyone. [3] Before the introduction of HTML and HTTP, other protocols such as File Transfer Protocol and the gopher protocol were used to retrieve individual files from a server. These protocols offer a simple directory structure which the user navigates and chooses files to download. Documents were most often presented as plain text files without formatting, or were encoded in word processor formats.

Overview
Websites have many functions and can be used in various fashions; a website can be a personal website , a commercial website, a government website or a non-profit organization website. Websites can be the work of an individual, a business or other organization, and are typically dedicated to a particular topic or purpose. Any website can contain a hyperlink to any other website, so the distinction between individual sites, as perceived by the user, can be blurred. Websites are written in, or converted to, HTML ( Hyper Text Markup Language ) and are accessed using a software interface classified as a user agent . Web pages can be viewed or otherwise accessed from a range of computer -based and Internet-enabled devices of various sizes, including desktop computers, laptops, PDAs and cell phones. A website is hosted on a computer system known as a web server , also called an HTTP server. These terms can also refer to the software that runs on these systems which retrieves and delivers the web pages in response to requests from the website's users. Apache is the most commonly used web server software (according to Netcraft statistics) and Microsoft 's IIS is also commonly used. Some alternatives, such as Nginx , Lighttpd , Hiawatha or Cherokee , are fully functional and lightweight.

Static website
A static website is one that has web pages stored on the server in the format that is sent to a client web browser. It is primarily coded in Hypertext Markup Language (HTML); Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) are used to control appearance beyond basic HTML. Images are commonly used to effect the desired appearance and as part of the main content. Audio or video might also be considered "static" content if it plays automatically or is generally non-interactive. This type of website usually displays the same information to all visitors. Similar to handing out a printed brochure to customers or clients, a static website will generally provide consistent, standard information for an extended period of time. Although the website owner may make updates periodically, it is a manual process to edit the text, photos and other content and may require basic website design skills and software. Simple forms or marketing examples of websites, such as classic website , a five-page website or a brochure website are often static websites, because they present pre-defined, static information to the user. This may include information about a company and its products and services through text, photos, animations, audio/video, and navigation menus.
Static websites can be edited using four broad categories of software:
Static websites may still use server side includes (SSI) as an editing convenience, such as sharing a common menu bar across many pages. As the site's behaviour to the reader is still static, this is not considered a dynamic site.

Dynamic website
A dynamic website is one that changes or customizes itself frequently and automatically. Server-side dynamic pages are generated "on the fly" by computer code that produces the HTML (CSS are responsible for appearance and thus, are static files). There are a wide range of software systems, such as CGI , Java Servlets and Java Server Pages (JSP), Active Server Pages and ColdFusion (CFML) that are available to generate dynamic web systems and dynamic sites . Various web application frameworks and web template systems are available for general-use programming languages like Perl , PHP , Python and Ruby to make it faster and easier to create complex dynamic websites.
A site can display the current state of a dialogue between users, monitor a changing situation, or provide information in some way personalized to the requirements of the individual user. For example, when the front page of a news site is requested, the code running on the web server might combine stored HTML fragments with news stories retrieved from a database or another website via RSS to produce a page that includes the latest information. Dynamic sites can be interactive by using HTML forms , storing and reading back browser cookies , or by creating a series of pages that reflect the previous history of clicks. Another example of dynamic content is when a retail website with a database of media products allows a user to input a search request, e.g. for the keyword Beatles . In response, the content of the web page will spontaneously change the way it looked before, and will then display a list of Beatles products like CDs, DVDs and books. Dynamic HTML uses JavaScript code to instruct the web browser how to interactively modify the page contents. One way to simulate a certain type of dynamic website while avoiding the performance loss of initiating the dynamic engine on a per-user or per-connection basis, is to periodically automatically regenerate a large series of static pages.

Multimedia and interactive content
Early websites had only text, and soon after, images. Web browser plug ins were then used to add audio, video, and interactivity (such as for a rich Internet application that mirrors the complexity of a desktop application like a word processor ). Examples of such plug-ins are Microsoft Silverlight , Adobe Flash , Adobe Shockwave , and applets written in Java . HTML 5 includes provisions for audio and video without plugins. JavaScript is also built into most modern web browsers, and allows for website creators to send code to the web browser that instructs it how to interactively modify page content and communicate with the web server if needed. The browser's internal representation of the content is known as the Document Object Model (DOM) and the technique is known as Dynamic HTML . A 2010-era trend in websites called "responsive design" has given the best of viewing experience as it provides with a device based layout for users. These websites change their layout according to the device or mobile platform thus giving a rich user experience. [4]

Spelling
While "web site" was the original spelling (sometimes capitalized "Web site", since "Web" is a proper noun when referring to the World Wide Web ), this variant has become rarely used, and "website" has become the standard spelling. All major style guides, such as The Chicago Manual of Style [5] and the AP Stylebook , [6] have reflected this change.

Types
Websites can be divided into two broad categories—static and interactive. Interactive sites are part of the Web 2.0 community of sites, and allow for interactivity between the site owner and site visitors or users. Static sites serve or capture information but do not allow engagement with the audience or users directly. Some websites are informational or produced by enthusiasts or for personal use or entertainment. Many websites do aim to make money, using one or more business models, including:
There are many varieties of websites, each specializing in a particular type of content or use, and they may be arbitrarily classified in any number of ways. A few such classifications might include:
Some websites may be included in one or more of these categories. For example, a business website may promote the business's products, but may also host informative documents, such as white papers . There are also numerous sub-categories to the ones listed above. For example, a porn site is a specific type of e-commerce site or business site (that is, it is trying to sell memberships for access to its site) or have social networking capabilities. A fansite may be a dedication from the owner to a particular celebrity . Websites are constrained by architectural limits (e.g., the computing power dedicated to the website). Very large websites, such as Facebook, Yahoo!, Microsoft, and Google employ many servers and load balancing equipment such as Cisco Content Services Switches to distribute visitor loads over multiple computers at multiple locations. As of early 2011, Facebook utilized 9 data centers with approximately 63,000 servers.
In February 2009, Netcraft , an Internet monitoring [ disambiguation needed ] company that has tracked Web growth since 1995, reported that there were 215,675,903 websites with domain names and content on them in 2009, compared to just 19,732 websites in August 1995. [7] After reaching 1 billion websites in September 2014, a milestone confirmed by NetCraft in its October 2014 Web Server Survey and that Internet Live Stats was the first to announce—as attested by this tweet from the inventor of the World Wide Web himself, Tim Berners-Lee—the number of websites in the world has subsequently declined, reverting to a level below 1 billion. This is due to the monthly fluctuations in the count of inactive websites. The number of websites again grew to over 1 billion in March 2016, and has continued growing since. [8]

See also
WebPage index: 00098
Wikiquote
Wikiquote is one of a family of wiki -based projects run by the Wikimedia Foundation , running on MediaWiki software. Based on an idea by Daniel Alston and implemented by Brion Vibber, the goal of the project which began as an outgrowth to Wikipedia Famous Quotations is to produce collaboratively a vast reference of quotations from prominent people, books, films, proverbs, etc. and to be as proper as possible in regard to the details of the quotations and also providing the appropriate human reference of the quotation. Though there are many online collections of quotations, Wikiquote is distinguished by being among the few that provide an opportunity for visitors to contribute. [2] Wikiquote pages are cross-linked to articles about the notable personalities on Wikipedia. [3]
Initially, the project was created solely in English; a later expansion to include additional languages was started in July 2004. [ citation needed ]

History

Multi-lingual cooperation
As of September 2016, there are 89 versions. [4] As of September 2016, thirty-one versions each have more than 1,000 articles. The largest Wikiquote is the English project with over 28,000 articles, followed by the Italian, Polish, Russian, Czech, German, Portuguese, and Spanish sites with over 5,000 articles each, and then by the Ukrainian, Slovak, Persian, Bosnian, and French (which was restarted in December 2006, after being taken down for legal reasons). Sixty language versions have 100 or more articles. [4]

See also
WebPage index: 00099
Nicholas G. Carr
Nicholas G. Carr (born 1959) is an American writer who has published books and articles on technology, business, and culture. His book The Shallows: What the Internet Is Doing to Our Brains was a finalist for the 2011 Pulitzer Prize in General Nonfiction. [1]

Career
Nicholas Carr originally came to prominence with the 2003 Harvard Business Review article "IT Doesn't Matter" and the 2004 book Does IT Matter? Information Technology and the Corrosion of Competitive Advantage ( Harvard Business School Press ). In these widely discussed works, he argued that the strategic importance of information technology in business has diminished as IT has become more commonplace, standardized and cheaper. His ideas roiled the information technology industry, [2] spurring heated outcries from executives of Microsoft , Intel , Hewlett-Packard and other leading technology companies, although the ideas got mixed responses from other commentators. [3] [4] [5] In 2005, Carr published the controversial article "The End of Corporate Computing" in the MIT Sloan Management Review , in which he argued that in the future companies will purchase information technology as a utility service from outside suppliers. [6]
Carr's second book, The Big Switch: Rewiring the World, From Edison to Google , was published in January 2008 by W. W. Norton . It examines the economic and social consequences of the rise of Internet-based " cloud computing " comparing the consequences to those that occurred with the rise of electric utilities in the early 20th century. [7]
In the summer of 2008, The Atlantic published Carr's article " Is Google Making Us Stupid? " as the cover story of its annual Ideas issue. [8] Highly critical of the Internet's effect on cognition, the article has been read and debated widely in both the media and the blogosphere . Carr's main argument is that the Internet may have detrimental effects on cognition that diminish the capacity for concentration and contemplation.
Carr's 2010 book, The Shallows , develops this argument further. Discussing various examples ranging from Nietzsche 's typewriter to London cab drivers' GPS navigators , Carr shows how newly introduced technologies change the way people think, act and live. [9] [ dead link ] The book focuses on the detrimental influence of the Internet—although it does recognize its beneficial aspects—by investigating how hypertext has contributed to the fragmentation of knowledge. When we search the Web, for instance, the context of information can be easily ignored. "We don't see the trees," Carr writes. "We see twigs and leaves." [10] One of Carr's major points is that the change caused by the Internet involves the physical restructuring of the human brain, which he explains using the neuroscientific notion of " neuroplasticity ." In addition to being a Pulitzer Prize nominee, the book appeared on the New York Times nonfiction bestseller list [11] and has been translated into 17 languages in addition to English. [12]
In January 2008 Carr became a member of the Editorial Board of Advisors of Encyclopædia Britannica . [13] Earlier in his career, Carr served as executive editor of the Harvard Business Review . He was educated at Dartmouth College and Harvard University . [14]
In 2014, Carr published his fourth book, " The Glass Cage: Automation and Us ", which presents a critical examination of the role of computer automation in contemporary life. Spanning historical, technical, economic, and philosophical viewpoints, the book has been widely acclaimed by reviewers, with the New York Times Sunday Book Review terming it "essential." [15]
In 2016, Carr published " Utopia Is Creepy: and Other Provocations ", a collection of blog posts, essays, and reviews from 2005 to 2016. The book provides a critique of modern American techno-utopianism, [16] which TIME magazine said "punches a hole in Silicon Valley cultural hubris." [17]

Blog
Through his blog "Rough Type," Carr has been a critic of technological utopianism and in particular the populist claims made for online social production . In his 2005 blog essay titled "The Amorality of Web 2.0," he criticized the quality of volunteer Web 2.0 information projects such as Wikipedia and the blogosphere and argued that they may have a net negative effect on society by displacing more expensive professional alternatives. [18] In a response to Carr's criticism, Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales admitted that the Wikipedia articles quoted by Carr "are, quite frankly, a horrific embarrassment" and solicited recommendations for improving Wikipedia's quality. [19] In May 2007, Carr argued that the dominance of Wikipedia pages in many search results represents a dangerous consolidation of Internet traffic and authority, which may be leading to the creation of what he called "information plantations". [20] Carr coined the term "wikicrats" (a pejorative description of Wikipedia administrators ) in August 2007, as part of a more general critique of what he sees as Wikipedia's tendency to develop ever more elaborate and complex systems of rules and bureaucratic rank or caste over time. [21]

See also

Books

Notes

External links
WebPage index: 00100
The Wisdom of Crowds
The Wisdom of Crowds: Why the Many Are Smarter Than the Few and How Collective Wisdom Shapes Business, Economies, Societies and Nations , published in 2004, is a book written by James Surowiecki about the aggregation of information in groups, resulting in decisions that, he argues, are often better than could have been made by any single member of the group. The book presents numerous case studies and anecdotes to illustrate its argument, and touches on several fields, primarily economics and psychology .
The opening anecdote relates Francis Galton 's surprise that the crowd at a county fair accurately guessed the weight of an ox when their individual guesses were averaged (the average was closer to the ox's true butchered weight than the estimates of most crowd members). [1] [2]
The book relates to diverse collections of independently deciding individuals, rather than crowd psychology as traditionally understood. Its central thesis, that a diverse collection of independently deciding individuals is likely to make certain types of decisions and predictions better than individuals or even experts, draws many parallels with statistical sampling ; however, there is little overt discussion of statistics in the book.
Its title is an allusion to Charles Mackay 's Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds , published in 1841. [3]

Types of crowd wisdom
Surowiecki breaks down the advantages he sees in disorganized decisions into three main types, which he classifies as

Four elements required to form a wise crowd
Not all crowds (groups) are wise. Consider, for example, mobs or crazed investors in a stock market bubble . According to Surowiecki, these key criteria separate wise crowds from irrational ones:
Based on Surowiecki’s book, Oinas-Kukkonen [4] captures the wisdom of crowds approach with the following eight conjectures:

Failures of crowd intelligence
Surowiecki studies situations (such as rational bubbles ) in which the crowd produces very bad judgment, and argues that in these types of situations their cognition or cooperation failed because (in one way or another) the members of the crowd were too conscious of the opinions of others and began to emulate each other and conform rather than think differently. Although he gives experimental details of crowds collectively swayed by a persuasive speaker, he says that the main reason that groups of people intellectually conform is that the system for making decisions has a systematic flaw.
Surowiecki asserts that what happens when the decision making environment is not set up to accept the crowd, is that the benefits of individual judgments and private information are lost and that the crowd can only do as well as its smartest member, rather than perform better (as he shows is otherwise possible). [5] Detailed case histories of such failures include:

Connection
At the 2005 O'Reilly Emerging Technology Conference Surowiecki presented a session entitled Independent Individuals and Wise Crowds , or Is It Possible to Be Too Connected? [7]
He recommends:
Tim O'Reilly [8] and others also discuss the success of Google , wikis , blogging , and Web 2.0 in the context of the wisdom of crowds.

Applications
Surowiecki is a very strong advocate of the benefits of decision markets and regrets the failure of DARPA 's controversial Policy Analysis Market to get off the ground. He points to the success of public and internal corporate markets as evidence that a collection of people with varying points of view but the same motivation (to make a good guess) can produce an accurate aggregate prediction. According to Surowiecki, the aggregate predictions have been shown to be more reliable than the output of any think tank . He advocates extensions of the existing futures markets even into areas such as terrorist activity and prediction markets within companies.
To illustrate this thesis, he says that his publisher is able to publish a more compelling output by relying on individual authors under one-off contracts bringing book ideas to them. In this way they are able to tap into the wisdom of a much larger crowd than would be possible with an in-house writing team.
Will Hutton has argued that Surowiecki's analysis applies to value judgments as well as factual issues, with crowd decisions that "emerge of our own aggregated free will [being] astonishingly... decent". He concludes that "There's no better case for pluralism, diversity and democracy, along with a genuinely independent press." [9]
Applications of the wisdom-of-crowds effect exist in three general categories: Prediction markets , Delphi methods , and extensions of the traditional opinion poll .

Prediction markets
The most common application is the prediction market, a speculative or betting market created to make verifiable predictions. Surowiecki discusses the success of prediction markets. Similar to Delphi methods but unlike opinion polls , prediction (information) markets ask questions like, “Who do you think will win the election?” and predict outcomes rather well. Answers to the question, "Who will you vote for?" are not as predictive.
Assets are cash values tied to specific outcomes (e.g., Candidate X will win the election) or parameters (e.g., Next quarter's revenue). The current market prices are interpreted as predictions of the probability of the event or the expected value of the parameter. Betfair is the world's biggest prediction exchange, with around $28 billion traded in 2007. NewsFutures is an international prediction market that generates consensus probabilities for news events. Intrade.com , which operated a person to person prediction market based in Dublin Ireland achieved very high media attention in 2012 related to the US Presidential Elections, with more than 1.5 million search references to Intrade and Intrade data. Several companies now offer enterprise class prediction marketplaces to predict project completion dates, sales, or the market potential for new ideas. [ citation needed ] A number of Web-based quasi-prediction marketplace companies have sprung up to offer predictions primarily on sporting events and stock markets but also on other topics. Those companies include Piqqem , Cake Financial , Covestor , Predictify , and the Motley Fool (with its Fool CAPS product). The principle of the prediction market is also used in project management software such as Yanomo to let team members predict a project's "real" deadline and budget.

Delphi methods
The Delphi method is a systematic, interactive forecasting method which relies on a panel of independent experts. The carefully selected experts answer questionnaires in two or more rounds. After each round, a facilitator provides an anonymous summary of the experts’ forecasts from the previous round as well as the reasons they provided for their judgments. Thus, participants are encouraged to revise their earlier answers in light of the replies of other members of the group. It is believed that during this process the range of the answers will decrease and the group will converge towards the "correct" answer. Many of the consensus forecasts have proven to be more accurate than forecasts made by individuals.

Human Swarming
Designed as an optimized method for unleashing the wisdom of crowds, this approach implements real-time feedback loops around synchronous groups of users with the goal of achieving more accurate insights from fewer numbers of users. Human Swarming (sometimes referred to as Social Swarming) is modeled after biological processes in birds, fish, and insects, and is enabled among networked users by using mediating software such as the UNU collective intelligence platform. As published by Rosenberg (2015), such real-time control systems enable groups of human participants to behave as a unified collective intelligence . [10] When logged into the UNU platform, for example, groups of distributed users can collectively answer questions, generate ideas, and make predictions as a singular emergent entity. [11] [12] Early testing shows that human swarms can out-predict individuals across a variety of real-world projections. [13] [14]

In popular culture
Hugo-winning writer John Brunner 's 1975 science fiction novel The Shockwave Rider includes an elaborate planet-wide information futures and betting pool called "Delphi" based on the Delphi method.
Illusionist Derren Brown claimed to use the 'Wisdom of Crowds' concept to explain how he correctly predicted the UK National Lottery results in September 2009. His explanation was met with criticism on-line, by people who argued that the concept was misapplied. [15] The methodology employed was too, flawed; the sample of people, couldn’t have been totally objective and free in thought, because they were gathered multiple times and socialised with each other too much; a condition Surowiecki tells us is corrosive to pure independence and the diversity of mind required (Surowiecki 2004:38). Groups thus fall into groupthink where they increasingly make decisions based on influence of each other and are thus less accurate. However, other commentators have suggested that, given the entertainment nature of the show, Brown's misapplication of the theory may have been a deliberate smokescreen to conceal his true method. [16] [17]
This was also shown in the television series East of Eden where a social network of roughly 10,000 individuals came up with ideas to stop missiles in a very short span of time. [ citation needed ]
Wisdom of Crowds would have a significant influence on the naming of the crowdsourcing creative company Tongal , which is an anagram for Galton, the last name of the social-scientist highlighted in the introduction to Surowiecki’s book. Sir Francis Galton recognized the ability of a crowd’s averaged weight-guesses for oxen to exceed the accuracy of experts. [18]

Criticism
In his book Embracing the Wide Sky , Daniel Tammet finds fault with this notion. He explains that this notion may work in the Who Wants to be a Millionaire scenario because audience members have various levels of knowledge that can be coordinated to provide a correct answer in aggregate: Some persons will know the correct answer, others will know what are not the right answers and some will have no clue. Those who know the right answer will choose it, and the others will choose among what might seem the possible answers. The result will be to give a slight edge to the correct answer, even if only a few actually know the correct answer.
However, Tammet points out the potential for problems in systems which have less well defined means of pooling knowledge: Subject matter experts can be overruled and even wrongly punished by less knowledgeable persons in systems like Wikipedia, citing a case of this on Wikipedia. Furthermore, Tammet mentions the assessment of the accuracy of Wikipedia as described in a study mentioned in Nature in 2005, outlining several flaws in the study's methodology which included that the study made no distinction between minor errors and large errors.
Tammet also cites the Kasparov versus the World , an online competition that pitted the brainpower of tens of thousands of online chess players choosing moves in a match against Garry Kasparov , which was won by Kasparov, not the "crowd" (which was not "wise" according to Surowiecki's criteria.) [ clarification needed ]
In his book You Are Not a Gadget , Jaron Lanier argues that crowd wisdom is best suited for problems that involve optimization, but ill-suited for problems that require creativity or innovation. In the online article Digital Maoism , Lanier argues that the collective is more likely to be smart only when
Lanier argues that only under those circumstances can a collective be smarter than a person. If any of these conditions are broken, the collective becomes unreliable or worse.

See also
WebPage index: 00101
Computational linguistics
Computational linguistics is an interdisciplinary field concerned with the statistical or rule-based modeling of natural language from a computational perspective.
Traditionally, computational linguistics was performed by computer scientists who had specialized in the application of computers to the processing of a natural language . Today, computational linguists often work as members of interdisciplinary teams, which can include regular linguists, experts in the target language, and computer scientists. In general, computational linguistics draws upon the involvement of linguists , computer scientists , experts in artificial intelligence , mathematicians, logicians , philosophers , cognitive scientists , cognitive psychologists , psycholinguists , anthropologists and neuroscientists , among others.
Computational linguistics has theoretical and applied components. Theoretical computational linguistics focuses on issues in theoretical linguistics and cognitive science, and applied computational linguistics focuses on the practical outcome of modeling human language use. [1]
The Association for Computational Linguistics defines computational linguistics as:

Origins
Computational linguistics is often grouped within the field of artificial intelligence, but actually was present before the development of artificial intelligence. Computational linguistics originated with efforts in the United States in the 1950s to use computers to automatically translate texts from foreign languages, particularly Russian scientific journals, into English. [3] Since computers can make arithmetic calculations much faster and more accurately than humans, it was thought to be only a short matter of time before they could also begin to process language. [4] Computational and quantitative methods are also used historically in attempted reconstruction of earlier forms of modern languages and subgrouping modern languages into language families. Earlier methods such as lexicostatistics and glottochronology have been proven to be premature and inaccurate. However, recent interdisciplinary studies which borrow concepts from biological studies, especially gene mapping , have proved to produce more sophisticated analytical tools and more trustful results. [5]
When machine translation (also known as mechanical translation) failed to yield accurate translations right away, automated processing of human languages was recognized as far more complex than had originally been assumed. Computational linguistics was born as the name of the new field of study devoted to developing algorithms and software for intelligently processing language data. When artificial intelligence came into existence in the 1960s, the field of computational linguistics became that sub-division of artificial intelligence dealing with human-level comprehension and production of natural languages. [ citation needed ]
In order to translate one language into another, it was observed that one had to understand the grammar of both languages, including both morphology (the grammar of word forms) and syntax (the grammar of sentence structure). In order to understand syntax, one had to also understand the semantics and the lexicon (or 'vocabulary'), and even something of the pragmatics of language use. Thus, what started as an effort to translate between languages evolved into an entire discipline devoted to understanding how to represent and process natural languages using computers. [6]
Nowadays research within the scope of computational linguistics is done at computational linguistics departments, [7] computational linguistics laboratories, [8] computer science departments, [9] and linguistics departments. [10] [11] Some research in the field of computational linguistics aims to create working speech or text processing systems while others aim to create a system allowing human-machine interaction. Programs meant for human-machine communication are called conversational agents . [12]

Approaches
Just as computational linguistics can be performed by experts in a variety of fields and through a wide assortment of departments, so too can the research fields broach a diverse range of topics. The following sections discuss some of the literature available across the entire field broken into four main area of discourse: developmental linguistics, structural linguistics, linguistic production, and linguistic comprehension.

Developmental approaches
Language is a cognitive skill which develops throughout the life of an individual. This developmental process has been examined using a number of techniques, and a computational approach is one of them. Human language development does provide some constraints which make it harder to apply a computational method to understanding it. For instance, during language acquisition , human children are largely only exposed to positive evidence. [13] This means that during the linguistic development of an individual, only evidence for what is a correct form is provided, and not evidence for what is not correct. This is insufficient information for a simple hypothesis testing procedure for information as complex as language, [14] and so provides certain boundaries for a computational approach to modeling language development and acquisition in an individual.
Attempts have been made to model the developmental process of language acquisition in children from a computational angle, leading to both statistical grammars and connectionist models . [15] Work in this realm has also been proposed as a method to explain the evolution of language through history. Using models, it has been shown that languages can be learned with a combination of simple input presented incrementally as the child develops better memory and longer attention span. [16] This was simultaneously posed as a reason for the long developmental period of human children. [16] Both conclusions were drawn because of the strength of the neural network which the project created.
The ability of infants to develop language has also been modeled using robots [17] in order to test linguistic theories. Enabled to learn as children might, a model was created based on an affordance model in which mappings between actions, perceptions, and effects were created and linked to spoken words. Crucially, these robots were able to acquire functioning word-to-meaning mappings without needing grammatical structure, vastly simplifying the learning process and shedding light on information which furthers the current understanding of linguistic development. It is important to note that this information could only have been empirically tested using a computational approach.
As our understanding of the linguistic development of an individual within a lifetime is continually improved using neural networks and learning robotic systems, it is also important to keep in mind that languages themselves change and develop through time. Computational approaches to understanding this phenomenon have unearthed very interesting information. Using the Price Equation and Pólya urn dynamics, researchers have created a system which not only predicts future linguistic evolution, but also gives insight into the evolutionary history of modern-day languages. [18] This modeling effort achieved, through computational linguistics, what would otherwise have been impossible.
It is clear that the understanding of linguistic development in humans as well as throughout evolutionary time has been fantastically improved because of advances in computational linguistics. The ability to model and modify systems at will affords science an ethical method of testing hypotheses that would otherwise be intractable.

Structural approaches
In order to create better computational models of language, an understanding of language’s structure is crucial. To this end, the English language has been meticulously studied using computational approaches to better understand how the language works on a structural level. One of the most important pieces of being able to study linguistic structure is the availability of large linguistic corpora, or samples. This grants computational linguists the raw data necessary to run their models and gain a better understanding of the underlying structures present in the vast amount of data which is contained in any single language. One of the most cited English linguistic corpora is the Penn Treebank . [19] Derived from widely-different sources, such as IBM computer manuals and transcribed telephone conversations, this corpus contains over 4.5 million words of American English. This corpus has been primarily annotated using part-of-speech tagging and syntactic bracketing and has yielded substantial empirical observations related to language structure. [20]
Theoretical approaches to the structure of languages have also been developed. These works allow computational linguistics to have a framework within which to work out hypotheses that will further the understanding of the language in a myriad of ways. One of the original theoretical theses on internalization of grammar and structure of language proposed two types of models. [14] In these models, rules or patterns learned increase in strength with the frequency of their encounter. [14] The work also created a question for computational linguists to answer: how does an infant learn a specific and non-normal grammar ( Chomsky Normal Form ) without learning an overgeneralized version and getting stuck? [14] Theoretical efforts like these set the direction for research to go early in the lifetime of a field of study, and are crucial to the growth of the field.
Structural information about languages allows for the discovery and implementation of similarity recognition between pairs of text utterances. [21] For instance, it has recently been proven that based on the structural information present in patterns of human discourse, conceptual recurrence plots can be used to model and visualize trends in data and create reliable measures of similarity between natural textual utterances. [21] This technique is a strong tool for further probing the structure of human discourse . Without the computational approach to this question, the vastly complex information present in discourse data would have remained inaccessible to scientists.
Information regarding the structural data of a language is available for English as well as other languages, such as Japanese . [22] Using computational methods, Japanese sentence corpora were analyzed and a pattern of log-normality was found in relation to sentence length. [22] Though the exact cause of this lognormality remains unknown, it is precisely this sort of intriguing information which computational linguistics is designed to uncover. This information could lead to further important discoveries regarding the underlying structure of Japanese, and could have any number of effects on the understanding of Japanese as a language. Computational linguistics allows for very exciting additions to the scientific knowledge base to happen quickly and with very little room for doubt.
Without a computational approach to the structure of linguistic data, much of the information that is available now would still be hidden under the vastness of data within any single language. Computational linguistics allows scientists to parse huge amounts of data reliably and efficiently, creating the possibility for discoveries unlike any seen in most other approaches.

Production approaches
The production of language is equally as complex in the information it provides and the necessary skills which a fluent producer must have. That is to say, comprehension is only half the problem of communication. The other half is how a system produces language, and computational linguistics has made some very interesting discoveries in this area.
In a now famous paper published in 1950 Alan Turing proposed the possibility that machines might one day have the ability to "think". As a thought experiment for what might define the concept of thought in machines, he proposed an "imitation test" in which a human subject has two text-only conversations, one with a fellow human and another with a machine attempting to respond like a human. Turing proposes that if the subject cannot tell the difference between the human and the machine, it may be concluded that the machine is capable of thought. [23] Today this test is known as the Turing test and it remains an influential idea in the area of artificial intelligence.
One of the earliest and best known examples of a computer program designed to converse naturally with humans is the ELIZA program developed by Joseph Weizenbaum at MIT in 1966. The program emulated a Rogerian psychotherapist when responding to written statements and questions posed by a user. It appeared capable of understanding what was said to it and responding intelligently, but in truth it simply followed a pattern matching routine that relied on only understanding a few keywords in each sentence. Its responses were generated by recombining the unknown parts of the sentence around properly translated versions of the known words. For example, in the phrase "It seems that you hate me" ELIZA understands "you" and "me" which matches the general pattern "you [some words] me", allowing ELIZA to update the words "you" and "me" to "I" and "you" and replying "What makes you think I hate you?". In this example ELIZA has no understanding of the word "hate", but it is not required for a logical response in the context of this type of psychotherapy. [24]
Some projects are still trying to solve the problem which first started computational linguistics off as its own field in the first place. However, the methods have become more refined and clever, and consequently the results generated by computational linguists have become more enlightening. In an effort to improve computer translation, several models have been compared, including hidden Markov models , smoothing techniques, and the specific refinements of those to apply them to verb translation. [25] The model which was found to produce the most natural translations of German and French words was a refined alignment model with a first-order dependence and a fertility model[16]. They also provide efficient training algorithms for the models presented, which can give other scientists the ability to improve further on their results. This type of work is specific to computational linguistics, and has applications which could vastly improve understanding of how language is produced and comprehended by computers.
Work has also been done in making computers produce language in a more naturalistic manner. Using linguistic input from humans, algorithms have been constructed which are able to modify a system's style of production based on a factor such as linguistic input from a human, or more abstract factors like politeness or any of the five main dimensions of personality . [26] This work takes a computational approach via parameter estimation models to categorize the vast array of linguistic styles we see across individuals and simplify it for a computer to work in the same way, making human-computer interaction much more natural.

Text-based interactive approach
Many of the earliest and simplest models of human-computer interaction, such as ELIZA for example, involve a text-based input from the user to generate a response from the computer. By this method, words typed by a user trigger the computer to recognize specific patterns and reply accordingly, through a process known as keyword spotting .

Speech-based interactive approach
Recent technologies have placed more of an emphasis on speech-based interactive systems. These systems, such as Siri of the iOS operating system, operate on a similar pattern-recognizing technique as that of text-based systems, but with the former, the user input is conducted through speech recognition . This branch of linguistics involves the processing of the user's speech as sound waves and the interpreting of the acoustics and language patterns in order for the computer to recognize the input. [27]

Comprehension approaches
Much of the focus of modern computational linguistics is on comprehension. With the proliferation of the internet and the abundance of easily accessible written human language, the ability to create a program capable of understanding human language would have many broad and exciting possibilities, including improved search engines, automated customer service, and online education.
Early work in comprehension included applying Bayesian statistics to the task of optical character recognition, as illustrated by Bledsoe and Browing in 1959 in which a large dictionary of possible letters were generated by "learning" from example letters and then the probability that any one of those learned examples matched the new input was combined to make a final decision. [28] Other attempts at applying Bayesian statistics to language analysis included the work of Mosteller and Wallace (1963) in which an analysis of the words used in The Federalist Papers was used to attempt to determine their authorship (concluding that Madison most likely authored the majority of the papers). [29]
In 1971 Terry Winograd developed an early natural language processing engine capable of interpreting naturally written commands within a simple rule governed environment. The primary language parsing program in this project was called SHRDLU , which was capable of carrying out a somewhat natural conversation with the user giving it commands, but only within the scope of the toy environment designed for the task. This environment consisted of different shaped and colored blocks, and SHRDLU was capable of interpreting commands such as "Find a block which is taller than the one you are holding and put it into the box." and asking questions such as "I don't understand which pyramid you mean." in response to the user's input. [30] While impressive, this kind of natural language processing has proven much more difficult outside the limited scope of the toy environment. Similarly a project developed by NASA called LUNAR was designed to provide answers to naturally written questions about the geological analysis of lunar rocks returned by the Apollo missions. [31] These kinds of problems are referred to as question answering .
Initial attempts at understanding spoken language were based on work done in the 1960s and 1970s in signal modeling where an unknown signal is analyzed to look for patterns and to make predictions based on its history. An initial and somewhat successful approach to applying this kind of signal modeling to language was achieved with the use of hidden Markov models as detailed by Rabiner in 1989. [32] This approach attempts to determine probabilities for the arbitrary number of models that could be being used in generating speech as well as modeling the probabilities for various words generated from each of these possible models. Similar approaches were employed in early speech recognition attempts starting in the late 70s at IBM using word/part-of-speech pair probabilities. [33]
More recently these kinds of statistical approaches have been applied to more difficult tasks such as topic identification using Bayesian parameter estimation to infer topic probabilities in text documents. [34]

Applications
Modern computational linguistics is often a combination of studies in computer science and programming, math, particularly statistics, language structures, and natural language processing. Combined, these fields most often lead to the development of systems that can recognize speech and perform some task based on that speech. Examples include speech recognition software, such as Apple's Siri feature, spellcheck tools, speech synthesis programs, which are often used to demonstrate pronunciation or help the disabled, and machine translation programs and websites, such as Google Translate and Word Reference. [35]
Computational linguistics can be especially helpful in situations involving social media and the Internet . For example, filters in chatrooms or on website searches require computational linguistics. Chat operators often use filters to identify certain words or phrases and deem them inappropriate so that users cannot submit them. [35] Another example of using filters is on websites. Schools use filters so that websites with certain keywords are blocked from children to view. There are also many programs in which parents use Parental controls to put content filters in place. Computational linguists can also develop programs that group and organize content through Social media mining . An example of this is Twitter, in which programs can group tweets by subject or keywords. [36] Computational linguistics is also used for document retrieval and clustering. When you do an online search, documents and websites are retrieved based on the frequency of unique labels related to what you typed into a search engine. For instance, if you search "red, large, four-wheeled vehicle," with the intention of finding pictures of a red truck, the search engine will still find the information desired by matching words such as "four-wheeled" with "car". [37]

Subfields
Computational linguistics can be divided into major areas depending upon the medium of the language being processed, whether spoken or textual; and upon the task being performed, whether analyzing language (recognition) or synthesizing language (generation).
Speech recognition and speech synthesis deal with how spoken language can be understood or created using computers. Parsing and generation are sub-divisions of computational linguistics dealing respectively with taking language apart and putting it together. Machine translation remains the sub-division of computational linguistics dealing with having computers translate between languages. The possibility of automatic language translation, however, has yet to be realized and remains a notorious branch of computational linguistics. [38]
Some of the areas of research that are studied by computational linguistics include:

Legacy
The subject of computational linguistics has had a recurring impact on popular culture:

See also
WebPage index: 00102
University of Franche-Comté
The University of Franche-Comté is a French university in the Academy of Besançon with five campuses: Besançon ( Doubs ), Belfort (named for Léon Delarbre ), Montbéliard (Doubs), Vesoul ( Haute-Saône ), and Lons-le-Saunier ( Jura ).

History
The university was founded in 1423 in Dole , at that time in the Duchy of Burgundy . [1] It was moved to Besançon in 1691 as Dole was being punished for having resisted too long against the king of France Louis XIV during his conquest of the region. [1]

Research centres
The Centre for Applied Linguistics (CLA) of the University of Franche-Comté ranks among the top language teaching institutions in the world. The CLA has research contacts in more than 110 countries, and partners with the French Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The Centre of Distance Teaching (CTU) allow to people who are working to continue to study in different matters like history, informatics, mathematics, AEG, etc.
Much of the international visibility in pure and applied science at the University of Franche-Comté comes through the CNRS FEMTO-ST with its expertise in numerous fields, including physics, optics, mechanics, time-frequency, microsystems and nanotechnology.

Research about Wikipedia
In 2015, Dr José Lages of the University of Franche-Comté and Dima Shepelyansky of Paul Sabatier University in Toulouse published a global university ranking based on Wikipedia scholarly citations. [2] [3] [4]
WebPage index: 00103
BBC Domesday Project
The BBC Domesday Project was a partnership between Acorn Computers , Philips , Logica and the BBC (with some funding from the European Commission 's ESPRIT programme) to mark the 900th anniversary of the original Domesday Book , an 11th-century census of England. It has been cited as an example of digital obsolescence on account of the physical medium used for data storage. [1] [2] [3] [4]
This new multimedia edition of Domesday was compiled between 1984 and 1986 and published in 1986. It included a new "survey" of the United Kingdom, in which people, mostly school children, wrote about geography, history or social issues in their local area or just about their daily lives. Children from over 9,000 schools were involved. [5] This was linked with maps, and many colour photos, statistical data, video and "virtual walks". Over 1 million people participated in the project. The project also incorporated professionally prepared video footage, virtual reality tours of major landmarks and other prepared datasets such as the 1981 census.

Purpose
The project includes local information gathered and stored by school pupils, in order to create an up-to-date version. [5]

Format
The project was stored on adapted laserdiscs in the LaserVision Read Only Memory (LV-ROM) format, which contained not only analogue video and still pictures, but also digital data, with 300 MB of storage space on each side of the disc. Data and images were selected and collated by the BBC Domesday project based in Bilton House in West Ealing. Pre-mastering of data was carried out on a VAX-11/750 mini-computer, assisted by a network of BBC micros. The discs were mastered, produced, and tested by the Philips Laservision factory in Blackburn, England. Viewing the discs required an Acorn BBC Master expanded with a SCSI controller and an additional coprocessor controlled Philips VP415 "Domesday Player", a specially produced laserdisc player. The user interface consisted of the BBC Master's keyboard and a trackball (known at the time as a trackerball). The software for the project was written in BCPL (a precursor to C ), to make cross platform porting easier, although BCPL never attained the popularity that its early promise suggested it might.
The project was split over two laserdiscs:

Preservation
In 2002, there were great fears that the discs would become unreadable as computers capable of reading the format had become rare and drives capable of accessing the discs even rarer. Aside from the difficulty of emulating the original code, a major issue was that the still images had been stored on the laserdisc as single-frame analogue video, which were overlaid by the computer system's graphical interface. The project had begun years before JPEG image compression and before truecolour computer video cards had become widely available.
However, the BBC later announced that the CAMiLEON project (a partnership between the University of Leeds and University of Michigan ) had developed a system capable of accessing the discs using emulation techniques. [6] CAMiLEON copied the video footage from one of the extant Domesday laserdiscs. Another team, working for the UK National Archives (who hold the original Domesday Book) tracked down the original 1-inch videotape masters of the project. These were digitised and archived to Digital Betacam .
A version of one of the discs was created that runs on a Windows PC. This version was reverse-engineered from an original Domesday Community disc and incorporates images from the videotape masters. It was initially available only via a terminal at the National Archives headquarters in Kew, Surrey, but was published on the web in July 2004. This version was taken off-line early in 2008 when its programmer, Adrian Pearce, suddenly died.
The deputy editor of the Domesday Project, Mike Tibbets, has criticized the UK's National Data Archive to which the archive material was originally entrusted, arguing that the creators knew that the technology would be short-lived but that the archivists had failed to preserve the material effectively. [7]
The Centre for Computing History has undertaken a similar project to preserve the data from the Domesday Project and make it available online. They already have data from both the National Disk and Community Disk online and are currently investigating copyright issues before releasing the URL to the general public. [8] They have a working Domesday system on display and accessible to the public. They also have possibly the largest Domesday and interactive laserdisc archive in the world.
The National Museum of Computing based beside Bletchley Park in Milton Keynes has two working Domesday systems accessible by visitors to the Museum.

Domesday Reloaded
In 2011 a team at BBC Learning, headed by George Auckland republished much of the Community disc data in a web based format. [9] This data comprising around 25,000 images was loaded onto the BBC Domesday Reloaded website which went online in May 2011. [10] The data extraction underlying the Domesday Reloaded site was carried out in 2003 and 2004 by Simon Guerrero and Eric Freeman. [11] [12] [13]

Copyright issues
In addition to preserving the project, untangling the copyright issues also presents a significant challenge. In addition to copyright surrounding the many contributions made by the estimated 1 million people who took part in the project, there are also copyright issues that relate to the technologies employed. It is likely that the Domesday Project will not be completely free of copyright restrictions until at least 2090 (assuming no further extensions of copyright terms). [14]
WebPage index: 00104
Douglas Adams
WebPage index: 00105
Conservapedia
WebPage index: 00106
Tree structure
A tree structure or tree diagram is a way of representing the hierarchical nature of a structure in a graphical form. It is named a "tree structure" because the classic representation resembles a tree , even though the chart is generally upside down compared to an actual tree, with the "root" at the top and the "leaves" at the bottom.
A tree structure is conceptual, and appears in several forms. For a discussion of tree structures in specific fields, see Tree (data structure) for computer science: insofar as it relates to graph theory, see tree (graph theory) , or also tree (set theory) . Other related pages are listed below.

Terminology and properties
The tree elements are called " nodes ". The lines connecting elements are called "branches". Nodes without children are called leaf nodes , "end-nodes", or "leaves".
Every finite tree structure has a member that has no superior . This member is called the "root" or root node . The root is the starting node. But the converse is not true: infinite tree structures may or may not have a root node.
The names of relationships between nodes model the kinship terminology of family relations. The gender-neutral names "parent" and "child" have largely displaced the older "father" and "son" terminology, although the term "uncle" is still used for other nodes at the same level as the parent.
In the example, "encyclopedia" is the parent of "science" and "culture", its children. "Art" and "craft" are siblings, and children of "culture", which is their parent and thus one of their ancestors. Also, "encyclopedia", as the root of the tree, is the ancestor of "science", "culture", "art" and "craft". Finally, "science", "art" and "craft", as leaves, are ancestors of no other node.
Tree structures can depict all kinds of taxonomic knowledge, such as family trees , the biological evolutionary tree , the evolutionary tree of a language family , the grammatical structure of a language (a key example being S → NP VP, meaning a sentence is a noun phrase and a verb phrase, with each in turn having other components which have other components), the way web pages are logically ordered in a web site, mathematical trees of integer sets , et cetera.
The Oxford English Dictionary records use of both the terms "tree structure" and "tree-diagram" from 1965 in Noam Chomsky 's Aspects of the Theory of Syntax . [1]
In a tree structure there is one and only one path from any point to any other point.
Computer science uses tree structures extensively ( see Tree (data structure) and telecommunications .)
For a formal definition see set theory , and for a generalization in which children are not necessarily successors, see prefix order .

Examples of tree structures

Representing trees
There are many ways of visually representing tree structures. Almost always, these boil down to variations, or combinations, of a few basic styles:

Classical node-link diagrams
Classical node-link diagrams, that connect nodes together with line segments.

Nested sets
Nested sets that use enclosure/containment to show parenthood, examples include TreeMaps and fractal maps .

Layered "icicle" diagrams
Layered "icicle" diagrams that use alignment/adjacency.

Outlines and tree views
Lists or diagrams that use indentation, sometimes called " outlines " or " tree views ".

Nested parentheses
A correspondence to nested parentheses was first noticed by Sir Arthur Cayley .

Radial trees
Trees can also be represented radially .

See also
WebPage index: 00107
Network effect
In economics and business , a network effect (also called network externality or demand-side economies of scale ) is the effect that one user of a good or service has on the value of that product to other people. When a network effect is present, the value of a product or service is dependent on the number of others using it. [1]
The classic example is the telephone . The more people who own telephones, the more valuable the telephone is to each owner. This creates a positive externality because a user may purchase a telephone without intending to create value for other users, but does so in any case. Online social networks work in the same way, with sites like Twitter and Facebook becoming more attractive as more users join.
The expression "network effect" is applied most commonly to positive network externalities as in the case of the telephone. Negative network externalities can also occur, where more users make a product less valuable, but are more commonly referred to as "congestion" (as in traffic congestion or network congestion ).
Over time, positive network effects can create a bandwagon effect as the network becomes more valuable and more people join, in a positive feedback loop.

Origins
Network effects were a central theme in the arguments of Theodore Vail , the first post patent president of Bell Telephone , in gaining a monopoly on US telephone services. In 1908, when he presented the concept in Bell's annual report, there were over 4,000 local and regional telephone exchanges, most of which were eventually merged into the Bell System.
The economic theory of the network effect was advanced significantly between 1985 and 1995 by researchers Michael L. Katz, Carl Shapiro, Joseph Farrell and Garth Saloner. [2]
Network effects were popularized by Robert Metcalfe , stated as Metcalfe's law . Metcalfe was one of the co-inventors of Ethernet and a co-founder of the company 3Com . In selling the product, Metcalfe argued that customers needed Ethernet cards to grow above a certain critical mass if they were to reap the benefits of their network. [3]
According to Metcalfe, the rationale behind the sale of networking cards was that (1) the cost of the network was directly proportional to the number of cards installed, but (2) the value of the network was proportional to the square of the number of users. This was expressed algebraically as having a cost of N, and a value of N². While the actual numbers behind this definition were never firm, the concept allowed customers to share access to expensive resources like disk drives and printers, send e-mail, and access the Internet.
Rod Beckstrom presented a mathematical model for describing networks that are in a state of positive network effect at BlackHat and Defcon in 2009 and also presented the "inverse network effect" with an economic model for defining it as well. [4]

Benefits
Network effects become significant after a certain subscription percentage has been achieved, called critical mass. At the critical mass point, the value obtained from the good or service is greater than or equal to the price paid for the good or service. As the value of the good is determined by the user base, this implies that after a certain number of people have subscribed to the service or purchased the good, additional people will subscribe to the service or purchase the good due to the value exceeding the price.
A key business concern must then be how to attract users prior to reaching critical mass. One way is to rely on extrinsic motivation, such as a payment, a fee waiver, or a request for friends to sign up. A more natural strategy is to build a system that has enough value without network effects, at least to early adopters . Then, as the number of users increases, the system becomes even more valuable and is able to attract a wider user base.
Beyond critical mass, the increasing number of subscribers generally cannot continue indefinitely. After a certain point, most networks become either congested or saturated, stopping future uptake. Congestion occurs due to overuse. The applicable analogy is that of a telephone network. While the number of users is below the congestion point, each additional user adds additional value to every other customer. However, at some point the addition of an extra user exceeds the capacity of the existing system. After this point, each additional user decreases the value obtained by every other user. In practical terms, each additional user increases the total system load , leading to busy signals , the inability to get a dial tone , and poor customer support . The next critical point is where the value obtained again equals the price paid. The network will cease to grow at this point, and the system must be enlarged. The congestion point may be larger than the market size. New Peer-to-peer technological models may always defy congestion. Peer-to-peer systems, or "P2P," are networks designed to distribute load among their user pool. This theoretically allows true P2P networks to scale indefinitely. The P2P based telephony service Skype benefits greatly from this effect (though market saturation will still occur).
Network effects are commonly mistaken for economies of scale , which result from business size rather than interoperability . To help clarify the distinction, people speak of demand side vs. supply side economies of scale. Classical economies of scale are on the production side, while network effects arise on the demand side. Network effects are also mistaken for economies of scope .
The network effect has a lot of similarities with the description of phenomenon in reinforcing positive feedback loops described in system dynamics . System dynamics could be used as a modelling method to describe phenomena such as word of mouth and Bass model of marketing.
Network effect is a benefit to society as a whole because it positively relates to and affects the Intellectual Commons, Property Rights, and Cultural Commons of the world. One form of network externality is social media, which is a peer-to-peer network ran by a privately held for profit business. Although the creation of a large network creates a barrier to entry according to Porters five forces and may prevent a few from creating a new form of P2P networking, it largely benefits society as whole and provides a new form of a common-pool resource solargely scalable that the entire world has the ability to use it. Although the barrier to entry may be high, there is no true form of monopoly in the P2P social sharing market. For example, Facebook holds a large stake in the P2P social sharing market, but it is not mutually exclusive, meaning users can have an account on Facebook and also have an account on Twitter. Furthermore, there becomes no true critical mass in this space due to the ability for technology and innovation to constantly adapt to different environments, market for underdeveloped countries to integrate with social sharing is unlimited.
Network effect relates to the intellectual commons in a positive way. Through P2P networks users are able to share their intellectual property in a way that can benefit society as a whole.The sharing of intellectual property ultimately relates to, economic growth due to the ability for creators to share information and still possibly benefit financially from it. Through P2P networks people are able to share types of education like scholarly articles, becoming a new form of public commons. Network externality like Ted.com is an example of how intellectual commons with the use of network externality benefits society as a whole. Those who present intellectual property at Ted conferences are sharing their education on a public forum that benefits whoever will listen. Therefore, the larger Ted.com network becomes positively correlates to those who benefit from its common-pool resources.
P2P networks positively affect property rights. In reference to property rights , it enables those who create the intellectual property: The right to use the good, The right to earn income from the good, The right to transfer the good to others, The right to enforcement of property rights. Through P2P networks those who provide intellectual property not only have these rights, but they also possess the right to claim their information on a public forum. Due to these rights sharing benefits the intellectual property holders and promotes P2P sharing in a positive way. Those who consume the intellectual property also benefit positively from the sharing of it because they are able to use the information freely with respect to the person who created it. An example of this system in effect is a company called Music Vault . Music Vault operates on the P2P network Facebook, enabling users who create music to openly and freely collaborate with other artists content. This is a form of remixing that benefits both parties. This is an example of how a P2P network positively affects the sharing of property rights. In Joseph E. Stiglitz essay Prizes, Not Patents , he suggests that the creation of intellectual property should be rewarded with by social gratification and rewards instead of patents preventing others from duplicating the creation and sharing it as a common-pool resource. This can be related to P2P networking because it creates a greater incentive for those who create intellectual property to share it is a common-pool resource. As a P2P sharing network becomes larger the gratification of being rewarded on a global public forum would compete with a patent. It is through large P2P networks and network externality that humans can create a reward system large enough to deter seekers of patents to be rewarded in different ways.
Network Externality positively affects the cultural commons in many ways. The reward for being part of a group, society, and even the world through a P2P network is one of the greatest benefits that a modern common-pool resource can provide.The ability to connect and create with people from different cultures, ethnicities, and beliefs is something thought to be impossible 100 years ago. Without network externality this form of communication would have been impossible. Through P2P sharing the world as a culture are able to learn and teach each other through public forums. In Sugata Mitra’s Ted talk, “The child-driven education” he placed a computer in the a third world town and left it there to see what would happen. To his amazement children were able to quickly figure out how to use the computer and educate themselves on its inner workings. [5] This example is a benefit to society for several reasons. The first is the relationship between Sugata Mitra and the P2P network which led him to place the computer in a third world town, along with the ability to present his findings on a public forum. Secondly, it is those who consumed his ted talk and benefited from the knowledge that those in third world countries just need a chance to learn and they will take it. This experiment as a whole brings the culture of the world together and connects us with those we thought impossible due to the P2P network and network externality that led individuals to the Ted talk.

Technology lifecycle
If some existing technology or company whose benefits are largely based on network effects starts to lose market share against a challenger such as a disruptive technology or open standards based competition, the benefits of network effects will reduce for the incumbent, and increase for the challenger. In this model, a tipping point is eventually reached at which the network effects of the challenger dominate those of the former incumbent, and the incumbent is forced into an accelerating decline, whilst the challenger takes over the incumbent's former position. [ citation needed ]

Lock-in
Not surprisingly network economics became a hot topic after the diffusion of the Internet across academia . Most people know only of Metcalfe's law as part of network effects. Network effects are notorious for causing lock-in with the most-cited examples being Microsoft products and the QWERTY keyboard. [6]
Vendor lock-in can be mitigated by opening the standards upon which users depend, allowing competition between implementations. This does not, however, mitigate industry-wide lock-in to the standard itself. Indeed, as there are now multiple vendors driving down the price and increasing the quality, more users are likely to adopt the standard thereby creating greater industry-wide lock-in to the standard.

Types of network effects
Broadly, there are two kinds of networks effects:
Additionally, there are two sources of economic value that are relevant when analyzing products that display network effects:

Negative network effects
Negative network effects, in the mathematical sense, are those that have the opposite effect on stability compared to normal (positive) network effects. Just like positive network effects cause positive feedback loops and exponential growth , negative network effects create negative feedback and exponential decay . In nature, negative network effects are the forces that pull towards equilibrium, are responsible for stability, and are the physical limitations preventing states from reaching infinity.

Interoperability
Interoperability has the effect of making the network bigger and thus increases the external value of the network increasing appear to consumers. Interoperability achieves this primarily by increasing potential connections and secondarily by attracting new participants to the network. Other benefits of interoperability include reduced uncertainty, reduced lock-in, commoditization and competition based on price. [1] :229
Interoperability can be achieve through standardization or other cooperation. Companies involved in fostering interoperability face a tension between cooperating with their competitors to grow the potential market for products and competing for market share. [1] :227

Open versus closed standards
In communication and information technologies, open standards and interfaces are often developed through the participation of multiple companies and are usually perceived to provide mutual benefit. But, in cases in which the relevant communication protocols or interfaces are closed standards the network effect can give the company controlling those standards monopoly power. The Microsoft corporation is widely seen by computer professionals as maintaining its monopoly through these means. One observed method Microsoft uses to put the network effect to its advantage is called Embrace, extend and extinguish .
Mirabilis is an Israeli start-up which pioneered instant messaging (IM) and was bought by America Online . By giving away their ICQ product for free and preventing interoperability between their client software and other products, they were able to temporarily dominate the market for instant messaging. Because of the network effect, new IM users gained much more value by choosing to use the Mirabilis system (and join its large network of users) than they would using a competing system. As was typical for that era, the company never made any attempt to generate profits from their dominant position before selling the company.

Examples

Financial exchanges
Stock exchanges and derivatives exchanges feature a network effect. Market liquidity is a major determinant of transaction cost in the sale or purchase of a security, as a bid-ask spread exists between the price at which a purchase can be done versus the price at which the sale of the same security can be done. As the number of buyers and sellers on an exchange increases, liquidity increases, and transaction costs decrease. This then attracts a larger number of buyers and sellers to the exchange.
The network advantage of financial exchanges is apparent in the difficulty that startup exchanges have in dislodging a dominant exchange. For example, the Chicago Board of Trade has retained overwhelming dominance of trading in US Treasury bond futures despite the startup of Eurex US trading of identical futures contracts. Similarly, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange has maintained a dominance in trading of Eurobond interest rate futures despite a challenge from Euronext.Liffe .

Software
There are very strong network effects operating in the market for widely used computer software.
For many people choosing an office suite , prime considerations include how much value having learned that office suite will prove to potential employers , and how well the software interoperates with other users. That is, since learning to use an office suite takes many hours, users want to invest that time learning the office suite that will make them most attractive to potential employers and clients, and they also want to be able to share documents. Similarly, finding already-trained employees is a big concern for employers when deciding which office suite to purchase or standardize on.
In 2007 Apple released the iPhone followed by the app store. Most iPhone apps rely heavily on the existence of strong network effects. This enables the software to grow in popularity very quickly and spread to a large userbase with very limited marketing needed. The Free-mium business model has evolved to take advantage of these network effects by releasing a free version that will not limit the adoption or any users and then charge for "premium" features as the primary source of revenue.

Web sites
Many web sites benefit from a network effect. One example is web marketplaces and exchanges. For example, eBay would not be a particularly useful site if auctions were not competitive. However, as the number of users grows on eBay, auctions grow more competitive, pushing up the prices of bids on items. This makes it more worthwhile to sell on eBay and brings more sellers onto eBay, which drives prices down again as this increases supply, while bringing more people onto eBay because there are more things being sold that people want. Essentially, as the number of users of eBay grows, prices fall and supply increases, and more and more people find the site to be useful.
Network effects were used as justification for some of the dot-com business models in the late 1990s. These firms operated under the belief that when a new market comes into being which contains strong network effects, firms should care more about growing their market share than about becoming profitable . This was believed because market share will determine which firm can set technical and marketing standards and thus determine the basis of future competition .
Social networking websites are good examples. The more people register onto a social networking website, the more useful the website is to its registrants. [9]
Alexa Internet uses a technology that tracks users' surfing patterns; thus Alexa's Related Sites results improve as more users use the technology. Alexa's network relies heavily on a small number of browser software relationships, which makes the network more vulnerable to competition.
Google has also attempted to create a network effect in its advertising business with its Google AdSense service. Google AdSense places ads on many small sites, such as blogs , using Google technology to determine which ads are relevant to which blogs. Thus, the service appears to aim to serve as an exchange (or ad network) for matching many advertisers with many small sites (such as blogs). In general, the more blogs Google AdSense can reach, the more advertisers it will attract, making it the most attractive option for more blogs, and so on, making the network more valuable for all participants.
By contrast, the value of a news site is primarily proportional to the quality of the articles, not to the number of other people using the site. Similarly, the first generation of search sites experienced little network effect, as the value of the site was based on the value of the search results. This allowed Google to win users away from Yahoo! without much trouble, once users believed that Google's search results were superior. Some commentators mistook the value of the Yahoo! brand (which does increase as more people know of it) for a network effect protecting its advertising business.

Rail gauge
There are strong network effects in the initial choice of rail gauge , and in gauge conversion decisions. Even when placing isolated rails not connected to any other lines, track layers usually choose a standard rail gauge so they can use off-the-shelf rolling stock. Although a few manufacturers make rolling stock that can adjust to different rail gauges, most manufacturers make rolling stock that only works with one of the standard rail gauges.

See also
WebPage index: 00108
Cf.
The abbreviation cf. (short for the Latin : confer , meaning "compare") [1] is used in writing to refer the reader to other material to make a comparison with the topic being discussed. It is used to form a contrast, for example: "Abbott (2010) found supportive results in her memory experiment, unlike those of previous work (cf. Zeller & Williams, 2007)." [2] It is recommended that "cf." be used only to suggest a comparison, and the word "see" be used to point to a source of information. [3] [4]

Use in scientific nomenclature
In biological naming conventions , cf. is commonly placed between the genus name name and the species name to describe a specimen that is difficult to identify because of practical difficulties, such as the specimen being poorly preserved. For example, " Barbus cf. holotaenia " implies that the specimen is believed to be Barbus holotaenia but the actual identification cannot be certain. [5]
Cf. can also be used to express a possible identity, or at least a significant resemblance, such as between a newly observed specimen and a known species or taxon . [5] Such a usage might suggest a specimen's membership of the same genus or possibly of a shared higher taxon, such as in, " Diptera: Tabanidae , cf. Tabanus ", where the author is confident of the order and family ( Diptera : Tabanidae ), but can only offer the genus ( Tabanus ) as a suggestion and has no information favouring a particular species. [6]

See also
WebPage index: 00109
CBS News
CBS News is the news division of American television and radio service CBS . The president of CBS News is David Rhodes . [1] CBS News' broadcasts include the CBS Evening News , CBS This Morning , news magazine programs CBS Sunday Morning , 60 Minutes and 48 Hours , and Sunday morning political affairs program Face the Nation . CBS operates a 24-hour news network called CBSN , the first live anchored 24-hour streaming news network that is exclusively online and on smart devices.

History
In 1929 the Columbia Broadcasting System began making regular radio news broadcasts—five-minute summaries taken from reports from the United Press, one of the three wire services that supplied newspapers with national and international news. In December 1930 CBS chief William S. Paley hired journalist Paul W. White away from United Press as CBS's news editor. Paley put the radio network's news operation at the same level as entertainment, and authorized White to interrupt programming if events warranted. Along with other networks, CBS chafed at the breaking news embargo imposed upon radio by the wire services, which prevented them from using bulletins until they first appeared in print. CBS disregarded an embargo when it broke the story of the Lindbergh kidnapping in 1932, using live on-the-air reporting. Radio networks scooped print outlets with news of the 1932 presidential election . [2] :485–486
In March 1933 White was named vice president and general manager in charge of news at CBS. [3] As the first head of CBS News, he began to build an organization that soon established a legendary reputation. [2] :486
In 1935 White hired Edward R. Murrow , and sent him to London in 1937 to run CBS Radio's European operation. [2] :486 White led a staff that would come to include Charles Collingwood , William L. Shirer , Eric Sevareid , [4] John Charles Daly , Joseph C. Harsch [2] :501 Cecil Brown , Elmer Davis , Quincy Howe , H. V. Kaltenborn , Robert Trout , [5] and Lewis Shollenberger . [6]
"CBS was getting its ducks in a row for the biggest news story in history, World War II", wrote radio historian John Dunning. [2] :487

Television
Upon becoming commercial station WCBW (channel 2, now WCBS-TV ) in 1941, the pioneer CBS television station in New York City broadcast two daily news programs, at 2:30 and 7:30 p.m. weekdays, anchored by Richard Hubbell . Most of the newscasts featured Hubbell reading a script with only occasional cutaways to a map or still photograph. When Pearl Harbor was bombed on December 7, 1941, WCBW (which was usually off the air on Sunday to give the engineers a day off), took to the air at 8:45 p.m. with an extensive special report. The national emergency even broke down the unspoken wall between CBS radio and television. WCBW executives convinced radio announcers and experts such as George Fielding Elliot and Linton Wells to come down to the Grand Central studios during the evening and give information and commentary on the attack. The WCBW special report that night lasted less than 90 minutes. But that special broadcast pushed the limits of live television in 1941 and opened up new possibilities for future broadcasts. As CBS wrote in a special report to the FCC, the unscheduled live news broadcast on December 7 "was unquestionably the most stimulating challenge and marked the greatest advance of any single problem faced up to that time."
Additional newscasts were scheduled in the early days of the war. In May 1942, WCBW (like almost all television stations) sharply cut back its live program schedule and the newscasts were canceled, since the station temporarily suspended studio operations, resorting exclusively to the occasional broadcast of films. This was primarily because much of the staff had either joined the service or were redeployed to war related technical research, and to prolong the life of the early, unstable cameras which were now impossible to repair due to the wartime lack of parts.
In May 1944, as the war began to turn in favor of the Allies, WCBW reopened the studios and the newscasts returned, briefly anchored by Ned Calmer , and then by Everett Holles . [7] After the war, expanded news programs appeared on the WCBW schedule – whose call letters were changed to WCBS-TV in 1946 – first anchored by Milo Boulton , and later by Douglas Edwards . On May 3, 1948, Edwards began anchoring CBS Television News , a regular 15-minute nightly newscast on the CBS television network, including WCBS-TV. It aired every weeknight at 7:30 p.m., and was the first regularly scheduled, network television news program featuring an anchor (the nightly Lowell Thomas NBC radio network newscast was simulcast on television locally on NBC's WNBT—now WNBC —for a time in the early 1940s and the previously mentioned Richard Hubbell, Ned Calmer, Everett Holles and Milo Boulton on WCBW in the early and mid-1940s, but these were local television broadcasts seen only in New York City). NBC 's offering at the time, NBC Television Newsreel (which premiered in February 1948), was simply film footage with voice narration.
In 1950, the name of the nightly newscast was changed to Douglas Edwards with the News , and the following year, it became the first news program to be broadcast on both coasts, thanks to a new coaxial cable connection, prompting Edwards to use the greeting "Good evening everyone, coast to coast." The broadcast was renamed the CBS Evening News when Walter Cronkite replaced Edwards in 1962. [8] Edwards remained with CBS News with various daytime television newscasts and radio news broadcasts until his retirement on April 1, 1988.

Broadcast history
The information on programs listed in this section came directly from CBS News in interviews with the Vice President of Communications and NewsWatch Dallas.
According to the CBS News Library and source Sandy Genelius (Vice President, CBS News Communications), the "CBS Evening News" was the program title for both Saturday and Sunday evening broadcasts. The program title for the Sunday late night news beginning in 1963 was the "CBS Sunday Night News". These titles were also seen on the intro slide of the program's opening. The program airs on Saturday, and Sunday nights at 7:00 - 7:30PM UTC (Eastern Time) on CBS.

Current CBS News broadcasts

Prime time/evening news program history

Morning news program history

Late night/early morning program history

CBSN
CBSN is a 24-hour streaming news channel available from the CBS News website and launched on November, 4th 2014. The channel feature live news from 9am to midnight on weekdays. The channel makes all of the resources of CBS News available directly on digital platforms with live, anchored coverage 15 hours each week. It is a first for a U.S. 24-hour news channel to forgo cable and be available exclusively only on line and on smart devices such as smart TV's Apple TV , Roku , Amazon Fire and others. [10] The Channel is based at CBS's New York City headquarters.

CBS Newspath
CBS Newspath is CBS News' satellite news-gathering service (similar to CNN Newsource ). Newspath provides national hard news, sports highlights, regional spot news, features and live coverage of major breaking news events for affiliate stations to use in their local news broadcasts. The service has a team of domestic and global correspondents and freelance reporters dedicated to reporting for affiliates, and offers several different national or international stories fronted by reporters on a daily basis. CBS Newspath also relies heavily on local affiliates sharing content. Stations will often contribute locally obtained footage that may be of national interest. It replaced a similar service, CBS News NewsNet.
Network News Service (NNS) is a pioneering news organization formed by ABC NewsOne, CBS Newspath and Fox NewsEdge. Launched in June 2000, its subscriber list already includes more than 500 ABC, CBS and Fox affiliates throughout the United States. The three news distributors created NNS to cost-effectively pool resources for developing and delivering second tier news stories and b-roll footage. The goal was to realize cost savings in the creation and distribution of these news images, while news organizations and member television stations continued to independently develop and deliver their own signature coverage of top news stories.

CBS Radio News
The branch of CBS News that produces newscasts and features to radio stations is CBS Radio News, which airs on the CBS Radio Network . The radio network is the oldest unit of CBS and traced its roots to the company's founding in 1927, and the news division took shape over the following 10 years. The list of CBS News correspondents (below) includes those reporting on CBS Radio News.
CBS Radio News produces the oldest daily news show on radio or television, the CBS World News Roundup , which first aired in 1938 and celebrated its 75th anniversary in 2013. The World News Roundup airs twice every weekday: a morning edition is anchored by Steve Kathan and produced by Paul Farry, while a "late edition" is anchored by Bill Whitney and produced by Greg Armstrong. The evening Roundup , previously known as The World Tonight , has aired in its current form since 1956 and has been anchored by Blair Clark, Douglas Edwards , Dallas Townsend and Christopher Glenn (Glenn also anchored the morning Roundup before his death in 2006).
The CBS Radio Network provides newscasts at the top of the hour, regular updates at :31 minutes past the hour, the popular Newsfeeds for affiliates (including WCBS and KYW ) at :35 minutes past the hour, and breaking news updates when developments warrant, often at :20 and :50 minutes past the hour. Westwood One handles the distribution.

Bureaus and offices

Domestic bureaus

Foreign bureaus

Personnel

Current correspondents
New York World Headquarters
Washington, D.C.
Los Angeles
London
Denver
Chicago
Asia
Johannesburg
Contributors
CBS Newspath
CBS Radio News

Past correspondents

Presidents of CBS News

International broadcasts
CBS Evening News is shown on Sky News to viewers in Europe, Middle East, Africa, and Asia.
In Australia, the CBS Evening News is shown at 11.30 a.m. Monday to Saturday, and at 12.30 p.m. on Sundays on Sky News Australia .
In the Philippines, CBS Evening News (during Katie Couric 's era) was broadcast via satellite on QTV 11 (a now-defunct sister station of GMA Network, rebranded to GMA News TV ) at 7:30 p.m. with replays at 1:00 p.m. after Balitanghali. CBS Evening News broadcasts were stopped on QTV 11 in late 2010 to make way for a public affairs look-back program ( NAPA-Strip and Power Review ). 60 Minutes is currently broadcast on CNN Philippines (formerly Talktv , Solar News Channel and 9TV ) as a part of their Stories block, which includes non-CNN documentaries and is broadcast on Wednesday at 8:00 p.m. before CNN Philippines Nightly News with replays in a capacity as a stand-alone program on Saturdays at 8:00 a.m. & 5:00 pm and Sundays at 6:00 a.m, all in local time (UTC + 8) .
CBS News stories are a common occurrence on Australia's Ten News on Network Ten , as part a CBS programming content deal. They also air CBS This Morning each weekday as well.

See also
WebPage index: 00110
Digital object identifier
In computing, a Digital Object Identifier or DOI is a persistent identifier or handle used to uniquely identify objects, standardized by the ISO . [1] An implementation of the Handle System , [2] [3] DOIs are in wide use mainly to identify academic, professional, and government information, such as journal articles, research reports and data sets, and official publications though they also have been used to identify other types of information resources, such as commercial videos.
A DOI aims to be "resolvable", usually to some form of access to the information object to which the DOI refers. This is achieved by binding the DOI to metadata about the object, such as a URL , indicating where the object can be found. Thus, by being actionable and interoperable, a DOI differs from identifiers such as ISBNs and ISRCs which aim only to uniquely identify their referents. The DOI system uses the indecs Content Model for representing metadata.
The DOI for a document remains fixed over the lifetime of the document, whereas its location and other metadata may change. Referring to an online document by its DOI provides more stable linking than simply using its URL, because if its URL changes, the publisher only needs to update the metadata for the DOI to link to the new URL. [4] [5] [6]
The developer and administrator of the DOI system is the International DOI Foundation (IDF), which introduced it in 2000. [7] Organizations that meet the contractual obligations of the DOI system and are willing to pay to become a member of the system can assign DOIs. [8] The DOI system is implemented through a federation of registration agencies coordinated by the IDF. [9] By late April 2011 more than 50 million DOI names had been assigned by some 4,000 organizations, [10] and by April 2013 this number had grown to 85 million DOI names assigned through 9,500 organizations.

Nomenclature
A DOI is a type of Handle System handle, which takes the form of a character string divided into two parts, a prefix and a suffix, separated by a slash. The prefix identifies the registrant of the identifier, and the suffix is chosen by the registrant and identifies the specific object associated with that DOI. Most legal Unicode characters are allowed in these strings, which are interpreted in a case-insensitive manner. The prefix usually takes the form 10.NNNN , where NNNN is a series of at least 4 numbers greater than or equal to 1000 , whose limit depends only on the total number of registrants. [11] [12] The prefix may be further subdivided with periods, like 10.NNNN.N . [13]
For example, in the DOI name 10.1000/182 , the prefix is 10.1000 and the suffix is 182 . The "10." part of the prefix distinguishes the handle as part of the DOI namespace, as opposed to some other Handle System namespace, [A] and the characters 1000 in the prefix identify the registrant; in this case the registrant is the International DOI Foundation itself. 182 is the suffix, or item ID, identifying a single object (in this case, the latest version of the DOI Handbook ).
DOI names can identify creative works (such as texts, images, audio or video items, and software) in both electronic and physical forms, performances , and abstract works [14] such as licenses, parties to a transaction, etc.
The names can refer to objects at varying levels of detail: thus DOI names can identify a journal, an individual issue of a journal, an individual article in the journal, or a single table in that article. The choice of level of detail is left to the assigner, but in the DOI system it must be declared as part of the metadata that is associated with a DOI name, using a data dictionary based on the indecs Content Model .

Display
The official DOI Handbook explicitly states that DOIs should display on screens and in print in the format "doi:10.1000/182". [15] Contrary to the DOI Handbook , CrossRef , a major DOI registration agency, recommends displaying a URL (for example, https://doi.org/10.1000/182 ) instead of the officially specified format (for example, doi:10.1000/182 ) [16] [17] This URL provides the location of an HTTP proxy server which will redirect web accesses to the correct online location of the linked item. [8] [18] This recommendation is primarily based on the assumption that the DOI is being displayed without being hyper-linked to its appropriate URL – the argument being that without the hyperlink it is not as easy to copy-and-paste the full URL to actually bring up the page for the DOI, thus the entire URL should be displayed, allowing people viewing the page containing the DOI to copy-and-paste the URL, by hand, into a new window/tab in their browser in order to go to the appropriate page for the document the DOI represents.

Applications
Major applications of the DOI system currently include:
In the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 's publication service OECD iLibrary , each table or graph in an OECD publication is shown with a DOI name that leads to an Excel file of data underlying the tables and graphs. Further development of such services is planned. [19]
A multilingual European DOI registration agency activity, m EDRA , and a Chinese registration agency, Wanfang Data , are active in non-English language markets.

Features and benefits
The IDF designed the DOI system to provide a form of persistent identification , in which each DOI name permanently and unambiguously identifies the object to which it is associated. It also associates metadata with objects, allowing it to provide users with relevant pieces of information about the objects and their relationships. Included as part of this metadata are network actions that allow DOI names to be resolved to web locations where the objects they describe can be found. To achieve its goals, the DOI system combines the Handle System and the indecs Content Model with a social infrastructure.
The Handle System ensures that the DOI name for an object is not based on any changeable attributes of the object such as its physical location or ownership, that the attributes of the object are encoded in its metadata rather than in its DOI name, and that no two objects are assigned the same DOI name. Because DOI names are short character strings, they are human-readable, may be copied and pasted as text, and fit into the URI specification. The DOI name-resolution mechanism acts behind the scenes, so that users communicate with it in the same way as with any other web service; it is built on open architectures , incorporates trust mechanisms , and is engineered to operate reliably and flexibly so that it can be adapted to changing demands and new applications of the DOI system. [20] DOI name-resolution may be used with OpenURL to select the most appropriate among multiple locations for a given object, according to the location of the user making the request. [21] However, despite this ability, the DOI system has drawn criticism from librarians for directing users to non-free copies of documents that would have been available for no additional fee from alternative locations. [22]
The indecs Content Model as used within the DOI system associates metadata with objects. A small kernel of common metadata is shared by all DOI names and can be optionally extended with other relevant data, which may be public or restricted. Registrants may update the metadata for their DOI names at any time, such as when publication information changes or when an object moves to a different URL.
The International DOI Foundation (IDF) oversees the integration of these technologies and operation of the system through a technical and social infrastructure. The social infrastructure of a federation of independent registration agencies offering DOI services was modelled on existing successful federated deployments of identifiers such as GS1 and ISBN .

Comparison with other identifier schemes
A DOI name differs from commonly used Internet pointers to material, such as the Uniform Resource Locator (URL), in that it identifies an object itself as a first-class entity , rather than the specific place where the object is located at a certain time. It implements the Uniform Resource Identifier ( Uniform Resource Name ) concept and adds to it a data model and social infrastructure. [23]
A DOI name also differs from standard identifier registries such as the ISBN , ISRC , etc. The purpose of an identifier registry is to manage a given collection of identifiers, whereas the primary purpose of the DOI system is to make a collection of identifiers actionable and interoperable, where that collection can include identifiers from many other controlled collections. [24]
The DOI system offers persistent, semantically-interoperable resolution to related current data and is best suited to material that will be used in services outside the direct control of the issuing assigner (e.g., public citation or managing content of value). It uses a managed registry (providing social and technical infrastructure). It does not assume any specific business model for the provision of identifiers or services and enables other existing services to link to it in defined ways. Several approaches for making identifiers persistent have been proposed. The comparison of persistent identifier approaches is difficult because they are not all doing the same thing. Imprecisely referring to a set of schemes as "identifiers" doesn't mean that they can be compared easily. Other "identifier systems" may be enabling technologies with low barriers to entry, providing an easy to use labeling mechanism that allows anyone to set up a new instance (examples include Persistent Uniform Resource Locator (PURL), URLs, Globally Unique Identifiers (GUIDs), etc.), but may lack some of the functionality of a registry-controlled scheme and will usually lack accompanying metadata in a controlled scheme. The DOI system does not have this approach and should not be compared directly to such identifier schemes. Various applications using such enabling technologies with added features have been devised that meet some of the features offered by the DOI system for specific sectors (e.g., ARK ).
A DOI name does not depend on the object's location and, in this way, is similar to a Uniform Resource Name (URN) or PURL but differs from an ordinary URL. URLs are often used as substitute identifiers for documents on the Internet (better characterised as Uniform Resource Identifiers) although the same document at two different locations has two URLs. By contrast, persistent identifiers such as DOI names identify objects as first class entities: two instances of the same object would have the same DOI name.

Resolution
DOI name resolution is provided through the Handle System , developed by Corporation for National Research Initiatives , and is freely available to any user encountering a DOI name. Resolution redirects the user from a DOI name to one or more pieces of typed data: URLs representing instances of the object, services such as e-mail, or one or more items of metadata. To the Handle System, a DOI name is a handle, and so has a set of values assigned to it and may be thought of as a record that consists of a group of fields. Each handle value must have a data type specified in its <type> field, which defines the syntax and semantics of its data. While a DOI persistently and uniquely identifies the object to which it is assigned, DOI resolution may not be persistent, due to technical and administrative issues.
To resolve a DOI name, it may be input to a DOI resolver, such as doi.org .
Another approach, which avoids typing or cutting-and-pasting into a resolver is to include the DOI in a document as a URL which uses the resolver as an HTTP proxy, such as http://doi.org/ (preferred) [25] or http://dx.doi.org/ , both of which support HTTPS. For example, the DOI 10.1000/182 can be included in a reference or hyperlink as https://doi.org/10.1000/182 . This approach allows users to click on the DOI as a normal hyperlink . Indeed, as previously mentioned, this is how CrossRef recommends that DOIs always be represented (preferring HTTPS over HTTP), so that if they are cut-and-pasted into other documents, emails, etc., they will be actionable.
Other DOI resolvers and HTTP Proxies include http://hdl.handle.net , http://doi.medra.org , https://doi.pangaea.de/ . At the beginning of the year 2016, a new class of alternative DOI resolvers was started by http://doai.io . This service is unusual in that it tries to find a non-paywalled version of a title and redirects you to that instead of the publisher's version. [26] [27] Since then, other open-access favoring DOI resolvers have been created, notably https://oadoi.org/ in October 2016. [28] While traditional DOI resolvers solely rely on the Handle System, alternative DOI resolvers first consult open access resources such as BASE (Bielefeld Academic Search Engine). [26] [28]
An alternative to HTTP proxies is to use one of a number of add-ons and plug-ins for browsers , thereby avoiding the conversion of the DOIs to URLs, [29] which depend on domain names and may be subject to change, while still allowing the DOI to be treated as a normal hyperlink. For example. the CNRI Handle Extension for Firefox , enables the browser to access Handle System handles or DOIs like hdl:4263537/4000 or doi:10.1000/1 directly in the Firefox browser, using the native Handle System protocol. This plug-in can also replace references to web-to-handle proxy servers with native resolution. A disadvantage of this approach for publishers is that, at least at present, most users will be encountering the DOIs in a browser, mail reader , or other software which does not have one of these plug-ins installed.

IDF organizational structure
The International DOI Foundation (IDF), a non-profit organisation created in 1998, is the governance body of the DOI system. [30] It safeguards all intellectual property rights relating to the DOI system, manages common operational features, and supports the development and promotion of the DOI system. The IDF ensures that any improvements made to the DOI system (including creation, maintenance, registration, resolution and policymaking of DOI names) are available to any DOI registrant. It also prevents third parties from imposing additional licensing requirements beyond those of the IDF on users of the DOI system.
The IDF is controlled by a Board elected by the members of the Foundation, with an appointed Managing Agent who is responsible for co-ordinating and planning its activities. Membership is open to all organizations with an interest in electronic publishing and related enabling technologies. The IDF holds annual open meetings on the topics of DOI and related issues.
Registration agencies, appointed by the IDF, provide services to DOI registrants: they allocate DOI prefixes, register DOI names, and provide the necessary infrastructure to allow registrants to declare and maintain metadata and state data. Registration agencies are also expected to actively promote the widespread adoption of the DOI system, to cooperate with the IDF in the development of the DOI system as a whole, and to provide services on behalf of their specific user community. A list of current RAs is maintained by the International DOI Foundation. The IDF is recognized as one of the federated registrars for the Handle System by the DONA Foundation (of which the IDF is a board member), and is responsible for assigning Handle System prefixes under the top-level 10 prefix. [31]
Registration agencies generally charge a fee to assign a new DOI name; parts of these fees are used to support the IDF. The DOI system overall, through the IDF, operates on a not-for-profit cost recovery basis.

Standardization
The DOI system is an international standard developed by the International Organization for Standardization in its technical committee on identification and description, TC46/SC9. [32] The Draft International Standard ISO/DIS 26324, Information and documentation – Digital Object Identifier System met the ISO requirements for approval. The relevant ISO Working Group later submitted an edited version to ISO for distribution as an FDIS (Final Draft International Standard) ballot, [33] which was approved by 100% of those voting in a ballot closing on 15 November 2010. [34] The final standard was published on 23 April 2012. [1]
DOI is a registered URI under the info URI scheme specified by IETF RFC 4452 . info:doi/ is the infoURI Namespace of Digital Object Identifiers. [35]
The DOI syntax is a NISO standard, first standardised in 2000, ANSI/NISO Z39.84-2005 Syntax for the Digital Object Identifier. [36]
The maintainers of the DOI system have deliberately not registered a DOI namespace for URNs, stating that:

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00111
Times Internet
Times Internet is an Internet subsidiary of The Times of India Group , under which some of the largest websites in India, The Times of India , The Economic Times , Navbharat Times and Maharashtra Times , operate.
Indiatimes is the flagship brand of Times Internet. Times Internet is in turn promoted by The Times Group , which has a 100% stake in it. Times Internet is the largest Indian online group in India, with over 6.5 billion monthly pageviews. It has a wide range of services from online news to e-commerce, music, radio, television, video, daily deals, sports, educational platforms and location-based services.

E-Commerce
Indiatimes Shopping is an online shopping platform, featuring over 30,000 products for sale across a wide range of categories such as apparels, accessories, jewellery, consumer durables/electronics, books, music, and movies. [1] [2]
Indiatimes has also launched a few vertical properties in the recent past. These include the Nokia India Shop and Satvik Shop . The former is the exclusive online store for Nokia in India, with Indiatimes being the official online distributor for Nokia in India. The latter is a website and community dedicated to selling organic and ayurveda products. Recently Indiatimes shopping tied up with Land Mark and have listed 3 million books of various categories.

Digital
It is one of the largest Indian digital networks based on traffic and revenue (behind Google, Facebook, and Yahoo). It operates 30+ digital businesses. The most popular internet channels of Times Group - The Times Of India , The Economic Times , Navbharat Times , iDiva , Luxpresso , and Maharashtra Times - even come under the banner of Times Internet's network. Business Insider India is another of the fastest growing news websites for business and technology persons nationwide. The Huffington Post India in association with The Times of India Group is also an online news aggregator and blog offering coverage of Indian politics, entertainment, Bollywood, world news and technology.

Mobile
TimesMobile (TML) is the mobile Internet venture of Times Internet. It has applications and services to users in diverse categories.
Alive app is a mobile augmented reality software by Times Internet Ltd. On its launch day, December 13, 2012, it was reported that the app was downloaded 250,000 times, leading to 300,000 augmentation views on a single day.
Follo is another celebrity Fan-connect application.
GreetZAP is an application to send greetings and cards to friends.

Social networking
itimes.com is the social networking site. [3]

Music
Gaana.com is a commercial music streaming service providing free and licensed music. [4] Launched in June 2011 by Times Internet, Gaana.com provides both Indian and international music content. The entire Indian music catalog is available to users worldwide, but only users in India have access to international music. Gaana.com features music from 21 languages - Hindi , English , Kannada , Malayalam , Marathi , Punjabi , Tamil , Telugu , Bengali and other Indian regional languages.

Radio
Radio Mirchi is one of the most popular FM. radio stations in all major cities of India, including New Delhi , Mumbai , Chennai , Hyderabad , Bangalore , Kolkata , Ahemdabad and Pune .

Sports
cricbuzz offers news and coverage of cricket matches. It covers upcoming match schedules and live ball-by-ball commentary.

Education and technology
Lifehacker is a computer and technology website that recommends websites, software downloads, tutorials, and tips and tricks to assist pewople at work as well as home. Gizmodo India is a blog about electronic gadgets and technology. Techgig.com was launched by Times Business Solutions Limited (TBSL), which is the "life interactive" arm of The Times Group .

Entertainment
Boxtv.com is an internet based video streaming service that provides the latest on Bollywood blockbuster movies, TV shows, documentaries, short films and more. Times Internet became the first to launch a TV channel on mobile with Times Now .

Astrology
Astrospeak provides astrology, horoscope, numerology, vastu, tarot, vedic and Chinese astrology daily, weekly and monthly horoscopes from top Indian astrologers.

Deals
Times Internet acquired a majority stake in CouponDunia Media Pvt. Ltd. and merged its company TimesDeal with it. The new company now runs under the brand name CouponDunia which has over six million subscribers and monthly traffic of over six million visitors.

Health and lifestyle
Times Internet launched Timescity with a focus on food and lifestyle listings. It is a one-stop destination for restaurants, events, movies and nightlife hotspots.
HealthMeUp.com is a health and fitness website that offers solutions to modern day health issues and tips on lifestyle.
Mensxp.com is a part of Indiatimes' lifestyle network, for men. iDiva.com offers beauty, health, relationship, career, recipe, home decor and parenting tips for women.
HappyTrips is a platform to discover new travel destinations from all over the world and plan their holiday trip. It offers offline travel guides written by experts from across the globe.
Zigwheels has automobile reviews, expert opinions on cars as well as bike pricing and other various motoring subjects.

Finance
ETMoney provide best way to save grow and manage your money.
ETInsure Insurance web aggregator limited an online insurance distribution platform.

Most recent acquisitions
WebPage index: 00112
Sanibel, Florida
Sanibel is a city in Lee County, Florida , United States, on Sanibel Island . The population was 6,469 at the 2010 census , with an estimated 2012 population of 6,741. It is part of the Cape Coral-Fort Myers, Florida Metropolitan Statistical Area . Sanibel is a barrier island – a collection of sand on the leeward side of the more solid coral-rock of Pine Island .
The city incorporates the entire island, with most of the city proper at the east end of the island. After the Sanibel causeway was built to replace the ferry in May 1963, the residents asserted control over development by establishing the Sanibel Comprehensive Land Use Plan in 1974 helping to maintain a balance between development and preservation of the island's ecology. [4] A new, higher bridge, permitting passage without a bascule bridge (drawbridge) of tall boats and sailboats, was completed in late 2007.
Due to easy causeway access, Sanibel is a popular tourist destination known for its shell beaches and wildlife refuges. More than half of the island is made up of wildlife refuges, the largest being J.N. "Ding" Darling National Wildlife Refuge . The Island hosts the Sanibel Historical Village and a variety of other museums and theaters, as well as many non-profit organizations like the Sanibel-Captiva Conservation Foundation, the Clinic for the Rehabilitation of Wildlife, and the Sanibel Sea School . In August 2004, Hurricane Charley hit the island causing mandatory evacuation for the residents and resulting in the most storm damage to the island in 44 years. [5]

History
Sanibel and Captiva formed as one island about 6,000 years ago. The first known humans in the area were the Calusa , who arrived about 2,500 years ago. [6] The Calusa were a powerful Indian nation who came to dominate most of Southwest Florida through trade via their elaborate system of canals and waterways. Sanibel remained an important Calusa settlement until the collapse of their empire, soon after the arrival of the Europeans .
In 1765, the first known appearance of a harbor on Sanibel is shown on a map as Puerto de S. Nibel (the "v" and "b" being interchangeable); thus, the name may have evolved from "San Nibel". Alternatively, the name may derive, as many believe, from "(Santa) Ybel", which survives in the old placename "Point Ybel", where the Sanibel Island Light is located. How it would have gotten this name, however, is a matter of conjecture. One story says it was named by Juan Ponce de León for Queen Isabella I of Castile ; the island may indeed be named for this queen or the saint whose name she shares , either by Ponce de León or someone later. Another attributes the name to Roderigo Lopez, the first mate of José Gaspar (Gasparilla), after his beautiful lover Sanibel whom he had left behind in Spain. Like most of the lore surrounding Gasparilla, however, this story is apocryphal, as the above references to recognizable variants of the name predate the buccaneer's supposed reign.
Sanibel is not the only island in the area to figure prominently in the legends of Gaspar; Captiva, Useppa , and Gasparilla are also connected. Sanibel also appears in another tale, this one involving Gaspar's ally-turned-rival Black Caesar , said to have been a former Haitian slave who escaped during the Haitian Revolution to become a pirate. According to folklore, Black Caesar came to the Gulf of Mexico during the War of 1812 to avoid interference from the British. In the Gulf he befriended Gasparilla, who allowed him to establish himself on Sanibel Island. Eventually the old Spaniard discovered Caesar had been stealing from him and chased him off, but not before his loot had been buried.
Legendary pirates' dens aside, the first modern settlement on Sanibel (then spelled "Sanybel") was established by the Florida Peninsular Land Company in 1832. The colony never took off, and was abandoned by 1849. It was this first group that initially petitioned for a lighthouse on the island. The island was re-populated after the implementation of the Homestead Act in 1862, and again a lighthouse was petitioned. Construction on the Sanibel Island Lighthouse was completed in 1884, [7] but the community remained small. In May 1963 a causeway linking Sanibel and Captiva to the mainland was opened, resulting in an explosion of growth. The City of Sanibel passed new restrictions on development after it was incorporated; these were challenged by developers, to no avail. Currently the only buildings on the island taller than two stories date before 1974, and there are no fast food or chain restaurants allowed on the island except a Dairy Queen and a Subway , which were on the island before the laws were enacted. A new causeway was completed in 2007; it replaced the worn out 1963 spans, which were not designed to carry heavy loads or large numbers of vehicles. The new bridge features a "flyover" span tall enough for sailboats to pass under, replacing the old bridge's bascule drawbridge span. The original bridge was demolished and its remains were sunk into the water to create artificial reefs in the Gulf of Mexico. [8]
The main town is located on the eastern end of the island. The city was formed in 1974, [1] as a direct result of the main causeway being built in 1963 to replace the ferry, and the rampant construction and development that occurred afterward. Developers sued over the new restrictions, but the city and citizens prevailed in their quest to protect the island. The only buildings above two to three stories now on the barrier island were built during that period.
The city is on Gulf coast of Southwest Florida, and is linked to the mainland by the Sanibel Causeway. A short bridge over Blind Pass links Sanibel to Captiva Island . More than half of the two islands are preserved in its natural state as wildlife refuges. Visitors can drive, walk, bike, or kayak through the J. N. "Ding" Darling National Wildlife Refuge [9] The island's most famous landmark, the Sanibel Lighthouse , is located at the eastern end of the island, adjacent to the fishing pier. The main thoroughfare, Periwinkle Way, is where the majority of stores and restaurants are located, while the Gulf Drives (East, Middle and West) play host to most of the accommodations.
The Sanibel-Captiva Conservation Foundation, a not-for-profit organization, has also been a key player in helping to curb uncontrolled commercial growth and development on the island. Since 1967, SCCF has been dedicated to the preservation of natural resources on and around Sanibel and Captiva and has led efforts to acquire and preserve environmentally sensitive land on the islands including critical wildlife habitats, rare and unique subtropical plant communities, tidal wetlands, and freshwater wetlands along the Sanibel River. [10]
The city's best-known resident is former CIA Director Porter Goss , who spearheaded the island's incorporation, became its first mayor, and represented the area in Congress from 1989 until his appointment as CIA Director in 2004.
The Wall Street Journal selected Sanibel and Captiva Islands as one of the 10 Best Places for Second Homes in 2010.

Geography
Sanibel is located at 26°26′23″N 82°4′50″W ﻿ / ﻿ 26.43972°N 82.08056°W ﻿ / 26.43972; -82.08056 (26.439608, -82.080456). [11] According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 33.16 square miles (85.9 km 2 ), of which 17.21 square miles (44.6 km 2 ) is land and 15.96 square miles (41.3 km 2 ) (48.13%) is water.

Demographics
As of the census of 2010, there were 6,469 people, 3,359 households, and 2,273 families residing in the city. The population density was 375.9 per square mile (145.1/km²). There were 7,821 housing units at an average density of 454.6 per square mile (175.5/km²).The racial makeup of the city was 98.0% White , 0.6% African American , 0.1% Native American , 0.4% Asian , 0.00%(1) Pacific Islander , 0.3% from other races , and 0.6% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.3% of the population. [14]
There were 3,359 households out of which 8.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 63.8% were married couples living together, 2.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.3% were non-families. 27.9% of all households were made up of individuals and 16.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 1.92 and the average family size was 2.28. [14]
Among the population; 8.5% under the age of 19, 1.1% from 20 to 24, 7.5% from 25 to 44, 32.7% from 45-64, and those aged 65 or older represented 50.1%. The median age was 65 years. For every 100 females there were 89.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.5 males age 18 and over. [14]
The median income for a household in the city was $97,788, and the median income for a family was $138,194. Males had a median income of $80,152 versus $45,458 for females. The per capita income for the city was $79,742. About 3.6% of families and 7.0% of the population were below the poverty line, with 21.3% of those under age 18 and 3.4% of those age 65 or over. [14]

Ecology
The island's curved shrimp -like shape forms Tarpon Bay on the north side of the island. It is linked to the mainland by the Sanibel Causeway , which runs across two small manmade islets and the Intracoastal Waterway . A short bridge links Sanibel Island to Captiva Island over Blind Pass . The Bailey-Matthews Shell Museum on Sanibel is the only museum in the world dedicated entirely to the study of shells. The Gulf-side beaches are excellent on both Sanibel and Captiva, and are world-renowned for their variety of seashells , which include coquinas , scallops , whelks , sand dollars , and many other species of both shallow-water and deeper-water mollusks , primarily bivalves and gastropods . Sanibel Island is home to a significant variety of birds , including the roseate spoonbill and several nesting pairs of bald eagles . Birds can be seen on the beaches, the causeway islands, and the reserves, including J. N. "Ding" Darling National Wildlife Refuge . Common sights include pelicans , herons , egrets , and anhingas , as well as the more common birds like terns , sandpipers , and seagulls .
There is a population of American alligators on Sanibel Island. A lone rare American crocodile had been seen at the Wildlife Refuge for over 30 years, but she died in 2010 of unseasonably cold winters or old age. [15] A memorial was set up at J.N. "Ding" Darling National Wildlife Refuge honoring "Wilma", as she was known by the residents. [15] A new crocodile was introduced in May 2010 when she was found on a private property and relocated to J.N. "Ding" Darling National Wildlife Refuge . [16] Plants on the island include the native sea grape , sea oats , mangroves , and several types of palm trees . The Australian pine is an introduced species that has spread throughout the island, to some extent overpowering native vegetation and trees. Once mature, the pine blocks sunlight and drops a thick bed of pine needles that affect the soil's pH and prevents new native growth. The ground is very soft under these pines.
The local form of the marsh rice rat has been recognized in some classifications as a separate subspecies , Oryzomys palustris sanibeli . [17]

Wildlife refuges
Preserving the island's natural ecology has always been important to its citizens and visitors alike. A driving force in the preservation of the island is the Sanibel-Captiva Conservation Foundation which was founded in 1967 with a mission to "preserve natural resources and wildlife habitat on and around the islands of Sanibel and Captiva." [18] 1,300 acres (5.3 km 2 ) of land on Sanibel are under the supervision of the Foundation; included in this land there is a "Marine Laboratory which actively conducts research in areas including seagrasses , mangroves , harmful algal blooms , fish populations and shellfish restoration." [19] Sanibel Captiva Conservation Foundation also has a project called RECON (River, Estuary and Coastal Observing Network) which includes a "network of eight in-water sensors that provide real-time, hourly readings of key water quality parameters." [19] The foundation is also serves to protect the wildlife on the island and has a variety of education programs designed to instruct people about the island's unique ecology.
The biggest wildlife refuge on the island is the J.N. "Ding" Darling National Wildlife Refuge, Covering more than 5,200 acres (21 km 2 ) of land, the refuge strives to ensure that these lands are "preserved, restored and maintained as a haven for indigenous and migratory wildlife as part of a nation-wide network of Refuges administered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service" The lands also serve to provide a home for many endangered and threatened species. [20] Currently the refuge provides a home for over 220 species of birds native to the island. [21] Visitors to the refuge can walk, bike, drive, or kayak though the wildlife drive which takes you through five miles (8.0 kilometres) of mangrove tree forests and tidal flats, this drive is perfect for watching the island's wildlife and looking at the island's native vegetation. To show that preserving the wildlife really is important, the drive is closed one day every week, Friday, so that the wildlife can have a day to themselves where they can scavenge for food closer to the drive and not have to be bothered by or fearful of humans. There is also an education center which features "interactive exhibits on refuge ecosystems, the life and work of "Ding" Darling, migratory flyways, and the National Wildlife Refuge System." [22]

Beaches and seashells
Sanibel beaches attract visitors from all around the world, partly because of the large quantities of seashells that frequently wash up there. Many sand dollars can be found as well. One of the reasons for these large accumulations of shells is the fact that Sanibel is a barrier island which is "part of a large plateau that extends out into the Gulf of Mexico for miles. It is this plateau that acts like a shelf for seashells to gather." Sanibel also has an "east-west orientation when most islands are north-south. Hence, the island is gifted with great sandy beaches and an abundance of shells." [23]
People who are lucky enough to find the elegant brown-spotted shell of a Junonia on a Sanibel beach often get their picture in the local newspapers. Junonia volutes are reasonably common living in deep water, but they only rarely wash up; a beach find of a whole shell is greatly prized.
Junonia shells can be purchased at local shell shops, or can be seen on display in the Bailey-Matthews National Shell Museum , in some of the glass display tables at the Sanibel Cafe, or at the Sanibel Shell Fair in early March.
Throughout the year, many people come to the beaches of Sanibel to gather shells. People are often seen bending down as they look for seashells, and this posture is known as the "Sanibel Stoop." [24] There are beaches almost all around the island. There are even beaches along the Sanibel causeway, and these are great for fishing and windsurfing . However, beach parking on Sanibel itself is very limited, and in high season finding a convenient parking space can be a challenge.
Lighthouse Beach is named after the famous Sanibel Lighthouse , which includes a popular fishing pier and nature trails. The most secluded beach on the island is Bowman's Beach; there are no hotels in sight and the beach has a "pristine and quiet" atmosphere. [23]
Barron's selected Sanibel and Captiva Islands as one of the 10 Best Places for Second Homes in 2010.

Climate
Sanibel Island, located in southern Florida, has a climate that is "subtropical and humid" with daily high temperatures ranging from 75 °F (24 °C) in midwinter to around 90 °F (32 °C) in the summer. [25] The months of January through April (peak tourist season on the island) have the coolest temperatures, ranging from 75 °F (24 °C) during the day to a cool 55 °F (13 °C) at night, and there is very little rainfall on the island during those months. [26] The summer heat and humidity on the island, which has been recorded as high as 100 °F (38 °C), is cooled by the ocean seabreezes from the Gulf of Mexico, and by almost daily afternoon and evening rain showers, which are responsible for much of the island's rainfall. June is when the Island gets most of its rainfall. [25] The area is prone to being hit by tropical cyclones and hurricanes; the hurricane season starts in June, but most of the activity occurs in September and October. However, local communities have "adapted to cope with these occasional storm threats." [27]

Hurricanes
Southwest Florida rarely suffers direct strikes by hurricanes, but every 20 or so years it takes a significant hit, and about every 40 years a major one. Most of these have affected Sanibel. On August 13, 2004, Sanibel Island was hit hard by Hurricane Charley, a category four hurricane with 143 mph (230 km/h) winds. [27] It was the strongest to hit Southwest Florida since Hurricane Donna in September 1960. [28] While much of the native vegetation survived, the non-native Australian pines suffered serious damage, blocking nearly every road. Wildlife officials were also concerned that nests of birds and sea turtles were destroyed. The Sanibel Lighthouse survived with little damage, and the Sanibel Causeway suffered relatively minor damage, save for a toll booth tilted partly over, and erosion of a small seawall . Blind Pass was again cut through, but refilled less than one month later. Residents who left before the August 13 storm were not allowed back by the city government until August 18, due to hundreds of downed trees and electric power lines, and the lack of potable water and sanitary sewer. A temporary city hall for Sanibel was set up on the mainland in a Fort Myers hotel, until utilities and transport could be restored to the island.

Infrastructure

Transportation
A new three-part causeway bridge to Sanibel was completed during the summer of 2007, and the high-span section replaced the original drawbridge.

Library
Sanibel Public Library was built in 1994 and measured 19,162 square feet. In 2004, the building was expanded an additional 10,386 square feet for a total of 29,548 square feet. The library houses more than 60,000 titles and is a charter member of the Southwest Florida Library Network (SWFLN). [29] Sanibel Public Library is owned by the citizens of Sanibel Island and governed by a seven-member elected Board of Commissioners. Sanibel Public Library District is an independent special district created by the Florida Legislature, and is a governmental agency for all purposes under Florida Law. [30]

Notable people
Notable people who reside or used to reside on Sanibel include:

In literature
Sanibel Island is the main setting for crime novels written by local author Randy Wayne White. Popular locales are referenced throughout his novels. White's main fictional character is named Doc Ford and due to his popularity, White opened a restaurant in his character's name, Doc Ford's Sanibel Rum Bar & Grill.

In film
Parts of George A. Romero 's Day of the Dead were shot on Sanibel Island. [31] Romero had a second home on Sanibel, from which he rewrote Day of the Dead in 1984. [32]
Night Moves was filmed on the Island in 1975, directed by Arthur Penn . It stars Gene Hackman , Jennifer Warren , Susan Clark and features early career appearances by James Woods and Melanie Griffith .
WebPage index: 00113
NBC News
NBC News is a division of the American broadcast network NBC . The division operates under NBCUniversal News Group , a subsidiary of NBCUniversal , in turn a subsidiary of Comcast . The group's various operations report to the president of NBC News, Noah Oppenheim . [1]
NBC News aired the first news program in American broadcast television history on February 21, 1940. The group's broadcasts are produced and aired from 30 Rockefeller Center , NBC's headquarters in New York City .
The division presides over America's number-one-rated newscast, [3] NBC Nightly News , and the longest-running television series in American history, Meet The Press . NBC News also offers 70 years of rare historic footage [4] from the NBCUniversal Archives online.
NBC News operates a 24-hour cable news network known as MSNBC , which includes the organization's flagship daytime news operation, MSNBC Live . The cable network shares staff and editorial control with NBC News. In 2016, the organization also purchased a portion of Euronews , a European 24-hour news network that, in 2017, entered into an international editorial relationship with NBC News. [5]

History

Caravan era
The first American television newscast in history was made by NBC News on February 21, 1940, anchored by Lowell Thomas and airing weeknights at 6:45 p.m. [6] In June 1940, NBC, through its flagship station in New York City , W2XBS (renamed commercial WNBT in 1941, now WNBC ) operating on channel one, televised 30¼ hours of coverage of the Republican National Convention live and direct from Philadelphia . The station used a series of relays from Philadelphia to New York and on to upper New York State , for rebroadcast on W2XB in Schenectady (now WRGB ), making this among the first "network" programs of NBC Television. Due to wartime restrictions, there were no live telecasts of the 1944 conventions, although films of the events were reportedly shown over WNBT the next day.
In 1948, NBC teamed up with Life magazine to provide election night coverage of President Harry S. Truman 's surprising victory over New York governor Thomas E. Dewey . The television audience was small, but NBC's share in New York was double that of any other outlet. [7] The following year, the Camel News Caravan , anchored by John Cameron Swayze , debuted on NBC. Lacking the graphics and technology of later years, it nonetheless contained many of the elements of modern newscasts. [8] NBC hired its own film crews and in the program's early years, it dominated CBS's competing program, which did not hire its own film crews until 1953. [8] (by contrast, CBS spent lavishly on Edward R. Murrow 's weekly series, See It Now [8] ). In 1950, David Brinkley began serving as the program's Washington correspondent, but attracted little attention outside the network until paired with Chet Huntley in 1956. [9] In 1955, the Camel News Caravan fell behind CBS 's Douglas Edwards with the News , and Swayze lost the already tepid support of NBC executives. [8] The following year, NBC replaced the program with the Huntley-Brinkley Report .
Beginning in 1951, NBC News was managed by director of news Bill McAndrew, who reported to vice president of news and public affairs J. Davidson Taylor. [10]

Huntley-Brinkley era
Television assumed an increasingly prominent role in American family life in the late 1950s, and NBC News was called television's "champion of news coverage." [11] NBC president Robert Kintner provided the news division with ample amounts of both financial resources and air time. [8] In 1956, the network paired anchors Chet Huntley and David Brinkley and the two became celebrities, [9] supported by reporters including John Chancellor , Frank McGee , Edwin Newman , Sander Vanocur , Nancy Dickerson , Tom Pettit , and Ray Scherer.
Created by producer Reuven Frank , NBC's Huntley-Brinkley Report had its debut on October 29, 1956. During much of its 14-year run, it exceeded the viewership levels of its CBS News competition, anchored initially by Douglas Edwards and, beginning in April 1962, by Walter Cronkite .
NBC's vice president of news and public affairs, J. Davidson Taylor, was a Southerner who, with producer Reuven Frank, was determined that NBC would lead television's coverage of the civil rights movement . [12] In 1955, NBC provided national coverage of Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. 's leadership of the bus boycott in Montgomery, Alabama , airing reports from Frank McGee, then news director of NBC's Montgomery affiliate WSFA-TV , who would later join the network. [13] A year later, John Chancellor's coverage of the admission of black students to Central High School in Little Rock, Arkansas was the first occasion when the key news story came from television rather than print [13] and prompted a prominent U.S. senator to observe later, "When I think of Little Rock, I think of John Chancellor." [10] Other reporters who covered the movement for the network included Sander Vanocur, Herbert Kaplow, Charles Quinn, and Richard Valeriani, [12] who was hit with an ax handle at a demonstration in Marion, Alabama in 1965. [14]
While Walter Cronkite's enthusiasm for the space race eventually won the anchorman viewers for CBS, NBC News, with the work of correspondents such as Frank McGee, Roy Neal, Jay Barbree , and Peter Hackes, also provided ample coverage of American manned space missions in the Project Mercury , Project Gemini , and Project Apollo programs. In an era when space missions rated continuous coverage, NBC configured its largest studio, Studio 8H , for space coverage. It utilized models and mockups of rockets and spacecraft, maps of the earth and moon to show orbital trackage, and stages on which animated figures created by puppeteer Bil Baird were used to depict movements of astronauts before on-board spacecraft television cameras were feasible. (Studio 8H had been home to the NBC Symphony Orchestra and is now the home of Saturday Night Live . ) NBC's coverage of the first moon landing in 1969 earned the network an Emmy Award . [15]
In the late 1950s, Kintner reorganized the chain of command at the network, making Bill McAndrew president of NBC News, reporting directly to Kintner. [10] McAndrew served in that position until his death in 1968. [10] McAndrew was succeeded by his executive vice president, producer Reuven Frank, who held the position until 1973. [10]
On November 22, 1963, NBC interrupted various programs on its affiliate stations at 1:45 p.m. to announce that President John F. Kennedy had been shot in Dallas , Texas . Eight minutes later, at 1:53:12 p.m., NBC broke into programming with a network bumper slide and Chet Huntley , Bill Ryan and Frank McGee informing the viewers what was going on as it happened; but since a camera was not in service, the reports were audio only. However, NBC did not begin broadcasting over the air until 1:57 p.m. ET. About 40 minutes later, after word came that JFK was pronounced dead, NBC suspended regular programming and carried 71 hours of uninterrupted news coverage of the assassination and the funeral of the president—including the only live broadcast of the fatal shooting of Kennedy's assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald , by Jack Ruby as Oswald was being led in handcuffs by law-enforcement officials through the basement of Dallas Police Headquarters. [16]

NBC Nightly News
NBC's ratings lead began to slip toward the end of the 1960s and fell sharply when Chet Huntley retired in 1970 (Huntley died of cancer in 1974). The loss of Huntley, along with a reluctance by RCA to fund NBC News at a similar level as CBS was funding its news division, left NBC News in the doldrums. NBC's primary news show gained its present title, NBC Nightly News , on August 3, 1970.
The network tried a platoon of anchors (Brinkley, McGee, and John Chancellor ) during the early months of Nightly News . Despite the efforts of the network's eventual lead anchor, the articulate, even-toned Chancellor, and an occasional first-place finish in the Nielsens , Nightly News in the 1970s was primarily a strong second. [8] By the end of the decade, NBC had to contend not only with a powerful CBS but also a surging ABC , led by Roone Arledge . Tom Brokaw became sole anchor in 1983, after co-anchoring with Roger Mudd for a year, and began leading NBC's efforts. In 1986 and 1987, NBC won the top spot in the Nielsens for the first time in years, [17] only to fall back when Nielsen's ratings methodology changed. In late 1996, Nightly News again moved into first place, [18] a spot it has held onto in most of the succeeding years. Brian Williams assumed primary anchor duties when Brokaw retired in December 2004. [19] In February 2015, NBC suspended Williams for six months for telling an inaccurate story about his experience in the 2003 invasion of Iraq . [20] He was replaced by Lester Holt on an interim basis. On June 18, 2015, it was announced that Holt would become the permanent anchor and Williams would be moved to MSNBC as an anchor of breaking news and special reports beginning in August. [21]
In 1993, Dateline NBC broadcast an investigative report about the safety of General Motors (GM) trucks. GM discovered the "actual footage" utilized in the broadcast had been rigged by the inclusion of explosive incendiaries attached to the gas tanks and the use of improper sealants for those tanks. GM subsequently filed an anti-defamation lawsuit against NBC, which publicly admitted the results of the tests were rigged and settled the lawsuit with GM on the very same day. [22]

Company news
On October 22, 2007, Nightly News moved into its new high definition studios, at Studio 3C at NBC Studios in 30 Rockefeller Plaza in New York City. The network's 24-hour cable network, MSNBC , joined the network in New York on that day as well. The new studios/headquarters for NBC News and MSNBC are now located in one area. [ citation needed ]
During the financial crisis of 2007–2008 , NBC News was urged to save $500 million by NBC Universal. On that occasion, NBC News laid off several of its in-house reporters such as Kevin Corke , Jeannie Ohm and Don Teague. This was the largest layoff in NBC News history.
After the sudden death of the influential moderator Tim Russert of Meet the Press in June 2008, Tom Brokaw took over as an interim host; and on December 14, 2008, David Gregory became the new moderator of the show until August 14, 2014, when NBC announced that NBC News Political Director Chuck Todd would take over as the 12th moderator of Meet the Press starting September 7, 2014. David Gregory's last broadcast was August 10, 2014. [23] [24]
By 2009, NBC had established leadership in network news, airing the highest-rated morning, evening, and Sunday interview news programs. [25] Its ability to share costs with MSNBC and share in the cable network's advertising and subscriber revenue made it far more profitable than its network rivals. [26]

Controversies

Virginia Tech massacre
On April 16, 2007, Cho Seung-hui , gunman in the Virginia Tech massacre , took time between the two shooting episodes to prepare and mail a large multimedia package to NBC News in New York City containing messages about his anger at the wealthy and alluding to the slaughter that was about to take place. Although the package was sent overnight mail, it was not received until 11 a.m. on April 18 because of Cho's confusion over the zip code of NBC's headquarters at 30 Rockefeller Plaza . The package contained a DVD showing video clips of Cho speaking and more than two dozen photos of Cho, including 11 of him thrusting pistols at the camera. A postal worker delivering the parcel to the network's Rockefeller Center offices recognized the sender and alerted NBC security personnel. They immediately reported the package to the FBI . Meanwhile, NBC made copies of the contents and aired carefully edited pieces on its evening news and cable programs. Snippets from the package, including still photos, videos and voice narration, were also made available to competing news outlets who agreed to credit the network as the source. Then-NBC News president Steve Capus defended use of the material, but the frequency of its broadcast was cut dramatically.

Shooting of Trayvon Martin
On March 27, 2012, NBC News broadcast an edited segment from a 911 call placed by George Zimmerman before he shot Trayvon Martin . The editing made it appear that Zimmerman volunteered that Martin was black, rather than merely responding to the dispatcher's inquiry, which would support a view that the shooting was racially motivated. A media watchdog organization accused NBC News of engaging in "an all-out falsehood." While NBC News initially declined to comment, [27] the news agency did issue an apology to viewers. [28] The Washington Post called the statement "skimpy on the details on just how the mistake unfolded." [28]

NBC News team kidnapping
On 13 December 2012, NBC News reporter Richard Engel and his five crew members, Aziz Akyavaş, Ghazi Balkiz, John Kooistra, Ian Rivers and Ammar Cheikh Omar, were abducted in Syria . Having escaped after five days in captivity, Engel said he believed that a Shabiha group loyal to al-Assad was behind the abduction, and that the crew was freed by the Ahrar al-Sham group five days later. [29] Engel's account was however challenged from early on. [30] In April 2015, NBC had to revise the kidnapping account, following further investigations by the New York Times , which suggested that the NBC team "was almost certainly taken by a Sunni criminal element affiliated with the Free Syrian Army ," rather than by a loyalist Shia group. [31]

Presidents
Nine men have served as president of NBC News during its history: Reuven Frank (1968–73, 1981–85), Richard Wald (1973–77), Lester M. Crystal (1977–79), William J. Small (1979–81), Lawrence Grossman (1985–88), Michael Gartner (1988–93), Andrew Lack (1993–2001), Neal Shapiro (2001–05), and Steve Capus (2005–March 5, 2013). In August 2013, Deborah Turness assumed the role as president of NBC News, becoming the first woman to head the division. [32] In February 2017, Today Show producer and executive Noah Oppenheim was named president of NBC News. [1]

Programming

Former programming

Syndicated productions

Other productions
NBC News provides content for the Internet, as well as cable-only news networks CNBC and MSNBC .

NBC News International
In November 2016, NBC News Group chairman Andy Lack announced NBCUniversal had purchased a 25% stake in Euronews , a European news organization competing against the likes of BBC News and ITV News . As part of the purchase, NBC News created "NBC News International," which seeks to combine the new European and pre-existing American resources of the newly-expanded organization into a streamlined, global operation. The new division of the company is under the direction of Deborah Turness, former President of NBC News. It was also announced that Euronews will take on EuronewsNBC branding once the deal is finalized. [33]

NBC News Radio
NBC News Radio has been distributed by iHeartMedia and its TTWN Networks since July 2016. It is provided to the network's 24/7 News Source affiliates and includes a top of the hour newscast along with other audio content which is heard on over 1000 radio stations. [34]
The original NBC Radio Network was purchased by Westwood One in 1987 as General Electric , which acquired NBC's parent company RCA , divested most properties not pertaining to the NBC television network. NBC Radio's news operation was merged into the Mutual Broadcasting System , then into Westwood One's then-corporate sibling CBS Radio , and eventually assimilated into the syndicator itself. Initially just a service limited to one-hour reports from 6 a.m. to 10 p.m. ET, on March 5, 2012, Dial Global – who had acquired Westwood One – announced NBC News Radio would expand to a full-time 24-hour radio news network, replacing CNN Radio (that itself replaced both NBC Radio and Mutual in 1999).
As of 2016, WOR serves as NBC News Radio's East Coast flagship station, while KOGO serves as the network's West Coast flagship station. [ citation needed ]
It broadcasts in a 15-minute cycle, with the latest news in business, politics, health, technology, sport, weather,...

NBC News Overnight
In 1982, NBC News began production on NBC News Overnight with anchors Linda Ellerbee , Lloyd Dobyns , and Bill Schechner. That program was cancelled in December 1983, but in 1991, NBC News launched another overnight news show called NBC Nightside . During its run, the show's anchors included Sara James, [35] Bruce Hall, Antonio Mora , Tom Miller, Campbell Brown , Kim Hindrew, Tom Donavan, and Tonya Strong.
NBC Nightside lasted until 1998 and was replaced by "NBC All Night", composed of reruns of The Tonight Show with Jay Leno and Late Night with Conan O'Brien , and later from January 1, 2007 to September 23, 2011, Poker After Dark . NBC now airs same day repeats of the fourth hour of Today and CNBC's Mad Money on weekdays, LXTV programs on early Sunday mornings, and Meet the Press and Dateline encores on early Monday mornings.

NBC News Channel
NBC News Channel is a news video and report feed service, similar to a wire service, providing pre-produced international, national and regional stories some with fronting reporters customized for NBC network affiliates. It is based in Charlotte, North Carolina and is connected to the studios of Charlotte NBC affiliate WCNC-TV . NBC News Channel also served as the production base of NBC Nightside .

Noted coverage
NBC News got the first American news interviews from two Russian presidents ( Vladimir Putin , Mikhail Gorbachev ), and Brokaw was the only American television news correspondent to witness the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989. [36]

Notable personnel

Former staff
† (deceased)

International broadcasts
MSNBC is not shown outside the Americas on a channel in its own right. However, both NBC News and MSNBC are shown for a few hours a day on OSN News in MENA Region.
MSNBC is also shown occasionally on sister network CNBC Europe during breaking news , and Nightly News and Meet the Press are also shown regularly. NBC Nightly News is shown in the Philippines on 9TV (formerly Talktv and Solar News Channel ), while Early Today was officially dropped from the network in December 2013, but they replaced by the repeats of Inside Edition . NBC Nightly News , along with the full program lineup of NBC, was carried by affiliate VSB-TV in Bermuda.
The Seven Network in Australia has close ties with NBC and has used a majority of the network's imaging and slogans since the 1970s. Seven News has featured The Mission as its news theme since the mid-1980s. Local newscasts were named Seven Nightly News from the mid-1980s until around 2000. NBC and Seven will often share news recourses between the two countries. NBC News has been known to use Seven News reporters for live reports on a developing news story in Australia. Seven News will sometimes also incorporate an NBC News report into its national bulletins. Today , Weekend Today and Meet The Press are all broadcast on the Seven Network during the early morning hours from 3-5 a.m., just before Seven's own morning show Sunrise .
In Hong Kong , NBC Nightly News is live digital television broadcast transmission (or delayed ) on TVB Pearl daily from 07:00 until 08:00 Hong Kong Time (18:00 until 19:00 New York City Time ).
In the United Kingdom , the ITV network, used to air segments from NBC Nightly News on their ITV News at 5:30 morning newscast before it was cancelled in December 2012. NBC News share facilities and crew in the UK with ITN , who is the news provider for ITV.

Bureaus

Major bureaus

Minor bureaus (within the United States)
1 All NBC owned-and-operated stations are considered NBC News bureaus, including those not listed here.

Foreign bureaus (NBC News/CNBC/MSNBC)

Theme music
Most of NBC's news television programs use " The Mission " by John Williams as their theme. The composition was first used by NBC in 1985 and was updated in 2004. [46]

Units
WebPage index: 00114
Martin M. Wattenberg
Martin M. Wattenberg (born 1970) is an American scientist and artist known for his work with data visualization. Along with Fernanda Viégas , he worked at the Cambridge location of IBM's Thomas J. Watson Research Center as part of the Visual Communication Lab, and created Many Eyes . In April 2010, Wattenberg and Viégas started a new venture called Flowing Media, Inc., to focus on visualization aimed at consumers and mass audiences. [1] Four months later, both of them joined Google as the co-leaders of the Google's "Big Picture" data visualization group in Cambridge, MA. [2] [3]

Biography
Wattenberg grew up in Amherst, Massachusetts. He received an A.B. from Brown University in 1991, an M.S. from Stanford University in 1992, and Ph.D. in Mathematics from U.C. Berkeley in 1996. [4] From 1996 through 2002, he lived in New York City and worked for Dow Jones, on the personal finance and investing site SmartMoney.com. In 2002 he took a position at IBM's Thomas J. Watson Research Center , in its Cambridge, Massachusetts location; in 2004, he founded IBM Research's Visual Communication Lab . [5]

Journalism
While at SmartMoney.com, Wattenberg focused on new forms of interactive web-based journalism. Early work in 1996-1997 ranged from service pieces, such as worksheets to guide financial decisions, to expository graphical narratives on subjects such as bond yield curves . In 1998 Wattenberg created the Map of the Market, which visualized the stock price performance of hundreds of publicly traded companies. The Map was the first web-based treemap and was widely imitated. [6] Subsequently, Wattenberg started a research and development group at SmartMoney, which was responsible for interactive charts, graphs, and simulations, as well as a library of visualization components. Outside of his work at Dow Jones, Wattenberg is known for interactive visualizations that have introduced mass audiences to data sets ranging from baby names [7] to museum collections at NASA [4] and the Smithsonian . [8]

Visualization research

Collaborative analysis and collective intelligence
Wattenberg, in partnership with Fernanda Viégas at IBM, has published widely on collective intelligence and the social use of data visualization. Their work with visualizations such as History Flow and Chromogram led to some of the earliest publications on the dynamics of Wikipedia, including the first scientific study of the repair of vandalism. [9] [10]
Wattenberg is one of the founders of IBM's experimental Many Eyes web site, created in 2007 [11] which seeks to make visualization technology accessible to the public. In addition to broad uptake from individuals, the technology from Many Eyes has been used by nonprofits and news outlets such as the New York Times Visualization Lab .

Visualization techniques and theory
Wattenberg invented or co-invented many visualization techniques. The Map of the Market was based on a new algorithm for treemap layouts (see Treemapping ). The Arc Diagram is a novel technique for visualizing structure in long sequences, [12] closely related to linear embeddings of networks, a technique that has since been used by many other designers. [13] Wattenberg and Viégas together introduced several techniques for depicting text: in addition to the history flow technique described above, the two created such text visualizations as the Word Tree [14] and Chromogram. [15]

Artwork
As an artist, Wattenberg uses interactive graphics and visualization as expressive media. He has primarily worked on internet-accessible projects, but has also created installations, videos, and prints.
In the 1990s he began to work with information visualization as an artistic medium. For example, his Shape of Song series (1999–2002) depicted the form of musical compositions; this project exists online as well as in prints that have been exhibited in multiple venues. [16] Starrynight (1999), a collaboration with Alexander Galloway and Mark Tribe, provided a new form of social, visual navigation for an online discussion. [17] Idealine (2001), an interactive representation of the online art universe, was the first internet artwork commissioned by the Whitney Museum of American Art, as well as a very early example of an artwork that used "crowdsourcing" to gather data. [18] Wattenberg has also worked with Golan Levin , contributing to the visualization technique used in The Secret Lives of Numbers (2002). [19] [20]
Wattenberg frequently works with Marek Walczak, with whom he formed a collaboration known as MW2MW. [21] A key theme of their work is the relationship between language and space. For example, Apartment took inspiration from the concept of a memory palace , turning free-form text entered by a viewer into an architectural floorplan. [22] The piece has appeared in many versions, including online (2000), an installation at the Whitney Museum of American Art (2001) and in many other venues. [23] Other works explore the possibilities of interaction: the Thinking Machine series (2004–2008), for example, is based on a chess- playing program that attempts to best the viewer while displaying its own thinking process [24] . [25]
Since 2003, Wattenberg has collaborated with Fernanda Viégas to create interactive works that evoke the joy of "revelation". [26] They have used academic techniques such as history flow to create prints that have been shown in venues such as the New York Museum of Modern Art. [27] The two have also created purely artistic visualizations. For example, the Fleshmap series (2008- 2009) portrays aspects of sensuality, and includes work on the web, video, and installations. For example, Fleshmap: Touch provides a collective view of erogenous zones, [28] while Fleshmap: Listen visualizes the language used to describe the body in song lyrics. [29]

Publications
Key publications:
WebPage index: 00115
János Kertész
János Kertész is a Hungarian physicist . He is one of the pioneers of econophysics , complex networks and application of fractal geometry in physical problems.
He is the director of the Institute of Physics in Budapest University of Technology and Economics , Budapest , Hungary . [1]

External links
WebPage index: 00116
Blog
A blog (a truncation of the expression " weblog ") [1] is a discussion or informational website published on the World Wide Web consisting of discrete, often informal diary -style text entries ("posts"). Posts are typically displayed in reverse chronological order, so that the most recent post appears first, at the top of the web page. Until 2009, blogs were usually the work of a single individual, [ citation needed ] occasionally of a small group, and often covered a single subject or topic. In the 2010s, "multi-author blogs" (MABs) have developed, with posts written by large numbers of authors and sometimes professionally edited. MABs from newspapers , other media outlets, universities , think tanks , advocacy groups , and similar institutions account for an increasing quantity of blog traffic. The rise of Twitter and other " microblogging " systems helps integrate MABs and single-author blogs into the news media. Blog can also be used as a verb, meaning to maintain or add content to a blog .
The emergence and growth of blogs in the late 1990s coincided with the advent of web publishing tools that facilitated the posting of content by non-technical users who did not have much experience with HTML or computer programming . Previously, a knowledge of such technologies as HTML and File Transfer Protocol had been required to publish content on the Web, and as such, early Web users tended to be hackers and computer enthusiasts. In the 2010s, the majority are interactive Web 2.0 websites, allowing visitors to leave online comments, and it is this interactivity that distinguishes them from other static websites. [2] In that sense, blogging can be seen as a form of social networking service . Indeed, bloggers do not only produce content to post on their blogs, but also often build social relations with their readers and other bloggers. [3] However, there are high-readership blogs which do not allow comments.
Many blogs provide commentary on a particular subject or topic, ranging from politics to sports. Others function as more personal online diaries , and others function more as online brand advertising of a particular individual or company. A typical blog combines text, digital images, and links to other blogs, web pages , and other media related to its topic. The ability of readers to leave publicly viewable comments, and interact with other commenters, is an important contribution to the popularity of many blogs. However, blog owners or authors often moderate and filter online comments to remove hate speech or other offensive content. Most blogs are primarily textual, although some focus on art ( art blogs ), photographs ( photoblogs ), videos ( video blogs or "vlogs"), music ( MP3 blogs ), and audio ( podcasts ). In education, blogs can be used as instructional resources. These blogs are referred to as edublogs . Microblogging is another type of blogging, featuring very short posts.
On 16 February 2011 [update] , there were over 156 million public blogs in existence. On 20 February 2014, there were around 172 million Tumblr [4] and 75.8 million WordPress [5] blogs in existence worldwide. According to critics and other bloggers, Blogger is the most popular blogging service used today. However, Blogger does not offer public statistics. [6] [7] Technorati lists 1.3 million blogs as of February 22, 2014. [8]

History
The term "weblog" was coined by Jorn Barger [9] on 17 December 1997. The short form, "blog", was coined by Peter Merholz, who jokingly broke the word weblog into the phrase we blog in the sidebar of his blog Peterme.com in April or May 1999. [10] [11] [12] Shortly thereafter, Evan Williams at Pyra Labs used "blog" as both a noun and verb ("to blog", meaning "to edit one's weblog or to post to one's weblog") and devised the term "blogger" in connection with Pyra Labs' Blogger product, leading to the popularization of the terms. [13]

Origins
Before blogging became popular, digital communities took many forms, including Usenet , commercial online services such as GEnie , Byte Information Exchange (BIX) and the early CompuServe , e-mail lists , [14] and Bulletin Board Systems (BBS). In the 1990s, Internet forum software, created running conversations with "threads". Threads are topical connections between messages on a virtual " corkboard ". From 14 June 1993, Mosaic Communications Corporation maintained their "What’s New" [15] list of new websites, updated daily and archived monthly. The page was accessible by a special "What's New" button in the Mosaic web browser.
The modern blog evolved from the online diary , where people would keep a running account of the events in their personal lives. Most such writers called themselves diarists, journalists , or journalers. Justin Hall , who began personal blogging in 1994 while a student at Swarthmore College , is generally recognized as one of the earlier bloggers, [16] as is Jerry Pournelle . [17] Dave Winer 's Scripting News is also credited with being one of the older and longer running weblogs. [18] [19] The Australian Netguide magazine maintained the Daily Net News [20] on their web site from 1996. Daily Net News ran links and daily reviews of new websites, mostly in Australia.
Another early blog was Wearable Wireless Webcam, an online shared diary of a person's personal life combining text, digital video, and digital pictures transmitted live from a wearable computer and EyeTap device to a web site in 1994. This practice of semi-automated blogging with live video together with text was referred to as sousveillance , and such journals were also used as evidence in legal matters. Early blogs were simply manually updated components of common Websites . However, the evolution of electronic and software tools to facilitate the production and maintenance of Web articles posted in reverse chronological order made the publishing process feasible to a much larger, less technical, population. Ultimately, this resulted in the distinct class of online publishing that produces blogs we recognize today. For instance, the use of some sort of browser-based software is now a typical aspect of "blogging". Blogs can be hosted by dedicated blog hosting services , or they can be run using blog software, or on regular web hosting services . Some early bloggers, such as The Misanthropic Bitch , who began in 1997, actually referred to their online presence as a zine , before the term blog entered common usage.

Rise in popularity
After a slow start, blogging rapidly gained in popularity. Blog usage spread during 1999 and the years following, being further popularized by the near-simultaneous arrival of the first hosted blog tools:

Political impact
An early milestone in the rise in importance of blogs came in 2002, when many bloggers focused on comments by U.S. Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott . [22] Senator Lott, at a party honoring U.S. Senator Strom Thurmond , praised Senator Thurmond by suggesting that the United States would have been better off had Thurmond been elected president. Lott's critics saw these comments as a tacit approval of racial segregation , a policy advocated by Thurmond's 1948 presidential campaign . This view was reinforced by documents and recorded interviews dug up by bloggers. (See Josh Marshall 's Talking Points Memo .) Though Lott's comments were made at a public event attended by the media, no major media organizations reported on his controversial comments until after blogs broke the story. Blogging helped to create a political crisis that forced Lott to step down as majority leader.
Similarly, blogs were among the driving forces behind the " Rathergate " scandal. To wit: (television journalist) Dan Rather presented documents (on the CBS show 60 Minutes ) that conflicted with accepted accounts of President Bush's military service record. Bloggers declared the documents to be forgeries and presented evidence and arguments in support of that view. Consequently, CBS apologized for what it said were inadequate reporting techniques (see Little Green Footballs ). Many bloggers view this scandal as the advent of blogs' acceptance by the mass media, both as a news source and opinion and as means of applying political pressure. [ original research? ] The impact of these stories gave greater credibility to blogs as a medium of news dissemination. Though often seen as partisan gossips, [ citation needed ] bloggers sometimes lead the way in bringing key information to public light, with mainstream media having to follow their lead. More often, however, news blogs tend to react to material already published by the mainstream media. Meanwhile, an increasing number of experts blogged, making blogs a source of in-depth analysis. [ original research? ]
In Russia , some political bloggers have started to challenge the dominance of official, overwhelmingly pro-government media. Bloggers such as Rustem Adagamov and Alexei Navalny have many followers and the latter's nickname for the ruling United Russia party as the "party of crooks and thieves" has been adopted by anti-regime protesters. [23] This led to the Wall Street Journal calling Navalny "the man Vladimir Putin fears most" in March 2012. [24]

Mainstream popularity
By 2004, the role of blogs became increasingly mainstream, as political consultants , news services, and candidates began using them as tools for outreach and opinion forming. Blogging was established by politicians and political candidates to express opinions on war and other issues and cemented blogs' role as a news source. (See Howard Dean and Wesley Clark .) Even politicians not actively campaigning, such as the UK's Labour Party's MP Tom Watson , began to blog to bond with constituents. In January 2005, Fortune magazine listed eight bloggers whom business people "could not ignore": Peter Rojas , Xeni Jardin , Ben Trott , Mena Trott , Jonathan Schwartz , Jason Goldman, Robert Scoble , and Jason Calacanis . [25]
Israel was among the first national governments to set up an official blog. [26] Under David Saranga , the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs became active in adopting Web 2.0 initiatives, including an official video blog [26] and a political blog . [27] The Foreign Ministry also held a microblogging press conference via Twitter about its war with Hamas , with Saranga answering questions from the public in common text-messaging abbreviations during a live worldwide press conference . [28] The questions and answers were later posted on IsraelPolitik , the country's official political blog. [29]
The impact of blogging upon the mainstream media has also been acknowledged by governments. In 2009, the presence of the American journalism industry had declined to the point that several newspaper corporations were filing for bankruptcy, resulting in less direct competition between newspapers within the same circulation area. Discussion emerged as to whether the newspaper industry would benefit from a stimulus package by the federal government. U.S. President Barack Obama acknowledged the emerging influence of blogging upon society by saying "if the direction of the news is all blogosphere, all opinions, with no serious fact-checking, no serious attempts to put stories in context, then what you will end up getting is people shouting at each other across the void but not a lot of mutual understanding”. [30] Between 2009 and 2012, an Orwell Prize for blogging was awarded.

Types
There are many different types of blogs, differing not only in the type of content, but also in the way that content is delivered or written.

Community and cataloging
As the popularity of blogging continues to rise, the commercialisation of blogging is rapidly increasing. Many corporations and companies collaborate with bloggers to increase advertising and engage online communities towards their products. In the book Fans, Bloggers, and Gamers , Henry Jenkins stated that "Bloggers take knowledge in their own hands, enabling successful navigation within and between these emerging knowledge cultures. One can see such behaviour as co-optation into commodity culture insofar as it sometimes collaborates with corporate interests, but one can also see it as increasing the diversity of media culture, providing opportunities for greater inclusiveness, and making more responsive to consumers." [46]

Popularity
As of 2008, blogging had become such a mania that a new blog was created every second of every minute of every hour of every day. [47] Researchers have actively analyzed the dynamics of how blogs become popular. There are essentially two measures of this: popularity through citations, as well as popularity through affiliation (i.e., blogroll). The basic conclusion from studies of the structure of blogs is that while it takes time for a blog to become popular through blogrolls, permalinks can boost popularity more quickly, and are perhaps more indicative of popularity and authority than blogrolls, since they denote that people are actually reading the blog's content and deem it valuable or noteworthy in specific cases. [48]
The blogdex project was launched by researchers in the MIT Media Lab to crawl the Web and gather data from thousands of blogs in order to investigate their social properties. Information was gathered by the tool for over four years, during which it autonomously tracked the most contagious information spreading in the blog community, ranking it by recency and popularity. It can, therefore, [ original research? ] be considered the first instantiation of a memetracker . The project was replaced by tailrank.com which in turn has been replaced by spinn3r.com.
Blogs are given rankings by Alexa Internet (web hits of Alexa Toolbar users), and formerly by blog search engine Technorati based on the number of incoming links (Technorati stopped doing this in 2014). In August 2006, Technorati found that the most linked-to blog on the internet was that of Chinese actress Xu Jinglei . [49] Chinese media Xinhua reported that this blog received more than 50 million page views, claiming it to be the most popular blog in the world. [50] Technorati rated Boing Boing to be the most-read group-written blog. [49]

Blurring with the mass media
Many bloggers, particularly those engaged in participatory journalism , are amateur journalists, and thus they differentiate themselves from the professional reporters and editors who work in mainstream media organizations. Other bloggers are media professionals who are publishing online, rather than via a TV station or newspaper, either as an add-on to a traditional media presence (e.g., hosting a radio show or writing a column in a paper newspaper), or as their sole journalistic output. Some institutions and organizations see blogging as a means of "getting around the filter" of media " gatekeepers " and pushing their messages directly to the public. Many mainstream journalists, meanwhile, write their own blogs—well over 300, according to CyberJournalist.net's J-blog list. [ citation needed ] The first known use of a blog on a news site was in August 1998, when Jonathan Dube of The Charlotte Observer published one chronicling Hurricane Bonnie . [51]
Some bloggers have moved over to other media. The following bloggers (and others) have appeared on radio and television: Duncan Black (known widely by his pseudonym, Atrios), Glenn Reynolds ( Instapundit ), Markos Moulitsas Zúniga ( Daily Kos ), Alex Steffen ( Worldchanging ), Ana Marie Cox ( Wonkette ), Nate Silver ( FiveThirtyEight.com ), and Ezra Klein (Ezra Klein blog in The American Prospect , now in the Washington Post ). In counterpoint, Hugh Hewitt exemplifies a mass media personality who has moved in the other direction, adding to his reach in "old media" by being an influential blogger. Similarly, it was Emergency Preparedness and Safety Tips On Air and Online blog articles that captured Surgeon General of the United States Richard Carmona 's attention and earned his kudos for the associated broadcasts by talk show host Lisa Tolliver and Westchester Emergency Volunteer Reserves- Medical Reserve Corps Director Marianne Partridge. [52] [53] [54] [55]
Blogs have also had an influence on minority languages , bringing together scattered speakers and learners; this is particularly so with blogs in Gaelic languages . Minority language publishing (which may lack economic feasibility) can find its audience through inexpensive blogging. There are examples of bloggers who have published books based on their blogs, e.g., Salam Pax , Ellen Simonetti , Jessica Cutler , ScrappleFace . Blog-based books have been given the name blook . A prize for the best blog-based book was initiated in 2005, [56] the Lulu Blooker Prize . [57] However, success has been elusive offline, with many of these books not selling as well as their blogs. The book based on Julie Powell 's blog "The Julie/Julia Project" was made into the film Julie & Julia , apparently the first to do so.

Consumer-generated advertising
Consumer-generated advertising is a relatively new and controversial development, and it has created a new model of marketing communication from businesses to consumers. Among the various forms of advertising on blog, the most controversial are the sponsored posts . [58] These are blog entries or posts and may be in the form of feedback, reviews, opinion, videos, etc. and usually contain a link back to the desired site using a keyword or several keywords. Blogs have led to some disintermediation and a breakdown of the traditional advertising model, where companies can skip over the advertising agencies (previously the only interface with the customer) and contact the customers directly via social media websites. On the other hand, new companies specialised in blog advertising have been established, to take advantage of this new development as well. However, there are many people who look negatively on this new development. Some believe that any form of commercial activity on blogs will destroy the blogosphere’s credibility. [59]

Legal and social consequences
Blogging can result in a range of legal liabilities and other unforeseen consequences. [60]

Defamation or liability
Several cases have been brought before the national courts against bloggers concerning issues of defamation or liability . U.S. payouts related to blogging totaled $17.4 million by 2009; in some cases these have been covered by umbrella insurance . [61] The courts have returned with mixed verdicts. Internet Service Providers (ISPs), in general, are immune from liability for information that originates with third parties (U.S. Communications Decency Act and the EU Directive 2000/31/EC). In Doe v. Cahill , the Delaware Supreme Court held that stringent standards had to be met to unmask the anonymous bloggers , and also took the unusual step of dismissing the libel case itself (as unfounded under American libel law) rather than referring it back to the trial court for reconsideration. [62] In a bizarre twist, the Cahills were able to obtain the identity of John Doe, who turned out to be the person they suspected: the town's mayor, Councilman Cahill's political rival. The Cahills amended their original complaint, and the mayor settled the case rather than going to trial.
In January 2007, two prominent Malaysian political bloggers, Jeff Ooi and Ahirudin Attan , were sued by a pro-government newspaper, The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad, Kalimullah bin Masheerul Hassan, Hishamuddin bin Aun and Brenden John a/l John Pereira over an alleged defamation. The plaintiff was supported by the Malaysian government. [63] Following the suit, the Malaysian government proposed to "register" all bloggers in Malaysia in order to better control parties against their interest. [64] This is the first such legal case against bloggers in the country. In the United States, blogger Aaron Wall was sued by Traffic Power for defamation and publication of trade secrets in 2005. [65] According to Wired magazine, Traffic Power had been "banned from Google for allegedly rigging search engine results." [66] Wall and other " white hat " search engine optimization consultants had exposed Traffic Power in what they claim was an effort to protect the public. The case was dismissed for lack of personal jurisdiction, and Traffic Power failed to appeal within the allowed time. [67]
In 2009, NDTV issued a legal notice to Indian blogger Kunte for a blog post criticizing their coverage of the Mumbai attacks . [68] The blogger unconditionally withdrew his post, which resulted in several Indian bloggers criticizing NDTV for trying to silence critics. [69]

Employment
Employees who blog about elements of their place of employment can begin to affect the reputation of their employer, either in a positive way, if the employee is praising the employer and its workplaces, or in a negative way, if the blogger is making negative comments about the company or its practices.
In general, attempts by employee bloggers to protect themselves by maintaining anonymity have proved ineffective. [70] In 2009, a controversial and landmark decision by The Hon. Mr Justice Eady refused to grant an order to protect the anonymity of Richard Horton . Horton was a police officer in the United Kingdom who blogged about his job under the name "NightJack". [71]
Delta Air Lines fired flight attendant Ellen Simonetti because she posted photographs of herself in uniform on an airplane and because of comments posted on her blog "Queen of Sky: Diary of a Flight Attendant" which the employer deemed inappropriate. [72] [73] This case highlighted the issue of personal blogging and freedom of expression versus employer rights and responsibilities, and so it received wide media attention. Simonetti took legal action against the airline for "wrongful termination, defamation of character and lost future wages". [74] The suit was postponed while Delta was in bankruptcy proceedings. [75]
In early 2006, Erik Ringmar, a senior lecturer at the London School of Economics , was ordered by the convenor of his department to "take down and destroy" his blog in which he discussed the quality of education at the school. [76]
Mark Jen was terminated in 2005 after 10 days of employment as an assistant product manager at Google for discussing corporate secrets on his personal blog, then called 99zeros and hosted on the Google-owned Blogger service. [77] He blogged about unreleased products and company finances a week before the company's earnings announcement. He was fired two days after he complied with his employer's request to remove the sensitive material from his blog. [78]
In India, blogger Gaurav Sabnis resigned from IBM after his posts questioned the claims made by a management school. [79] Jessica Cutler , aka "The Washingtonienne", [80] blogged about her sex life while employed as a congressional assistant. After the blog was discovered and she was fired, [81] she wrote a novel based on her experiences and blog: The Washingtonienne: A Novel . As of 2006 [update] , Cutler is being sued by one of her former lovers in a case that could establish the extent to which bloggers are obligated to protect the privacy of their real life associates. [82]
Catherine Sanderson, a.k.a. Petite Anglaise , lost her job in Paris at a British accountancy firm because of blogging. [83] Although given in the blog in a fairly anonymous manner, some of the descriptions of the firm and some of its people were less than flattering. Sanderson later won a compensation claim case against the British firm, however. [84]
On the other hand, Penelope Trunk wrote an upbeat article in the Boston Globe in 2006, entitled "Blogs 'essential' to a good career". [85] She was one of the first journalists to point out that a large portion of bloggers are professionals and that a well-written blog can help attract employers.

Business owners
Business owners who blog about their business can also run into legal consequences. Mark Cuban , owner of the Dallas Mavericks , was fined during the 2006 NBA playoffs for criticizing NBA officials on the court and in his blog. [86]

Political dangers
Blogging can sometimes have unforeseen consequences in politically sensitive areas. In some countries, Internet police or secret police may monitor blogs and arrest blog authors of commentators. Blogs can be much harder to control than broadcast or print media, because a person can create a blog whose authorship is hard to trace, by using anonymity technology such as Tor . As a result, totalitarian and authoritarian regimes often seek to suppress blogs and/or to punish those who maintain them.
In Singapore , two ethnic Chinese individuals were imprisoned under the country’s anti-sedition law for posting anti-Muslim remarks in their blogs. [87] Egyptian blogger Kareem Amer was charged with insulting the Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak and an Islamic institution through his blog. It is the first time in the history of Egypt that a blogger was prosecuted. After a brief trial session that took place in Alexandria , the blogger was found guilty and sentenced to prison terms of three years for insulting Islam and inciting sedition, and one year for insulting Mubarak. [88] Egyptian blogger Abdel Monem Mahmoud was arrested in April 2007 for anti-government writings in his blog. [89] Monem is a member of the then banned Muslim Brotherhood . After the 2011 Egyptian revolution , the Egyptian blogger Maikel Nabil Sanad was charged with insulting the military for an article he wrote on his personal blog and sentenced to 3 years. [90]
After expressing opinions in his personal blog about the state of the Sudanese armed forces, Jan Pronk , United Nations Special Representative for the Sudan , was given three days notice to leave Sudan. The Sudanese army had demanded his deportation. [91] [92] In Myanmar , Nay Phone Latt, a blogger, was sentenced to 20 years in jail for posting a cartoon critical of head of state Than Shwe . [93]

Personal safety
One consequence of blogging is the possibility of online or in-person attacks or threats against the blogger, sometimes without apparent reason. In some cases, bloggers have faced cyberbullying . Kathy Sierra , author of the blog "Creating Passionate Users", [94] was the target of threats and misogynistic insults to the point that she canceled her keynote speech at a technology conference in San Diego, fearing for her safety. [95] While a blogger's anonymity is often tenuous, Internet trolls who would attack a blogger with threats or insults can be emboldened by the anonymity of the online environment, where some users are known only by a pseudonymous "username" (e.g., "Hacker1984"). Sierra and supporters initiated an online discussion aimed at countering abusive online behavior [96] and developed a Blogger's Code of Conduct , which set out a rules for behaviour in the online space.

Behavior
The Blogger's Code of Conduct is a proposal by Tim O'Reilly for bloggers to enforce civility on their blogs by being civil themselves and moderating comments on their blog. The code was proposed in 2007 due to threats made to blogger Kathy Sierra . [97] The idea of the code was first reported by BBC News , who quoted O'Reilly saying, "I do think we need some code of conduct around what is acceptable behaviour, I would hope that it doesn't come through any kind of regulation it would come through self-regulation." [98]
O'Reilly and others came up with a list of seven proposed ideas: [99] [100] [101] [102]
These ideas were predictably intensely discussed on the Web and in the media. While the internet has continued to grow, with online activity and discourse only picking up both in positive and negative ways in terms of blog interaction, the proposed Code has drawn more widespread attention to the necessity of monitoring blogging activity and social norms being as important online as offline.

See also
WebPage index: 00117
TCS Daily
TCS Daily was an online magazine with commentary and analysis on current news from a free-market perspective. It was active between 2000 and 2010.

History and profile
TCS is an initialism that now stands for "Technology, Commerce, Society"; when the Web site was founded in 2000, those three letters stood for its original name, "Tech Central Station." The journal was originally published by DCI Group , a lobbying and PR firm based in Washington, D.C. . In 2006, it was sold to Nick Schulz, who had been its editor since 2001. [1] Some critics have written that Schulz is "a paid spokesperson for the oil industry" since his website is sponsored in part by Exxon Mobil. [2] Before the sale, it was "hosted" by James K. Glassman , a resident fellow at the American Enterprise Institute and syndicated columnist. In 2006, he left TCS to become editor of The American ; Schulz transferred ownership of TCS to New River Media, Inc. a Washington-based media company. Schulz continued as editor in chief, until he followed Glassman to The American and soon replaced him as that magazine's editor. In December, 2010, Publisher Andrew Walworth, president of Grace Creek Media, announced that TCS would be folded into the website of the weekly public television series, "Ideas in Action," which was a co-production between Grace Creek and The George W. Bush Institute and hosted by Glassman.
In its original incarnation, TCS was primarily funded by sponsors that included AT&T , The Coca-Cola Company , ExxonMobil , General Motors Corporation , McDonald's , Merck , Microsoft , Nasdaq , and PhRMA . However, according to the website, the sale of the journal in 2006 rendered all previous sponsorships expired. [1]
TCS folded in December 2010. [3]
WebPage index: 00118
The Economist
The Economist is an English-language weekly magazine-format newspaper owned by the Economist Group and edited at offices in London . [2] [6] [7] [8] Continuous publication began under its founder, James Wilson , in September 1843. In 2015 its average weekly circulation was a little over 1.5 million, about half of which were sold in the United States. [5] [2]
The publication belongs to the Economist Group . It is 50% owned by the English branch of the Rothschild family and by the Agnelli family through its holding company Exor . The remaining 50% is held by private investors including the editors and staff. [9] [10] The Rothschilds and the Agnellis are represented on the board of directors. [11] A board of trustees formally appoints the editor, who cannot be removed without its permission. Although The Economist has a global emphasis and scope, about two-thirds of the 75 staff journalists are based in the London borough of Westminster . [12] For the year to March 2016 the Economist Group declared operating profit of £61m. [13] Previous major shareholders include Pearson PLC . [14]
The Economist takes an editorial stance of classical and economic liberalism that supports free trade , globalisation , free immigration , and cultural liberalism (such as supporting legal recognition for same-sex marriage or drug liberalization ). [2] The publication has described itself as "...a product of the Caledonian liberalism of Adam Smith and David Hume ". [15] It targets highly educated readers and claims an audience containing many influential executives and policy-makers. [16] The publication's CEO described this recent global change, which was first noticed in the 1990s and accelerated in the beginning of the 21st century, as a "new age of Mass Intelligence". [17] [18]

Mission statement
On the contents page of each issue, The Economist ' s mission statement is written in italics. It states that The Economist was "First published in September 1843 to take part in 'a severe contest between intelligence, which presses forward, and an unworthy, timid ignorance obstructing our progress.'" [19]

History
The Economist was founded by the British businessman and banker James Wilson in 1843, to advance the repeal of the Corn Laws , a system of import tariffs. [20] A prospectus for the "newspaper" from 5 August 1843 enumerated thirteen areas of coverage that its editors wanted the publication to focus on: [21]
It has long been respected as "one of the most competent and subtle Western periodicals on public affairs". [22] The publication was a major source of financial and economic information for Karl Marx in the formulation of socialist theory; he wrote: "the London Economist , the European organ of the aristocracy of finance, described most strikingly the attitude of this class." [23]
Its logo was designed in 1959 by Reynolds Stone . [24]
In January 2012, The Economist launched a new weekly section devoted exclusively to China , the first new country section since the introduction of a section about the United States in 1942. [25]
In August 2015, The Economist Group bought back 5 million of its shares (worth $284 million) from Pearson. Pearson's remaining shares (worth $447 million) would be sold to Exor . [26] [27]

List of editors
The editors of The Economist have been:

Opinions
When the news magazine was founded, the term " economism " denoted what would today be termed " economic liberalism ". The Economist generally supports free trade , globalisation , [34] and free immigration . The activist and journalist George Monbiot has described it as neo-liberal while occasionally accepting the propositions of Keynesian economics where deemed more "reasonable". [35] The news magazine favours a carbon tax to fight global warming . [36] According to one former editor, Bill Emmott, "the Economist ' s philosophy has always been liberal, not conservative". [37] Individual contributors take diverse views. The Economist favours the support, through central banks , of banks and other important corporations. This principle can, in a much more limited form, be traced back to Walter Bagehot , the third editor of The Economist , who argued that the Bank of England should support major banks that got into difficulties. Karl Marx deemed The Economist the "European organ" of "the aristocracy of finance". [38]
The news magazine has also supported liberal causes on social issues such as recognition of gay marriages, [39] legalisation of drugs, [40] criticises the US tax model in a recent issue, [41] and seems to support some government regulation on health issues, such as smoking in public, [42] as well as bans on spanking children. [43] The Economist consistently favours guest worker programmes, parental choice of school, and amnesties [44] and once published an "obituary" of God. [45] The Economist also has a long record of supporting gun control. [46]
The Economist has endorsed both the Labour Party (in 2005) and the Conservative Party (in 2010 and 2015) [47] [48] at general election time in Britain, and both Republican and Democratic candidates in the United States. Economist.com puts its stance this way:
The Economist frequently accuses figures and countries of corruption or dishonesty. In recent years, for example, it criticised Paul Wolfowitz , World Bank president; Silvio Berlusconi , Italy's Prime Minister (who dubbed it The Ecommunist ); [49] Laurent-Désiré Kabila , the late president of the Democratic Republic of the Congo ; Robert Mugabe , the head of government in Zimbabwe ; and, recently, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner , the president of Argentina. [50] The Economist also called for Bill Clinton's impeachment and, after the emergence of the Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse , [51] for Donald Rumsfeld 's resignation. Though The Economist initially gave vigorous support for the US-led invasion of Iraq , it later called the operation "bungled from the start" and criticised the "almost criminal negligence" of the Bush Administration's handling of the war, while maintaining, in 2007, that pulling out in the short term would be irresponsible. [52] In the 2004 US election, the editors "reluctantly" backed John Kerry. [53] [54] In the 2008 US election The Economist endorsed Barack Obama , while using the front cover of the issue published on the eve of the election to promote his candidacy. [55] In the 2012 US election, Barack Obama was again endorsed: the editorial said that they preferred Obama on the economy, foreign policy and health care, but criticised him for running a negative campaign against Romney and for a "...poor appreciation of commerce." [56]

Tone and voice
Though it has many individual columns, by tradition and current practice the magazine ensures a uniform voice—aided by the anonymity of writers—throughout its pages, [57] as if most articles were written by a single author, which may be perceived to display dry, understated wit, and precise use of language. [58] [59] The Economist has traditionally—albeit not always consistently—persisted in referring to itself as a "newspaper", rather than a newsmagazine, due to the gradual pace of its transformation in format from newsprint to glossy colour (articles were printed on the front page into the 1950s) in addition to its general focus on current affairs as opposed to specialist subjects. [5]
The Economist ' s treatment of economics presumes a working familiarity with fundamental concepts of classical economics. For instance, it does not explain terms like invisible hand , macroeconomics , or demand curve , and may take just six or seven words to explain the theory of comparative advantage . Articles involving economics do not presume any formal training on the part of the reader and aim to be accessible to the educated layman. It usually does not translate short French (and German) quotes or phrases. It does describe the business or nature of even well-known entities, writing, for example, "Goldman Sachs, an investment bank". [60]
Many articles include some witticism; image captions are often humorous puns and the letters section usually concludes with an odd or light-hearted letter. These efforts at humour have sometimes had a mixed reception. For example, the cover of the 20 September 2003 issue, headlined by a story on the WTO ministerial meeting in Cancún, featured a cactus giving the middle finger . [61] Readers sent both positive and negative letters in response. [62]

Editorial anonymity
Articles often take a definite editorial stance and almost never carry a byline . Not even the name of the editor (since 2015, Zanny Minton Beddoes [63] ) is printed in the issue. It is a long-standing tradition that an editor's only signed article during their tenure is written on the occasion of their departure from the position. The author of a piece is named in certain circumstances: when notable persons are invited to contribute opinion pieces; when journalists of The Economist compile special reports (previously known as surveys); for the Year in Review special edition; and to highlight a potential conflict of interest over a book review. The names of The Economist editors and correspondents can be located on the media directory pages of the website. [64] Online blog pieces are signed with the initials of the writer and authors of print stories are allowed to note their authorship from their personal web sites. [65] "This approach is not without its faults (we have four staff members with the initials "J.P.", for example) but is the best compromise between total anonymity and full bylines, in our view", wrote one anonymous writer of The Economist. [66]
The editors say this is necessary because "collective voice and personality matter more than the identities of individual journalists" [67] and reflects "a collaborative effort". [68] In most articles, authors refer to themselves as "your correspondent" or "this reviewer". The writers of the titled opinion columns tend to refer to themselves by the title (hence, a sentence in the "Lexington" column might read "Lexington was informed...").
The American author Michael Lewis has criticised the magazine's editorial anonymity, labeling it a means to hide the youth and inexperience of those writing articles. In 1991 Lewis quipped: "The magazine is written by young people pretending to be old people ... If American readers got a look at the pimply complexions of their economic gurus, they would cancel their subscriptions in droves". [69] It should be noted that, although individual articles are written anonymously, there is no secrecy over who are The Economist writers, since they publicly disclose it, for example on their social network accounts. [70]
John Ralston Saul describes The Economist as a "...magazine which hides the names of the journalists who write its articles in order to create the illusion that they dispense disinterested truth rather than opinion. This sales technique, reminiscent of pre-Reformation Catholicism, is not surprising in a publication named after the social science most given to wild guesses and imaginary facts presented in the guise of inevitability and exactitude. That it is the Bible of the corporate executive indicates to what extent received wisdom is the daily bread of a managerial civilization." [71]

Circulation
Each of The Economist issue's official date range is from Saturday to the following Friday. The Economist posts each week's new content online at approximately 2100 Thursday evening UK time, ahead of the official publication date.
In 1877, the publication's circulation was 3,700, and in 1920 it had risen to 6,000. Circulation increased rapidly after 1945, reaching 100,000 by 1970. [24]
Circulation is audited by the Audit Bureau of Circulations (ABC). From around 30,000 in 1960 it has risen to near 1 million by 2000 and by 2016 to about 1.3 million. [72] Sales inside North America were in 2007 around 54 per cent of the total, with sales in the UK making up 14 per cent of the total and continental Europe 19 per cent. The Economist claims sales, both by subscription and at newsagents, in over 200 countries. Of its American readers, two out of three earn more than $100,000 a year. [73]
The Economist once boasted about its limited circulation. In the early 1990s it used the slogan " The Economist – not read by millions of people". "Never in the history of journalism has so much been read for so long by so few," wrote Geoffrey Crowther , a former editor. [74]
The Economist Newspaper Limited is a wholly owned subsidiary of The Economist Group . The publications of the group include the CFO brand family as well as the annual The World in... , the lifestyle bimonthly 1843 , European Voice , and Roll Call . Sir Evelyn Robert de Rothschild was Chairman of the company from 1972 to 1989.

Letters
The Economist frequently receives letters from senior businesspeople, politicians, ambassadors, and from spokespeople for various government departments, non-governmental organisations and lobbies. Well-written or witty responses from anyone are considered, and controversial issues frequently produce a torrent of letters. For example, the survey of corporate social responsibility , published January 2005, produced largely critical letters from Oxfam , the World Food Programme , United Nations Global Compact , the Chairman of BT Group , an ex-Director of Shell and the UK Institute of Directors . [75]
Many of the letters published are critical of its stance or commentary. After The Economist ran a critique of Amnesty International and human rights in general in its issue dated 24 March 2007, its letters page ran a vibrant reply from Amnesty, as well as several other letters in support of the organisation, including one from the head of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights . [76] Rebuttals from officials within regimes such as the Singapore government are routinely printed, to comply with local right-of-reply laws without compromising editorial independence. [77]
It is extremely rare for any comment by The Economist to appear alongside any published letter. Letters published in the news magazine are typically between 150 and 200 words long (and began with the salutation "Sir" until the editorship of Zanny Minton Beddoes, the first female editor; they now have no salutation). Previous to a change in procedure, all responses to on-line articles were usually published in "The Inbox". [78] Comments can now be made directly under each article.

Features
The Economist ' s primary focus is world events, politics and business, but it also runs regular sections on science and technology as well as books and the arts. Approximately every two weeks, the publication includes an in-depth special report. [79] (previously called surveys ) on a given topic. The five main categories are Countries and Regions, Business, Finance and Economics, Science and Technology, and Other. Every three months, it publishes a technology report called Technology Quarterly [80] or TQ, a special section focusing on recent trends and developments in science and technology.
Since July 2007, there has also been a complete audio edition of the news magazine available 9pm London time on Thursdays. [81] The audio version of The Economist is produced by the production company Talking Issues . The company records the full text of the news magazine in mp3 format, including the extra pages in the UK edition. The weekly 130 MB download is free for subscribers and available for a fee for non-subscribers.
The publication's writers adopt a tight style that seeks to include the maximum amount of information in a limited space. [82] David G. Bradley , publisher of The Atlantic , described the formula as "a consistent world view expressed, consistently, in tight and engaging prose". [83]
There is a section of economic statistics . Tables such as employment statistics are published each week and there are special statistical features too. It is unique among British weeklies in providing authoritative coverage of official statistics and its rankings of international statistics have been decisive. [84] In addition, The Economist is known for its Big Mac Index , which it first published in 1986, which uses the price of the hamburger in different countries as an informal measure of the purchasing power of currencies. [85] [86]
The publication runs several opinion columns whose names reflect their topic:
Other regular features include:
The news magazine goes to press on Thursdays, between 6pm and 7pm GMT, and is available at newsagents in many countries the next day. It is printed at seven sites around the world. Known on their website as "This week's print edition", it is available online, albeit with only the first five viewed articles being free (and available to subscribers only mid-October 2009 – 2010).
The Economist published in 2015 its first US college rankings, focused on comparable economical advantages defined as 'the economic value of a university is equal to the gap between how much its students subsequently earn, and how much they might have made had they studied elsewhere'. Based on set of strict criteria sourced from US Department of Education ("College Scorecard") with relevant 'expected earnings' and multiple statistics applied in calculation of 'median earnings' conclusive evaluation method has been applied to run the scorecard's earnings data through a multiple regression analysis, a common method of measuring the relationships between variables. [93]
The Economist also produces the annual The World in [ Year ] publication. It also sponsors a writing award.

The Economist

Innovation Awards
The Economist sponsors the yearly "Economist Innovation Awards", in the categories of bioscience, computing and communications, energy and the environment, social and economic innovation, business-process innovation, consumer products, and a special "no boundaries" category. [94] The awards have been held since 2002. Nominations are held between 2 and 30 April. The award ceremony is then hosted on 15 November. Choices are based off the following factors: [95]

Writing prize
In 1999, The Economist organized a global futurist writing competition, The World in 2050 . Co-sponsored by Royal Dutch/Shell , the competition included a first prize of US$ 20,000 and publication in The Economist ' s annual flagship publication, The World In . [96] Over 3,000 entries from around the world were submitted via a website set up for the purpose and at various Royal Dutch Shell offices worldwide. [96]
The judging panel included Bill Emmott , [96] Esther Dyson , [97] Sir Mark Moody-Stuart (then-chairman of Royal Dutch Shell ), [96] and Matt Ridley (a British scientist and member of the House of Lords ). [98]

Censorship
Sections of The Economist criticising authoritarian regimes are frequently removed from the magazine by the authorities in those countries. The Economist regularly has difficulties with the ruling party of Singapore , the People's Action Party , which had successfully sued it, in a Singaporean court, for libel . [99]
The Economist , like many other publications, is subjected to censorship in India whenever it depicts a map of Kashmir . The maps are stamped by Indian Customs officials as being "neither correct, nor authentic". Issues are sometimes delayed, but not stopped or seized. [100]
On 15 June 2006, Iran banned the sale of The Economist when it published a map labelling the Persian Gulf simply as "Gulf"—a choice that derives its political significance from the Persian Gulf naming dispute . [101]
In a separate incident, the government of Zimbabwe went further and imprisoned The Economist ' s correspondent there, Andrew Meldrum . The government charged him with violating a statute on "publishing untruth" for writing that a woman was decapitated by supporters of the ruling Zimbabwe African National Union – Patriotic Front party. The decapitation claim was retracted [102] and allegedly fabricated by the woman's husband. The correspondent was later acquitted, only to receive a deportation order.
On 19 August 2013, The Economist disclosed that the Missouri Department of Corrections had censored its issue of 29 June 2013. According to the letter sent by the department, prisoners were not allowed to receive the issue because "1. it constitutes a threat to the security or discipline of the institution; 2. may facilitate or encourage criminal activity; or 3. may interfere with the rehabilitation of an offender". [103]

Criticism, accusation and praise
In 1991, James Fallows argued in The Washington Post that The Economist used editorial lines that contradicted the news stories they purported to highlight. [69] In 1999, Andrew Sullivan complained in The New Republic that it uses "marketing genius" [104] to make up for deficiencies in analysis and original reporting, resulting in "a kind of Reader's Digest " [105] for America's corporate elite. [106] Although he acknowledged that the magazine's claim about the dotcom bubble bursting would probably be accurate in the long run (the bubble burst in the US market two years later), [107] Sullivan pointed out that the magazine greatly exaggerated the danger the US economy was in after the Dow Jones fell to 7,400 during the 1998 Labor Day weekend. He also said that The Economist is editorially constrained because so many scribes graduated from the same college at Oxford University , Magdalen College . [105] The Guardian wrote that "its writers rarely see a political or economic problem that cannot be solved by the trusted three-card trick of privatisation, deregulation and liberalisation". [108]
In 2008, Jon Meacham , former editor of Newsweek and a self-described "fan", criticised The Economist' s focus on analysis over original reporting. [109]
In 2012, The Economist was accused of hacking into the computer of Justice Mohammed Nizamul Huq of the Bangladesh Supreme Court, leading to his resignation as the chairman of the International Crimes Tribunal . [110] [111] [112] [113] [114] [115] The magazine denied the accusations.
In 2014, the magazine withdrew a harshly-criticised review of a book by Edward Baptist on slavery and American capitalism; The Economist had complained that "[a]lmost all the blacks in his book are victims, almost all the whites villains." [116] Baptist attributed the harsh review to the magazine's adherence to " free-market fundamentalist " theories, "the idea that everything would be better if measured first and last by its efficiency at producing profit." [117]

Praise and accolades
In 2005, the Chicago Tribune named it the best English-language magazine noting its strength in international reporting "where it does not feel moved to cover a faraway land only at a time of unmitigated disaster" and that it kept a wall between its reporting and its more conservative editorial policies. [118]

Notes
WebPage index: 00119
Google Scholar
Google Scholar is a freely accessible web search engine that indexes the full text or metadata of scholarly literature across an array of publishing formats and disciplines. Released in beta in November 2004, the Google Scholar index includes most peer-reviewed online academic journals and books, conference papers, theses and dissertations , preprints , abstracts , technical reports , and other scholarly literature, including court opinions and patents . [1] While Google does not publish the size of Google Scholar's database, third-party researchers estimated it to contain roughly 160 million documents as of May 2014 [2] and an earlier statistical estimate published in PLOS ONE using a Mark and recapture method estimated approximately 80-90% coverage of all articles published in English with an estimate of 100 million. [3] This estimate also determined how many documents were freely available on the web.
Google Scholar is similar in function to the freely available CiteSeerX and getCITED . It also resembles the subscription-based tools, Elsevier 's Scopus and Thomson Reuters ' Web of Science .

History
Google Scholar arose out of a discussion between Alex Verstak and Anurag Acharya , [4] both of whom were then working on building Google's main web index. [5] [6] Their goal was to "make the world's problem solvers 10% more efficient" [7] by allowing easier and more accurate access to scientific knowledge. This goal is reflected in the Google Scholar's advertising slogan – " Stand on the shoulders of giants " – taken from a quote by holy Bernard of Chartres and is a nod to the scholars who have contributed to their fields over the centuries, providing the foundation for new intellectual achievements.
Scholar has gained a range of features over time. In 2006, a citation importing feature was implemented supporting bibliography managers (such as RefWorks , RefMan , EndNote , and BibTeX ). In 2007, Acharya announced that Google Scholar had started a program to digitize and host journal articles in agreement with their publishers, an effort separate from Google Books , whose scans of older journals do not include the metadata required for identifying specific articles in specific issues. [8] In 2011, Google removed Scholar from the toolbars on its search pages, [9] making it both less easily accessible and less discoverable for users not already aware of its existence. Around this period, sites with similar features such as CiteSeer , Scirus , and Microsoft Windows Live Academic search were developed. All three of these are now defunct.
A major enhancement was rolled out in 2012, with the possibility for individual scholars to create personal "Scholar Citations profiles", public author profiles that are editable by authors themselves. [10] Individuals, logging on through a Google account with a bona fide address usually linked to an academic institution, can now create their own page giving their fields of interest and citations. Google Scholar automatically calculates and displays the individual's total citation count, h-index , and i10-index . According to Google, "three quarters of Scholar search results pages [...] show links to the authors' public profiles" as of August 2014. [10]
A feature introduced in November 2013 allows logged-in users to save search results into the "Google Scholar library", a personal collection which the user can search separately and organize by tags. [11] A metrics feature now supports viewing the impact of academic journals, [12] and whole fields of science, via the "metrics" button. This reveals the top journals in a field of interest, and the articles generating these journal's impact can also be accessed.

Features and specifications
Google Scholar allows users to search for digital or physical copies of articles, whether online or in libraries. [13] It indexes "full-text journal articles, technical reports, preprints, theses , books, and other documents, including selected Web pages that are deemed to be 'scholarly.'" [14] Because many of Google Scholar's search results link to commercial journal articles, most people will be able to access only an abstract and the citation details of an article, and have to pay a fee to access the entire article. [14] The most relevant results for the searched keywords will be listed first, in order of the author's ranking, the number of references that are linked to it and their relevance to other scholarly literature, and the ranking of the publication that the journal appears in. [15]
Using its "group of" feature, it shows the available links to journal articles. In the 2005 version, this feature provided a link to both subscription-access versions of an article and to free full-text versions of articles; for most of 2006, it provided links to only the publishers' versions. Since December 2006, it has provided links to both published versions and major open access repositories , but still does not cover those posted on individual faculty web pages; [ citation needed ] access to such self-archived non-subscription versions is now provided by a link to Google, where one can find such open access articles.
Through its "cited by" feature, Google Scholar provides access to abstracts of articles that have cited the article being viewed. [16] It is this feature in particular that provides the citation indexing previously only found in CiteSeer , Scopus and Web of Science . Through its "Related articles" feature, Google Scholar presents a list of closely related articles, ranked primarily by how similar these articles are to the original result, but also taking into account the relevance of each paper. [17]
As of July 2013 [update] , Google Scholar is not yet available to the Google AJAX API .
Google Scholar's legal database of US cases is extensive. Users can search and read published opinions of US state appellate and supreme court cases since 1950, US federal district, appellate, tax and bankruptcy courts since 1923 and US Supreme Court cases since 1791. [16] Google Scholar embeds clickable citation links within the case and the How Cited tab allows lawyers to research prior case law and the subsequent citations to the court decision. [18] The Google Scholar Legal Content Star Paginator extension inserts Westlaw and LexisNexis style page numbers in line with the text of the case. [19]

Ranking algorithm
While most academic databases and search engines allow users to select one factor (e.g. relevance, citation counts, or publication date) to rank results, Google Scholar ranks results with a combined ranking algorithm in a "way researchers do, weighing the full text of each article, the author, the publication in which the article appears, and how often the piece has been cited in other scholarly literature". [15] Research has shown that Google Scholar puts high weight especially on citation counts [20] and words included in a document's title. [21] As a consequence, the first search results are often highly cited articles.

Limitations and criticism
Quality — Some searchers consider Google Scholar of comparable quality and utility to commercial databases. [22] [23] The reviews recognize that its "cited by" feature in particular poses serious competition to Scopus and Web of Science . An early study, from 2007, limited to the biomedical field, found citation information in Google Scholar to be "sometimes inadequate, and less often updated". [24] The coverage of Google Scholar may vary by discipline compared to other general databases. [25]
Coverage — Especially early on, some publishers did not allow Scholar to crawl their journals. Elsevier journals have been included since mid-2007, when Elsevier began to make most of its ScienceDirect content available to Google Scholar and Google's web search. [26] As of February 2008 the absentees still included the most recent years of the American Chemical Society journals. Google Scholar does not publish a list of scientific journals crawled, and the frequency of its updates is unknown. It is therefore impossible to know how current or exhaustive searches are in Google Scholar, although a recent study [3] estimates that Google Scholar can find almost 90% (approximately 100 million) of all scholarly documents on the Web written in English. Nonetheless, it allows easy access to published articles without the difficulties encountered in some of the most expensive commercial databases. [27]
Matthew effect — Google Scholar puts high weight on citation counts in its ranking algorithm and therefore is being criticised for strengthening the Matthew effect ; [20] as highly cited papers appear in top positions they gain more citations while new papers hardly appear in top positions and therefore get less attention by the users of Google Scholar and hence fewer citations.
Google Scholar effect – It is a phenomenon when some researchers pick and cite works appearing in the top results on Google Scholar regardless of their contribution to the citing publication because they automatically assume these works’ credibility and believe that editors, reviewers, and readers expect to see these citations. [28]
Incorrect field detection — Google Scholar has problems identifying publications on the arXiv preprint server correctly. Interpunctuation characters in titles produce wrong search results, and authors are assigned to wrong papers, which leads to erroneous additional search results. Some search results are even given without any comprehensible reason. [29] [30]
Vulnerability to spam — Google Scholar is vulnerable to spam . [31] [32] Researchers from the University of California, Berkeley and Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg demonstrated that citation counts on Google Scholar can be manipulated and complete non-sense articles created with SCIgen were indexed from Google Scholar. [33] They concluded that citation counts from Google Scholar should only be used with care especially when used to calculate performance metrics such as the h-index or impact factor . Google Scholar started computing an h-index in 2012 with the advent of individual Scholar pages. Several downstream packages like Harzing's Publish or Perish also use its data. [34] The practicality of manipulating h-index calculators by spoofing Google Scholar was demonstrated in 2010 by Cyril Labbe from Joseph Fourier University , who managed to rank "Ike Antkare" ahead of Albert Einstein by means of a large set of SCIgen -produced documents citing each other (effectively an academic link farm ). [35]
Inability to shepardize case law — As of 2010, Google Scholar was not able to shepardize case law, as Lexis can. [36]
Lack of screening for quality — Google Scholar strives to include as many journals as possible, including predatory journals , which "have polluted the global scientific record with pseudo-science, a record that Google Scholar dutifully and perhaps blindly includes in its central index." [37]

Search engine optimization for Google Scholar
Search engine optimization (SEO) for traditional web search engines such as Google has been popular since many years. However, since a few years, the concept of SEO is also applied to academic search engines such as Google Scholar. [38] SEO for academic articles is also called "Academic Search Engine Optimization" (ASEO) and defined as "the creation, publication, and modification of scholarly literature in a way that makes it easier for academic search engines to both crawl it and index it [38] ". ASEO has been adopted by many organizations such as Elsevier , [39] OpenScience, [40] Mendeley , [41] and SAGE Publishing [42] to optimize their articles' rankings in Google Scholar. However, ASEO is not free of criticism. [33]

See also
WebPage index: 00120
British Comedy Guide
British Comedy Guide or BCG (formerly the British Sitcom Guide or BSG ) is a British website covering all forms of British comedy , across all media . [1] [2] At the time of writing, BCG has published guides to more than 7,000 individual British comedies - primarily TV and radio situation comedy , sketch shows , comedy dramas , satire , variety and panel games . Other notable features on BCG include a news section, a message board , interviews with comedians and actors, a series of comment and opinion articles, a searchable merchandise database, and a section offering advice to aspiring comedy writers . The website also runs The Comedy.co.uk Awards and hosts several podcast series, some of which have won awards.
Reportedly, British Comedy Guide attracts over 500,000 unique visitors a month, making it Britain's most-visited comedy-related reference website. [1] [3]

Background
The website was founded in August 2003 as the British Sitcom Guide ( BSG ), [4] a website devoted to British sitcom TV programmes. The website was established by Mark Boosey, a freelance web developer , originally as a hobby. [1] However, in 2008, it was decided to expand the remit of the website to cover all forms of British comedy, and thus the BSG was re-launched as British Comedy Guide or BCG, and has continued to expand since this point.
Other features added since the site's re-launch in 2008 as British Comedy Guide include a series of podcasts, a section featuring interviews with people working in the British comedy industry and a Twitter -based news service.
The website went through another relaunch in 2016, where it underwent a re-design of the layout, a new logo, and increased coverage of online comedy and people working in British comedy.
In 2015, BCG's data specialist Ian Wolf was awards the inaugural "Unsung Hero" at the first FringePig Ham Fist awards for his work collating reviews during that year's Edinburgh Festival Fringe . [5]

Key people

Podcasts
BCG hosts a range of podcasts, some of which have gone on to win awards. As It Occurs To Me was nominated for a Sony Radio Academy Award in 2010, [10] Do The Right Thing won the Bronze Sony Award for "Best Internet Programme" in 2012, [11] Pappy's Flatshare Slamdown won the 2012 Loaded Lafta award for "Best Podcast", [12] and Richard Herring's Leicester Square Theatre Podcast won the Bronze Sony Radio Award for comedy in 2013. [13]
In June 2013, an episode of Richard Herring's Leicester Square Theatre Podcast saw host Richard Herring interviewing Stephen Fry , in which Fry revealed that had attempted to commit suicide. The story was also reported widely across the media, including the BBC and Sky News . [14] [15]
The podcasts hosted by BCG are: [16]

The Comedy.co.uk Awards
In January 2007, the website launched The British Sitcom Guide Awards , which were later renamed The British Comedy Guide Awards and are now known as The Comedy.co.uk Awards . [17] The awards are notable for allowing the public to choose the winners via an online poll, but with no shortlist - all broadcast programmes are available to choose. This differs from the British Comedy Awards which relies on broadcasters to put their programmes forward for nomination, and only uses a small panel of judges to determine the results. Additionally, The Comedy.co.uk Awards seeks to name not just the winners, but the worst programme in each category too. [18]
In order to be considered for a Comedy.co.uk Award , a programme must be a British comedy which has had at least one new episode broadcast on British TV or radio between 1 January and 31 December of the previous year. The only exception is shows which span across the new year, in which case it is nominated only in the first of the years. [17]
Up until the 2015 awards the visitors taking part in the poll are asked to give three votes in each category: one to their favourite show, one to their second favourite show, and one to their least favourite show. The vote for "top favourite" scores two points for the selected programme, and a vote for a "second favourite" scores one. The comedy programme with the most points is declared the winner in that category. The show which receives the highest number of "worst" votes is declared the worst comedy in that category. The 2016 awards change format, removing the "worst" categories, and people voting for the top three programmes, with their favourite show scoring three points, their second favourite two points, and their third favourite one point. In the first week of voting all comedies from the year could be voted on, in the second week the six most popular shows in every category formed a shortlist.
All of the awards are voted for by the website's users except one, the British Comedy Guide Editors' Award , which is an award voted for just by the controllers of the guide, and is given "to the show, person, channel, or indeed anything else comedy related that deserves some recognition." [19]

2006
The first awards were presented in January 2007 and were known at the time as The British Sitcom Guide Awards 2006 , but have since been renamed. Below are the awards. [19]

2007
The second awards were presented in January 2008, originally under the title The British Sitcom Guide Awards 2007 . Below are the results. [20]

2008
The third awards were presented in January 2009 and were the first to include radio shows. The 2008 awards were known as the British Comedy Guide Awards 2008 , but were renamed in 2009 to reflect the website's new URL. Below are the awards. [21]

2009
The fourth awards were presented in January 2010. Below are the results. [18] [22]

2010
The fifth awards were presented in January 2011. Below are the results. [23]

2011
The sixth awards were presented on 23 January 2012. [24] Below are the results. [25]

2012
The seventh awards were presented on 21 January 2013. [26] Below are the results. [27]

2013
The eighth awards were presented on 20 January 2014. [28] Below are the results. [29]

2014
The ninth awards were presented on 26 January 2015. [30] Below are the results. [31]

2015
The tenth awards were presented on 1 February 2016. Below are the results. [32]

2016
The 11th awards will be presented on 23 January 2016. Below are the nominations. [33]

Footnotes
WebPage index: 00121
Times Higher Education
Times Higher Education ( THE ), formerly the Times Higher Education Supplement ( THES ), is a weekly magazine based in London , reporting specifically on news and issues related to higher education . It is the United Kingdom 's leading publication in its field. [1]

Publication history
From its first issue, in 1971, until 2008 the Times Higher Education Supplement ( THES ) was published in newspaper format and was born out of, and affiliated with, The Times newspaper. On 10 January 2008, it was relaunched as a magazine. It is published by TES Global, which until October 2005 was a division of Rupert Murdoch's News International . The magazine is edited by John Gill. Phil Baty is the editor at large, and is responsible for international coverage. He is also the editor of the magazine's World University Rankings.
The magazine features a fictional satirical column written by Laurie Taylor , the "Poppletonian", which reflects on life at the fictional Poppleton University . [2]
In 2011 Times Higher Education was awarded the titles of "Weekly Business Magazine of the Year" and "Media Business Brand of the Year" by the Professional Publishers Association . [3]

Times Higher Education
Times Higher Education became known for publishing the annual Times Higher Education–QS World University Rankings , which first appeared in November 2004. On 30 October 2009 Times Higher Education broke with QS, then its partner in compiling the Rankings, and signed an agreement with Thomson Reuters to provide the data instead. The magazine developed a new methodology in consultation with its readers and its editorial board . Thomson Reuters collects and analyses the data used to produce the rankings on behalf of Times Higher Education . The results have been published annually since autumn 2010. QS, which collected and analysed the rankings data from 2004-2009, no longer has any involvement with Times Higher Education ’s World University Rankings. [4] [5]

Awards
The magazine runs two sets of awards annually.
The first is the " Times Higher Education Awards". The 2011 awards took place on 24 November at the Grosvenor House Hotel on London's Park Lane and received a record number of entries across the 18 categories. [6] Seventeen universities were given awards in different categories, with the University of Sheffield being "University of the Year". Tessa Blackstone was given the " Lord Dearing Lifetime Achievement Award". [6]
The University of Strathclyde was named as the University of the Year at the 2012 awards which took place on 29 November 2012 at the Grosvenor House Hotel on London's Park Lane . University of Strathclyde Principal and Vice-Chancellor Professor Sir Jim McDonald received the award at the ceremony. [7] [8]
The " Times Higher Education Leadership and Management Awards" (Thelmas) were launched in 2009. The Thelmas were set up to recognise the impact that administrative staff have on the success of higher education institutions.
WebPage index: 00122
Wikipedia:Lists of protected pages
This is a list of resources available that list pages that are protected , semi-protected or move protected .
To request that a page be protected or unprotected, see Wikipedia:Requests for page protection .
WebPage index: 00123
Loren Terveen
Loren Terveen is an American computer scientist and the president of Association for Computing Machinery 's SIGCHI professional group. [1] Terveen is a professor of computer science and engineering [2] and studies human-computer interaction at GroupLens Research at the University of Minnesota .
In 2008, Terveen and colleagues created Cyclopath, a path recommender system for cyclists in Minneapolis-Saint Paul , Minnesota. [3] Terveen co-authored the article "Evaluating collaborative filtering recommender systems", which has been cited almost four thousand times in scientific research. [4]
WebPage index: 00124
Wikipedia – The Missing Manual
Wikipedia: The Missing Manual is a 2008 book by John Broughton. It is a how-to guide that explains the process of contributing to the Internet encyclopedia Wikipedia . [1]
"For anyone who is interested in becoming part of the noble experiment, this book is an excellent introduction," wrote reviewer Robert Slade . [2] Wikipedia: The Missing Manual is part of O'Reilly Media 's Missing Manual series, which was created by David Pogue , technology columnist for The New York Times and Scientific American .
On January 26, 2009, O'Reilly announced that the content of the book was being released under a free license compatible with Wikipedia and that it would be available for editing in the Help area of Wikipedia. [3]
The book has a spin-off, Wikipedia Reader's Guide: The Missing Manual , consisting of Appendix B (slightly expanded) and Chapter 1 from the book.

See also
WebPage index: 00125
Andrew Keen
Andrew Keen (born c. 1960 [2] ) is a British-American entrepreneur and author. He is particularly known for his view that the current Internet culture and the Web 2.0 trend may be debasing culture, an opinion he shares with Jaron Lanier and Nicholas G. Carr among others. Keen is especially concerned about the way that the current Internet culture undermines the authority of learned experts and the work of professionals.

Life
Keen was born in Hampstead , North London, to a Jewish family. [3] He attended the University of London , studying History under Hugh Seton-Watson , a British historian and political scientist. [4] Keen earned a bachelor's degree in history and then studied at the University of Sarajevo in Yugoslavia. Having been influenced by Josef Škvorecký , Danilo Kiš , Jaroslav Hašek and especially the writings of Franz Kafka ; [4] Keen relocated to America, where he earned a master's degree in political science from the University of California, Berkeley , studying under Ken Jowitt . After Berkeley, Keen taught modern history and politics at Tufts University , Northeastern University and the University of Massachusetts Amherst . He currently lives in Berkeley , California with his family. [5]

Career
Keen returned to Silicon Valley in 1995 and founded Audiocafe.com, [4] which received funding from Intel and SAP . The firm folded in April 2000 and after the demise of Audiocafe.com, Keen worked at various technology companies including Pulse 3D, SLO Media, Santa Cruz Networks, Jazziz Digital and Pure Depth, where he was director of global strategic sales. [4] Keen stated in October, 2007, that he is working on his new book, tentatively titled, Star Wars 2.0 . [6]

Criticism of Web 2.0
In 2005, Keen wrote that Web 2.0 is a "grand utopian movement" similar to " communist society " as described by Karl Marx . He states:
On 5 June 2007, Keen released his first book The Cult of the Amateur , published by Doubleday Currency , [8] and gave a talk at Google the same day. [9] The book is critical of free, user-generated content websites such as Wikipedia, YouTube, Digg , Reddit and many others. He prominently featured in the 2008 Dutch documentary The Truth According to Wikipedia and was also featured in the 2010 American documentary Truth in Numbers? .
Keen stresses the importance of media literacy and claims that user generated blogs, wikis and other "democratized" media, cannot match the resources of mainstream media outlets. [10] Pointing to examples like being able to gather teams together, travel to dangerous locations (sometimes spending years in the region) and having skilled and experienced editors oversee the process, [8] Keen forecasts that if the current Web 2.0 mentality—where content is either given away or stolen—continues, in 25 years there will not exist a professional music business, newspaper industry or publishing business and challenges his audience to question whether we value these or not. [11]
Keen discusses often-overlooked problems with participatory technology. He describes the Internet in amoral terms, saying it is a mirror of our culture. "We see irreverence, and vitality, and excitement. We see a youthfulness. But we also see, I think, many of the worst developments in modern cultural life, and, in particular, I think we see what I call digital narcissism , this embrace of the self. It's Time magazine's person of the year for last year was you." [12] Keen is also heavily critical of anonymity on the Internet, believing that it makes us behave worse, not better. He says: "The Web's cherished anonymity can be a weapon as well as a shield." [13] Showing that misbehavior using anonymity has been so widely adopted, new definitions such as " trolls " and " sock puppets " have emerged.

Criticism of social exhibitionism
In the book Digital Vertigo , Keen argues that the "hypervisibility" promoted by social networks like Facebook and Twitter traps us into sacrificing vitally important parts of the human experience, like privacy and solitude. He compares the experience of participating in modern social networks with Jeremy Bentham 's Panopticon , concluding that: "The future should be anything but social." [14]
He is not without his critics. Tim O'Reilly has said: "he was just pure and simple looking for an angle, to create some controversy to sell a book, I don't think there's any substance whatever to his rants." [15]
WebPage index: 00126
Nicholson Baker
Nicholson Baker (born January 7, 1957) is an American novelist and essayist. His fiction generally de-emphasizes narrative in favor of careful description and characterization. He often focuses on minute inspection of his characters' and narrators' stream of consciousness . Baker has written about poetry, literature, library systems, history, politics, time manipulation, youth, and sex. He has written about libraries getting rid of books and newspapers and created the American Newspaper Repository . He received a National Book Critics Circle Award in 2001 for his nonfiction book Double Fold: Libraries and the Assault on Paper and the International Hermann Hesse Prize (Germany) in 2014. Baker has also written about and edited at Wikipedia . A pacifist , he has also written about the buildup to World War II .

Life and career
Nicholson Baker was born in 1957 in New York City and spent much of his youth in the Rochester, New York area. He studied briefly at the Eastman School of Music and received a B.A. in English from Haverford College .
Baker is a fervent critic of what he perceives as libraries' unnecessary destruction of paper-based media. He wrote several vehement articles in The New Yorker critical of the San Francisco Public Library for sending thousands of books to a landfill, eliminating card catalogs, and destroying old books and newspapers in favor of microfilm . In 1997, Baker received the San Francisco–based James Madison Freedom of Information Award in recognition of these efforts.
In 1999, Baker established a non-profit corporation, the American Newspaper Repository , to rescue old newspapers from destruction by libraries. [1] In 2001 he published Double Fold , in which he accuses certain librarians of lying about the decay of materials and being obsessed with technological fads, at the expense of both the public and historical preservation.
Baker describes himself as having "always had pacifist leanings." [2]
In March 2008, Baker reviewed John Broughton's Wikipedia: The Missing Manual in the New York Review of Books . In the review, Baker described Wikipedia's beginnings, its culture, and his own editing activities under the username "Wageless". [3] His article "How I fell in love with Wikipedia" was published in The Guardian newspaper in the UK on April 10, 2008. [4]
In 2014, Baker spent 28 days as a substitute teacher in some Maine public schools as research for his 2016 book Substitute: Going to School With a Thousand Kids . [5] [6] He also wrote about the experience for The New York Times Magazine . [5]

Personal life
Baker lives with his wife and two children in South Berwick , Maine .

Synopses of books by Baker

Bibliography

Fiction

Non-fiction

Essays and reporting

Further reading

Music
While writing on Traveling Sprinkler, Nicholson Baker posted some songs in the Paul Chowder style on YouTube. The ballads follow Pauls composition design of combining dance music with protest songs and deal with foreign policy agenda. [9]
WebPage index: 00127
Web conferencing
Web conferencing may be used as an umbrella term for various types of online collaborative services including web seminars ("webinars"), webcasts , and peer-level web meetings. It may also be used in a more narrow sense to refer only to the peer-level web meeting context, in an attempt to disambiguate it from the other types of collaborative sessions. [1] Terminology related to these technologies is inexact, and no generally agreed upon source or standards organization exists to provide an established usage reference.
In general, web conferencing is made possible by Internet technologies, particularly on TCP/IP connections. Services may allow real-time point-to-point communications as well as multicast communications from one sender to many receivers. It offers data streams of text-based messages, voice and video chat to be shared simultaneously, across geographically dispersed locations. Applications for web conferencing include meetings , training events, lectures, or presentations from a web-connected computer to other web-connected computers.

Installation and operation
Web conferencing software is invoked by all participants in a web meeting. Some technologies include software and functionality that differs for presenters and attendees. Software may run as a web browser application (often relying on Adobe Flash , Java , or WebRTC to provide the operational platform). Other web conferencing technologies require download and installation of software on each participant's computer, which is invoked as a local application. Many web conferencing vendors provide the central connectivity and provisioning of meeting "ports" or "seats" as a hosted web service , while others allow the web conference host to install and run the software on its own local servers. Another installation option from certain vendors allows for use of a proprietary computer appliance that is installed at the hosting company's physical location.
Depending on the technology being used, participants may speak and listen to audio over standard telephone lines or via computer microphones and speakers. Some products allow for use of a webcam to display participants, while others may require their own proprietary encoding or externally provided encoding of a video feed (for example, from a professional video camera connected via an IEEE 1394 interface) that is displayed in the session.
Vendor-hosted web conferencing is usually licensed as a service based on one of three pricing models: a fixed cost per user per minute, a monthly or annual flat fee allowing unlimited use with a fixed maximum capacity per session, or a sliding rate fee based on the number of allowed meeting hosts and per-session participants (number of "seats").
Presentation of visual materials most often is accomplished through one of two primary methodologies. The web conferencing software may show participants an image of the presenter's computer screen (or desktop). Again, depending upon the product, the software may show the entire visible desktop area or may allow selection of a physical area or application running on the presenter's computer. The second method relies on an upload and conversion process (most commonly consisting of Microsoft PowerPoint files, other Microsoft Office electronic documents, or Adobe PDF documents).

Etymology
The term "webinar" is a portmanteau of web and seminar , meaning a presentation, lecture, or workshop that is transmitted over the web. The coined term has been attacked for improper construction, [2] since "inar" is not a valid root . Webinar was included on the Lake Superior University 2008 List of Banished Words, [3] but was included in the Merriam-Webster dictionary that same year. [4]
The term " webcast " derives from its original similarity to a radio or television broadcast. Early usage referred purely to transmission and consumption of streaming audio and video via the World Wide Web . Over time, webcast software vendors have added many of the same functional capabilities found in webinar software, blurring the distinction between the two terms. Webcasts are now likely to allow audience response to polls, text communication with presenters or other audience members, and other two-way communications that complement the consumption of the streamed audio/video content.

Features
Other typical features of a web conference include: [5]

Standards
Web conferencing technologies are not standardized, which has reduced interoperability and transparency and increased platform dependence, security issues, cost and market segmentation. In 2003, the IETF established a working group to establish a standard for web conferencing, called "Centralized Conferencing (xcon)". [6] The planned deliverables of xcon include:

Deployment models
Web conferencing is available with three models: hosting service, software and appliance.
An appliance, unlike the online hosted solution, is offered as hardware. It is also known as "in-house" or "on-premises" web conferencing. It is used to conduct live meetings, remote training, or presentations via the Internet.

History
Real-time text chat facilities such as IRC appeared in the late 1980s. Web-based chat and instant messaging software appeared in the mid-1990s. The PLATO computer learning system allowed students to collaborate on networked computers to accomplish learning tasks as early as the 1960s, but the early networking was not accomplished via the World Wide Web and PLATO's collaborative goals were not consistent with the presenter-audience dynamic typical of web conferencing systems. [ citation needed ]
Several point-to-point and private-network video conferencing products were introduced in the early 1990s, [8] most notably CU-SeeMe , which was used to link selected schools around the United States of America in real-time collaborative communications as part of the Global Schoolhouse project from Global SchoolNet . [9] [10]
In May 1995, PictureTel announced LiveShare Plus [11] as a general-use data collaboration product for Windows-based personal computers. The software allowed application sharing, user-granted control of a remote PC, shared whiteboard markup, file transfer, and text messaging. List price was given as $249 per computer. PictureTel referenced an agreement with Microsoft in its announcement press release, and a May 26, 1995 memo from Bill Gates to Microsoft executive staff and direct reports said "Our PictureTel screen sharing client allowing Window sharing should work easily across the Internet." [12]
In May 1996, Microsoft announced NetMeeting as an included component in Internet Explorer 3.0. [13] At the time, Microsoft called NetMeeting "the Internet's first real-time communications client that includes support for international conferencing standards and provides true multiuser application-sharing and data-conferencing capabilities."
In 1996, PlaceWare was founded as a spinoff from Xerox PARC . In November of that year, PlaceWare Auditorium was described in a public talk at Stanford University as allowing "one or more people to give an interactive, online, multimedia presentation via the Web to hundreds or thousands of simultaneous attendees; the presentation can include slides (made in PowerPoint or any GIF-image editor), live annotation on the slide images, real-time polls of the audience, live audio from the presenter and those asking questions, private text and audio conversations in the auditorium's "rows", and other features." [14] PlaceWare Auditorium was formally announced in March 1997 at a price of $150 per simultaneous user. [15]
In February 1998, Starlight Networks [16] released StarLive! (the exclamation point being part of the product name). [17] The press release said "customers can access familiar Web browser interfaces to view live and pre-recorded corporate presentations, along with synchronized slides. End users can communicate directly with the presenter using real-time chat technology and other Web-based collaboration tools."
In June 1998, PlaceWare 2.0 Conference Center was released, allowing up to 1000 live attendees in a meeting session. [18]
In February 1999, ActiveTouch announced WebEx Meeting Center and the webex.com web site. [19] In July 1999 WebEx Meeting Center was formally released [20] with a 1000-person meeting capacity demonstrated. [21] In September of the same year, ActiveTouch changed its company name to WebEx .
In April 1999, Vstream introduced the Netcall product for web conferencing as "a fee-based Internet software utility that lets you send business presentations and other graphic information via e-mail to a Vstream server. Vstream converts the content, again using streaming technology, and makes the presentation available for viewing by up to 1,200 people at a time." [22] Vstream changed the company name to Evoke Communications in 2000, with a further change to Raindance Communications in 2002. In February 2006, Raindance was acquired by the InterCall division of West Corporation .
In December 2003, Citrix Systems acquired Expertcity, giving it the GoToMyPC and GoToAssist products. [23] The acquired company was renamed as the Citrix Online division of Citrix Systems. In July 2004, Citrix Online released GoToMeeting as its first generic web conferencing product. [24] In June 2006, GoToWebinar was added, allowing additional registration and reporting functionality along with larger capacity in sessions. [25]
In January 2003, Macromedia acquired Presedia, including the Breeze Presentation product. [26] Breeze Live was added with the 4.0 release of Macromedia Breeze to support web conferencing. [27] In April 2005, Adobe Systems announced acquisition of Macromedia (completed in December 2005) and changed the Breeze product name to Adobe Connect . [28]
A trademark for the term WEBinar (first three letters capitalized) was registered in 1998 by Eric R. Korb (Serial Number 75478683, USPTO) and was reassigned to InterCall . [29] The trademark registration was cancelled in 2007. Learn.com filed a claim for the term "webinar" without regard to font or style in 2006 (Serial Number 78952304, USPTO). That trademark claim was abandoned in 2007 [30] and no subsequent filing has been made.

Software and service providers
Notable vendors with articles:

See also
WebPage index: 00128
Houston Chronicle
The Houston Chronicle is the largest daily newspaper in Houston , Texas , United States . As of April 2016 [update] , it is the third-largest newspaper by Sunday circulation in the United States. With its 1995 buy-out of long-time rival the Houston Post , the Chronicle became Houston's primary newspaper.
The Houston Chronicle is the largest daily paper owned and operated by the Hearst Corporation , a privately held multinational corporate media conglomerate with $4 billion in revenues. The paper employs nearly 2,000 people, including approximately 300 journalists , editors , and photographers . The Chronicle has bureaus in Washington, D.C. and Austin . It reports that its web site averages 125 million page views per month. [2]
The publication serves as the " newspaper of record " of the Houston area. [3] Previously headquartered in the Houston Chronicle Building at 801 Texas Avenue, Downtown Houston , the Houston Chronicle is now located at 4747 Southwest Freeway. [4]

History
From its inception, the practices and policies of the Houston Chronicle were shaped by strong-willed personalities who were the publishers. The history of the newspaper can be best understood when divided into the eras of these individuals.

1901–1926: Marcellus E. Foster Era
The Houston Chronicle was founded in 1901 by a former reporter for the now-defunct Houston Post , Marcellus E. Foster . Foster, who had been covering the Spindletop oil boom for the Post , invested in Spindletop and took $30 of the return on that investment — at the time equivalent to a week's wages — and used it to fund the Chronicle .
The Chronicle's first edition was published on October 14, 1901 and sold for two cents per copy, at a time when most papers sold for five cents each. At the end of its first month in operation, the Chronicle had a circulation of 4,378 — roughly one tenth of the population of Houston at the time. [5] Within the first year of operation, the paper purchased and consolidated the Daily Herald .
In 1908, Foster asked Jesse H. Jones, a local businessman and prominent builder, to construct a new office and plant for the paper, "and offered [a] half-interest in the newspaper as a down payment, with twenty years to pay the remainder. Jones agreed, and the resulting Chronicle Building was one of the finest in the South." [5] [6]
Under Foster, the paper's circulation grew from about 7,000 in 1901 to 75,000 on weekdays and 85,000 on Sundays by 1926. Foster continued to write columns under the pen name Mefo, and drew much attention in the 1920s for his opposition to the Ku Klux Klan (KKK). He sold the rest of his interest to Jesse H. Jones on June 26, 1926 and promptly retired. [7]

Goodfellows
In 1911, City Editor George Kepple started Goodfellows. [9] On a Christmas Eve in 1911, Kepple passed a hat among the Chronicle's reporters to collect money to buy toys for a shoe-shine boy.
Goodfellows continues today through donations made by the newspaper and its readers. It has grown into a city-wide program that provides needy children between the ages of two and ten with toys during the winter holidays . In 2003, Goodfellows distributed almost 250,000 toys to more than 100,000 needy children in the Greater Houston area.

1926–1956: Jesse H. Jones era
In 1926, Jesse H. Jones became the sole owner of the paper. He had approached Foster about selling, and Foster had answered, "What will you give me?". Jones described the buyout of Foster as follows:
In 1937, Jesse H. Jones transferred ownership of the paper to the newly established Houston Endowment Inc. Jones retained the title of publisher until his death in 1956.
According to The Handbook of Texas Online, the Chronicle generally represented very conservative political views during the 1950s:
Jones, a lifelong Democrat who organized the Democratic National Convention to be in Houston in 1928, and who spent long years in public service first under the Wilson administration, helping to found the Red Cross during World War I, and later famously under the Roosevelt administration, described the paper's mission in these terms:
Under Jones' watch, the Chronicle bought KTRH , one of Houston's oldest radio stations, in 1937. In 1954, Jones led a syndicate that signed on Houston's third television station, KTRK-TV .

1956–1965: John T. Jones Era
The board of Houston Endowment named John T. Jones, nephew of Jesse H. Jones, as editor of the Chronicle . Houston Endowment president, J. Howard Creekmore, was named publisher. In 1961, John T. Jones hired William P. Steven as editor. Steven had previously been editor of the Tulsa Tribune and the Minneapolis Star Tribune , and credited with turning around the declining readership of both papers. One of his innovations was the creation of a regular help column called "Watchem," where ordinary citizens could voice their complaints. The Chicago Tribune later called this column a pioneer and prototype of the modern newspaper "Action Line." [11]
Stevens' progressive political philosophy soon created conflict with the very conservative views of the Houston Endowment board, especially when he editorially supported the election of Lyndon B. Johnson, the Democratic candidate for president. But more than political philosophy was involved: Robert A. Caro revealed in his biography of Johnson that written assurance of this support from John T. Jones had been the price demanded by Johnson in January 1964 in return for approval of the merger of Houston's National Bank of Commerce, in which Jones had a financial interest, with another Houston bank, the Texas National. [12]
In 1964, the Chronicle purchased the assets of its evening newspaper competitor, the Houston Press , [5] becoming the only evening newspaper in the city. By then, the Chronicle had a circulation of 254,000 – the largest of any paper in Texas. The Atlantic Monthly credited the growth to the changes instigated by Steven. [13]
In the summer of 1965, Jones decided to buy a local television station that was already owned by the Houston Endowment. He resigned from the Houston Endowment board to avoid a conflict of interest, though he remained as publisher of the Chronicle . On September 2, 1965, Jones made a late-night visit to the Steven home, where he broke the news that the Endowment board had ordered him to dismiss Steven. Jones had to comply. On September 3, the paper published a story announcing that Everett Collier was now the new editor. [13]
No mention was made of Steven or the Houston Endowment board. Houston Post staff wrote an article about the change, but top management killed it. Only two weekly papers in Houston: Forward Times (which targeted the African-American community) and the Houston Tribune (an ultra conservative paper). Both papers had rather small circulations and no influence among the city's business community. [13] The two major newspapers in Houston never mentioned Steven for many years thereafter.

1965–1987: J. Howard Creekmore Era
John J. Jones left the Chronicle not long after Steven's ouster. J. Howard Creekmore, president of the Houston Endowment, took John Jones' place at the Chronicle . Everett D. Collier replaced Steven as editor. Collier remained in this position until his retirement in 1979.
J. Howard Creekmore was born in Abilene, Texas in 1905. His parents died while he was young, so he was raised by his stepmother. The family moved to Houston in 1920. Howard enrolled in Rice Institute, where he graduated with degrees in history and English. After graduation, he went to work for Jesse Jones as a bookkeeper. Jones took an interest in the young man’s career, and put him through law school. Creekmore passed the bar exam in 1932 and returned to work for Jones. He held several positions in the Jones business empire. In 1959, he was named to the board of Houston Endowment, and was promoted to president of the board in 1964. [14]
By 1965, Creekmore had persuaded other directors of Houston Endowment to sell several business properties, including the Chronicle . Houston oilman John Mecom offered $85 million for the newspaper, its building, a 30 percent interest in Texas National Bank of Commerce and the historic Rice Hotel. Early in 1966, Mecom encountered problems raising the additional cash to complete the transaction. He then began lining up potential buyers for the newspaper, which included non-Houstonians such as Sam Newhouse, Otis Chandler and the Scripps-Howard organization. Creekmore strongly believed that local persons should own the paper. He insisted that Mecom pay the $84 million debt immediately in cash. Mecom cancelled his purchase agreement. [15]
In 1968, the Chronicle set a Texas newspaper circulation record. In 1981, the business pages — which up until then had been combined with sports — became its own section of the newspaper. Creekmore remained as publisher until Houston Endowment sold the paper to the Hearst Corporation.

1987–present: Hearst Corporation Era
On May 1, 1987, the Hearst Corporation purchased the Houston Chronicle from Houston Endowment for $415 Million. [16] Richard J. V. Johnson, who had joined the paper as a copy editor in 1956, and worked up to executive vice president in 1972, and president in 1973, remained as chairman and publisher until he retired April 1, 2002. [17] He was succeeded by Jack Sweeney.
In 1994, the Chronicle switched to being a morning-only paper. With the demise of the Houston Post the following year, the Chronicle became Houston's sole major daily newspaper.
On October 18, 2008, the paper endorsed Senator Barack Obama for President of the United States in the 2008 U.S. Presidential Election , the first Democrat to be endorsed by the newspaper since 1964, when it endorsed Texan Lyndon B. Johnson . [18] [19] It endorsed Mitt Romney in 2012, [20] but endorsed Hillary Clinton in 2016. [21]
Locally, the Chronicle endorsed Wendy Davis for governor in 2014 , [22] and Sylvester Turner for mayor in 2015. [23] Additionally, the Chronicle initially endorsed Jeb Bush for the 2016 [24] Republican primary, but did not endorse any other candidate after he dropped out. [25]

Headquarters

4747 Southwest Freeway
On July 21, 2014 the Chronicle announced that its Downtown employees were moving to the 610 Loop campus, [26] at the intersection of the 610 Loop and U.S. Route 59 ( Southwest Freeway ). [27]
The facility, previously used as the Houston Post headquarters, will have a total of seven buildings with a total of over 440,000 square feet (41,000 m 2 ) of space. The original building is a 1970s four story " New Brutalist " building. [28]
As of 2016 the building housed the Chronicle Production Department, [28] as well as the offices of the Spanish newspaper La Voz de Houston . [27]

801 Texas
The Houston Chronicle building [ citation needed ] in Downtown Houston was the headquarters of the Houston Chronicle . [29] The facility included a loading dock, office space, a press room, and production areas. It had ten stories above ground and three stories below ground. The printing presses used by the newspaper spanned three stories. [30] The presses were two stories below ground and one above. In the Downtown facility, the presses there were decommissioned in the late 2000s. [ citation needed ] The newsroom within the facility had bull-pen style offices with a few private cubicles and offices on the edges. [31] The facility was connected to the downtown Houston tunnel system . [ citation needed ] Turner wrote that "in recent decades" 801 Texas "offered viewers an architectural visage of unadorned boxiness" and that "An accretion of five buildings made into one, it featured a maze of corridors, cul-de-sacs and steps that seemed to spring on strollers at the most unexpected times." [28]
The facility, 106 years old as of 2016 [update] , was originally four separate structures that were joined together to make one building. [32] Jesse H. Jones erected the first Chronicle building, a narrow and long structure clad in granite, on the corner of Travis Street and Texas Avenue in 1910. The second building, the Majestic Theater, was built west of the Chronicle building. The second building built by Jones, it opened in 1910. In 1918 the third Jones building, Milam Building, opened west of the theater. An annex was built on the north side of the main building in 1938, and that annex gained a fifth floor in the 1960s. The fifth building was a production plant built north of the original four buildings. They were joined together in a major renovation and modernisation project completed in the late 1960s. [28] Today the building has been imploded and is reduced to rubble, with what will become is TBD.

People
Jack Sweeney is the publisher of the Houston Chronicle and chairman of the executive team, John McKeon is the president of the newspaper.
As of August 2015, the executive team includes:
The paper employs nearly 2,000 people, including approximately 300 journalists . In addition, the Chronicle contracts with multiple distributors who circulate and deliver copies of the newspaper.
John H. Murphy was a longtime Chronicle officer. He was the assistant to Richard Johnson, a former executive vice president of the Texas Daily Newspaper Association, and a newspaperman, mostly in Houston, for seventy-four years.

Awards

Individual awards

Pulitzer Prize
The newspaper and its staff have several times been Pulitzer finalists:

Other notable people

Sections
The Houston Chronicle is divided into several sections:
the "local" sections are no longer published on Thursdays.

Robert Jensen series on the September 11, 2001 attacks on the U.S.
In the weeks following the September 11, 2001 attacks the Houston Chronicle published a series of opinion articles by University of Texas journalism professor Robert Jensen that asserted the United States was "just as guilty" as the hijackers in committing acts of violence and compared that attack with the history of U.S. attacks on civilians in other countries. The opinion piece resulted in hundreds of angry letters to the editor and reportedly over 4,000 angry responses to Jensen. [45]
Among them were claims of insensitivity against the newspaper and of giving an unduly large audience to a position characterized as being extremist. University of Texas president Larry Faulkner issued a response denouncing Jenson's as "a fountain of undiluted foolishness on issues of public policy", noting "[h]e is not speaking in the University's name and may not speak in its name." [46]
The Chronicle printed four subsequent opinion articles by Jensen, asserting his case. Jensen is also a regular guest writer on the opinion page and has published several dozen opinion articles on other subjects in the Chronicle .

Other publications
In April 2004 the Houston Chronicle began carrying a Spanish-language supplement, the entertainment magazine La Vibra . La Vibra caters to speakers of Spanish and bilingual English-Spanish speakers, and is mainly distributed in Hispanic neighborhoods. In December 2004 the Chronicle acquired the Spanish-language newspaper La Voz de Houston . [27]

Criticism

Light rail controversy
In late 2002, Chronicle website managers accidentally posted an internal memorandum on its web site. The memorandum outlined a draft agenda of coordinated news articles, editorials, and op-eds seemingly intended to promote a referendum to expand Houston's controversial METRORail system on the 2003 ballot. It proposed several "investigative" news stories and editorials designed to examine "the campaign led by Tom DeLay and Bob Lanier to defeat rail expansion." DeLay, a Houston congressman, and Lanier, a former mayor of Houston, had both actively opposed light rail in the past.
The document was online for only an hour, but long enough to be viewed by some readers. Soon after, the Houston Review , a conservative newspaper published by students at the University of Houston , printed the memo's full text and an accompanying commentary that criticized the paper. [47] [48] The Chronicle's response was initially muted. Its first official response appeared in the "corrections" section later the same week stating: "An internal Houston Chronicle document was mistakenly posted to the editorial/opinion area of the Web site early Thursday morning. We apologize for any confusion it may have caused." Chronicle editor Jeff Cohen, who gave a statement in defense of the memorandum: "I make no apologies for having a thorough discussion of the issue. We have nothing to apologize for…There was an inadvertent posting of it to the Web site, and I'm sorry about that, but I make no apologies for the contents of it."
As the bond referendum approached, the Houston Chronicle requested that Texans for True Mobility (TTM), the main critic of METRORail, provide the paper with a copy of their financial contributor reports. TTM declined, saying they did not believe the Chronicle would adequately protect the privacy of their donors. The Chronicle responded by making a complaint to the Harris County District Attorney's office asking that Texans for True Mobility be investigated for potential violations of Texas election law. The Chronicle alleged that TTM broke a law requiring PACs to disclose their donors. TTM said that their status as a registered non-profit 501(c)(6) organization, as opposed to a PAC, did not require them to do so. The Chronicle argued that the law covered TTM because it made "paid political moves." Texas campaign law allows nonprofits to run "educational" advertisements, but those advertisements cannot endorse specific political positions or people or make a specific recommendation in a pending election. The dispute was over whether TTM's advertisements, and specifically the slogans "Metro's Rail Plan Costs Too Much ... Does Too Little" and "Metro's Plan Won't Work Here," were specific recommendations on how to vote.
Harris County District Attorney Rosenthal later dismissed the Chronicle ' s complaint, finding it without merit on the grounds that the statute did not apply. Rosenthal's involvement in the probe itself came under fire by the Houston Press , which in editorials questioned whether Rosenthal was too close to TTM: from 2000 to 2004, Rosenthal accepted some $30,000 in donations from known TTM supporters. [49] Later that year, TTM revealed that their television and radio ads were funded by $30,000 in contributions made the day before the election by two PACs controlled by DeLay.

Sandoval family interview
In early 2004, Chronicle reporter Lucas Wall interviewed the family of Leroy Sandoval, a Marine from Houston who was killed in Iraq. After the article appeared, Sandoval's stepfather and sister called into Houston talk radio station KSEV and said that a sentence alleging "President Bush's failure to find weapons of mass destruction" in Iraq misrepresented their views on the war and President George W. Bush , that Wall had pressured them for a quotation that criticized Bush, and that the line alleging Bush's "failure" was included against the wishes of the family. [50]
A dispute ensued between KSEV radio show host/owner Dan Patrick and an assistant managing editor at the Chronicle . The incident prompted Patrick to join the call for a boycott of the paper. [51] The story was also picked up by the local Houston television stations and, a week later, the O'Reilly Factor . Eventually, Chronicle publisher Jack Sweeney contacted the Sandoval family to apologize. [51]

Purchase of 
On 18 April 1995, the Houston Post ceased operations, leaving the Chronicle as Houston's only major daily newspaper, and the Hearst Corporation purchased some of the Post's assets. Houston Chronicle announced it in a way that suggested the shutdown and Hearst's purchase of the Post's assets were simultaneous events. " Post closes; Hearst buys assets," the Chronicle headline read the day after the Post was shut.
Internal memos obtained via FOIA from the Justice Department antitrust attorneys who investigated the closing of the Houston Post said the Chronicle's parent organization struck a deal to buy the Post six months before it closed. The memos, first obtained by the alternative paper the Houston Press , say the Chronicle's conglomerate and the Post "reached an agreement in October, 1994, for the sale of Houston Post Co.'s assets for approximately $120 million." [52]

Tom DeLay poll
In January 2006 the Chronicle hired Richard Murray of the University of Houston to conduct an election survey in the district of U.S. Rep. Tom DeLay , in light of his 2005 indictment by District Attorney Ronnie Earle for alleged campaign money violations. The Chronicle said that its poll showed "severely eroded support for U.S. Rep Tom DeLay in his district, most notably among Republicans who have voted for him before." [53]
Former Texas Secretary of State Jack Rains contacted the Chronicle's James Howard Gibbons, alleging that the poll appeared to incorrectly count non-Republican Primary voters in its sample. Rains also asserted that Murray had a conflict of interest in the poll, as Murray's son Keir was a political consultant working for Nick Lampson , DeLay's Democratic challenger in 2006. [54] In response, Gibbons denied the methodological flaws in the poll.

Availability of 
Some Houston Post articles had been made available in the archives of the Houston Chronicle website, but by 2005 they were removed. The Houston Chronicle online editor Mike Read said that the Houston Chronicle decided to remove Houston Post articles from the website after the 2001 United States Supreme Court New York Times Co. v. Tasini decision; the newspaper originally planned to filter articles not allowed by the decision and to post articles that were not prohibited by the decision. The Houston Chronicle decided not to post or re-post any more Houston Post articles because of difficulties in complying with the New York Times Co. v. Tasini decision with the resources that were available to the newspaper. [55]
People interested in reading Houston Post articles may view them on microfilm . The Houston Public Library has the newspaper on microfilm from 1880–1995 and the Houston Post Index from 1976 to 1994. The microfilm of 1880–1900 is in the Texas and Local History Department of the Julia Ideson Building , while 1900–1995 is in the Jesse H. Jones Building, the main building of the Central Library. In addition, the M.D. Anderson Library at the University of Houston has the Houston Post available on microfilm from 1880–1995 and the Houston Post Index from 1976 to 1979 and from 1987 to 1994. [55]

See also
WebPage index: 00129
Media in New York's Capital District
The media in New York 's Capital District is part of the Albany - Schenectady - Troy media market , which is the 56th largest in the United States , [1] includes all of the 11 counties of the Capital District, along with Hamilton County, New York , as well as Berkshire County , Massachusetts , and Bennington County , Vermont . In total, there are 16 AM/ MW stations, 30 full-power FM stations, 14 low-power FM translators, 8 full power analog TV stations, 5 low-power TV translators, and 8 full power digital TV ( DTV ) stations licensed to communities within 30 miles (48 km) of downtown Albany. In terms of broadcast media, Albany is part of Arbitron market #63 (radio), and Nielsen DMA #57 (television), and is a broadcast market with historical relevance. The pioneering influence of General Electric in Schenectady directly contributed to the area emerging as the birthplace of station-based television ( WRGB ) and one of the earliest FM broadcast stations (today's WRVE ), in addition to the first federally licensed radio station in upstate New York, WGY .

Print

Newspaper
The Albany Times Union is area's primary daily newspaper; its headquarters moved to suburban Colonie from Albany in the 1970s, after a dispute with then-Mayor Erastus Corning 2nd over land needed for expansion. [ citation needed ] More localized are the Amsterdam Recorder for Montgomery and Fulton County; [ citation needed ] The Daily Gazette , which focuses primarily on Schenectady ; The Daily Mail in Greene County; [ citation needed ] the Gloversville Leader-Herald for Fulton County; [ citation needed ] The Post-Star , which focuses on Washington, Warren, and northern Saratoga counties; the Troy Record , which focuses on Troy; the Register-Star for Columbia County; [ citation needed ] and The Saratogian , which focuses on Saratoga County.

Weekly
The Business Review - a business weekly published each Friday [ citation needed ]

Other

Radio
In 1947, this region was also home to the first independently owned and operated stand-alone FM radio station in the United States, W47A. In the early 2000s, the greater Albany market had the distinction of having the highest concentration of FM broadcast stations east of the Mississippi River. The Capital District has three local News/Talk radio stations, WGY , WROW , and WGDJ on the AM ( MW ) band. All feature a mixture of locally oriented and nationally syndicated programming. There are two Sports formatted stations: WOFX , local affiliate for Fox Sports Radio ; and WTMM , local affiliate for ESPN Radio . Both stations provide local sports and sports-talk programming as well as national content. The FM dial is primarily made up of commercial music-formatted stations similar to those in other cities around North America, the largest of which include Pop music station WFLY 'FLY-92', Adult Contemporary WYJB 'B-95.5', Hot AC WRVE '99.5 The River', Rock station WQBK-FM 'Q-103', Classic Rock WPYX 'PYX-106', and Country music WGNA-FM 'Country 107.7'. Public radio broadcasting is available from two organisations: Northeast Public Radio serves the Capital Region via their flagship station WAMC -FM, and is the primary local affiliate for NPR network programming, and WMHT-FM is another local outlet that clears select NPR and PRI programming. WAMC focuses on News & Talk programming during the day, various music programs and BBC World Service programming in the evening, while WMHT-FM mainly provides Classical Music programming for most of their broadcast schedule. There are no radio stations in the Albany area that provide programming in languages other than English on a full-time basis. A few individual programs in languages including Spanish, Italian and Arabic are scheduled, primarily on college owned and operated stations.

AM stations

FM stations
Fringe FM signals which can be received in the Albany market include:

Television
WRGB has the distinction of being the very first affiliated station of the NBC Television Network. The Albany TV DMA is served by the following stations, providing programming from many of the English-language American broadcast television networks: WRGB ( CBS ), WTEN ( ABC ), WNYT ( NBC ), WXXA ( Fox ), WMHT ( PBS ), WCWN ( CW ), WNYA ( MyNetworkTV ), and WYPX ( ION ). There are currently no local affiliates for any of the Spanish-language domestic broadcast television networks, however the national service of Univision is provided via cable TV . Local cable TV operator Charter Communications provides a 24-hour cable news television channel, Spectrum News Capital Region (formerly Capital News 9, YNN Capital Region, and Time Warner Cable News Capital Region; now covering Albany and Glens Falls). Christian television networks TBN and 3ABN are available via low-power translator service to the immediate metro area. Unlike many television markets around the country, TV stations from neighboring markets cannot normally be received in the greater Albany area due to distance and terrain.
Charter Communications also provides a local 24-hour rolling news service to its subscribers, Spectrum News Capital Region (formerly Capital News 9) on cable channel 9.
WebPage index: 00130
Gender bias on Wikipedia
Gender bias on Wikipedia refers to criticism of the online encyclopedia, and especially its English-language site ; that the nature and quantity of its content is biased due to the fact that a dominant majority of Wikipedia editors are male. It is among the most frequent criticisms of Wikipedia , and part of a more general criticism about systemic bias in Wikipedia . The Wikimedia Foundation , which runs Wikipedia, agrees with this criticism and has made an ongoing attempt to increase female editorship of Wikipedia.

Research findings
Surveys have indicated that between 8.5–16 percent of Wikipedia editors are female. [3] [4] [5] Consequently, Wikipedia has been criticized by some academics and journalists for having primarily male contributors, [6] [7] [8] and for having fewer and less extensive articles about women or topics important to women. The New York Times pointed out that Wikipedia's female participation rate may be in line with other "public thought-leadership forums". [9] In 2009, a Wikimedia Foundation survey revealed that 6% of editors who made more than 500 edits were female; with the average male editor having twice as many edits. [10]
In 2010, United Nations University and UNU-MERIT jointly presented an overview of the results of a global Wikipedia survey. [11] A 30 January 2011, New York Times article cited this Wikimedia Foundation collaboration, which indicated that fewer than 13% of contributors to Wikipedia are women. Sue Gardner , then executive director of the foundation, said that increasing diversity was about making the encyclopedia "as good as it could be". Factors the article cited as possibly discouraging women from editing included the "obsessive fact-loving realm", associations with the "hard-driving hacker crowd," and the necessity to be "open to very difficult, high-conflict people, even misogynists". [6] In 2013, the results of the survey were challenged by Hill and Shaw using corrective estimation techniques to suggest upward corrections to the data from the survey and to recommend updates to the statistics being surveyed, giving 22.7% for adult US female editors and 16.1% overall. [5]
In February 2011, The New York Times followed up with a series of opinions on the subject under the banner, "Where Are the Women in Wikipedia?" [12] Susan C. Herring , a professor of information science and linguistics, said that she was not surprised by the Wikipedia contributors gender gap. She said that the often contentious nature of Wikipedia article "talk" pages, where article content is discussed, is unappealing to many women, "if not outright intimidating." [13] Joseph M. Reagle reacted similarly, saying that the combination of a "culture of hacker elitism," combined with the disproportionate effect of high-conflict members (a minority) on the community atmosphere, can make it unappealing. He said, "the ideology and rhetoric of freedom and openness can then be used (a) to suppress concerns about inappropriate or offensive speech as "censorship" and (b) to rationalize low female participation as simply a matter of their personal preference and choice." [14] Justine Cassell said that although women are as knowledgeable as men, and as able to defend their point of view, "it is still the case in American society that debate, contention, and vigorous defense of one’s position is often still seen as a male stance, and women’s use of these speech styles can call forth negative evaluations." [15]
The International Journal of Communication published research by Reagle and Lauren Rhue that examined the coverage, gender representation, and article length of thousands of biographical subjects on the English-language Wikipedia and the online Encyclopædia Britannica . They concluded that Wikipedia provided better coverage and longer articles in general, that Wikipedia typically has more articles on women than Britannica in absolute terms, but Wikipedia articles on women were more likely to be missing than articles on men relative to Britannica . That is, Wikipedia dominated Britannica in biographical coverage, but more so when it comes to men. Similarly, one might say that Britannica is more balanced in whom it neglects to cover than Wikipedia. For both reference works, article length did not consistently differ by gender. [16]
In April 2011, the Wikimedia Foundation conducted its first semi-annual Wikipedia survey. It suggested that 9% of Wikipedia editors are women. It also reported, "Contrary to the perception of some, our data shows that very few women editors feel like they have been harassed, and very few feel Wikipedia is a sexualized environment." [17] However, an October 2011 paper at the International Symposium on Wikis and Open Collaboration found evidence that suggested that Wikipedia may have "a culture that may be resistant to female participation". [18]
A study published in 2014 found that there is also an "Internet skills gap" with regard to Wikipedia editors. The authors found that the most likely Wikipedia contributors are high-skilled men and that there is no gender gap among low-skilled editors, and concluded that the "skills gap" exacerbates the gender gap among editors. [19]
During 2010–14, women made up 61% of participants of the college courses arranged by the Wiki Education Foundation program that included editing Wikipedia as part of the curriculum. Their contributions were found to shift the Wikipedia content from pop-culture and STEM towards social sciences and humanities. [20]
A 2017 study found that women participating in an experiment by editing a Wikipedia-like site tended to view other editors as male, and to view their responses as more critical than if the other editor was gender-neutral . The study concluded that:
A study by Ford and Wajcman observe that research on the gender bias continues to frame the problem as a deficit in women. In contrast, their central argument states that infrastructure studies in feminist technoscience allows the gender analysis to be taken to a further level. It looks at three issues within the infrastructure: content policies, software and the legalistic framework of operation. It suggests that progress can be made through altering that culture of knowledge production through encouraging alternate knowledge, reducing the technical barriers to editing and addressing the complexity of Wikipedia policies. [22]

Causes
Several causes for this gender disparity have been suggested. A 2010 study revealed a Wikipedia female participation rate of 13 percent, observed to be close to the 15 percent overall female participation rate of other "public thought-leadership forums". [9] [24] Wikipedia research fellow Sarah Stierch acknowledged that it is "fairly common" for Wikipedia contributors to remain gender-anonymous. [25] A perceived unwelcoming culture and tolerance of violent and abusive language are also reasons put forth for the gender gap. [26] According to a 2013 study, [27] another cause of the gender gap in Wikipedia is the failure to attract and retain female editors, resulting in a negative impact on Wikipedia's coverage.
Former Wikimedia Foundation executive director Sue Gardner cited nine reasons why women don't edit Wikipedia, culled from comments by female Wikipedia editors : [23]
Lam et al . suggest that there may be a culture which is non-inclusive of women on Wikipedia, which may be due to a disparity in male-to-female centric topics represented and edited, the tendency for female users to be more active in the social and community aspects of Wikipedia , an increased likelihood that edits by new female editors are reverted, and/or that articles with high proportions of female editors are more contentious. [18]
In July 2014, the National Science Foundation announced that it would spend $200,000 to study systemic gender bias on Wikipedia. The study will be led by Julia Adams and Hannah Brueckner. [28]
One concern is that articles about female subjects may be more likely to be tagged for deletion. [29] [30] [31]

Reaction
The Wikimedia Foundation has officially held, since at least 2011 when Gardner was executive director, that gender bias exists in the project. It has made some attempts to address it but Gardner has expressed frustration with the degree of success achieved. She has also noted that "in the very limited leisure time women had, they tended to be more involved in social activities instead of editing Wikipedia. 'Women see technology more as a tool they use to accomplish tasks, rather than something fun in itself. ' " [32] [33] In 2011, the Foundation set a target of having 25 percent of its contributors identifying as female by 2015. [6] In August 2013, Gardner said, "I didn't solve it. We didn't solve it. The Wikimedia Foundation didn't solve it. The solution won't come from the Wikimedia Foundation." [32]
Writing for Slate in 2011, Heather Mac Donald called Wikipedia's gender imbalance a "non-problem in search of a misguided solution." Mac Donald asserted, "The most straightforward explanation for the differing rates of participation in Wikipedia—and the one that conforms to everyday experience—is that, on average, males and females have different interests and preferred ways of spending their free time." [34]
In August 2014, Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales announced in a BBC interview the Wikimedia Foundation 's plans for "doubling down" on the issue of gender bias at Wikipedia. Wales said the Foundation would be open to more outreach and more software changes. [35]

Efforts to increase female editorship
Dedicated edit-a-thons have been organized to increase the coverage of women's topics in Wikipedia and to encourage more women to edit Wikipedia. [36] These events are supported by the Wikimedia Foundation, which sometimes provides mentors and technology to help guide newer editors through the process. Recent edit-a-thons have given specific focus to topics such as Australian female neuroscientists and women in Jewish history. [37]
VisualEditor , a project funded by the Wikimedia Foundation that allows for WYSIWYG -style editing on Wikipedia, is said to be aimed in part at closing the gender gap. [38] [39]
The "Wikipedia Teahouse" project was launched with the goal to provide a user-friendly environment for newcomers, with a particular goal of boosting women participation in Wikipedia. [40]
An early-2015 initiative to create a "women-only" space for Wikipedia editors was strongly opposed by Wikipedians. [41]

See also
WebPage index: 00131
Wikimania
Wikimania is the official annual conference of the Wikimedia Foundation . Topics of presentations and discussions include Wikimedia projects such as Wikipedia , other wikis, open-source software , free knowledge and free content, and social and technical aspects related to these topics.
Since 2011, the winner of the Wikipedian of the Year award has been announced at Wikimania.

Overview

Conferences

2005
Wikimania 2005 , the first Wikimania conference, was held from 4 to 8 August 2005 at the Haus der Jugend in Frankfurt , Germany, attracting about 380 attendees. [1]
The week of the conference included four "Hacking Days", from 1 to 4 August, when some 25 developers gathered to work on code and discuss the technical aspects of MediaWiki and of running the Wikimedia projects. The main days of the conference, despite its billing as being "August 4–8", were Friday to Sunday of that week, from 5 to 7 August. Presentation sessions were scheduled all day during those three days.
Keynote speakers included Jimmy Wales , Ross Mayfield , Ward Cunningham , and Richard Stallman (who spoke on "Copyright and community in the age of computer networks"). The majority of sessions and conversations were in English, although a few were in German.
Sponsors of the event included Answers.com , SocialText , Sun Microsystems , DocCheck ( de ) , [13] and Logos Group .

2006
Wikimania 2006 , the second Wikimania conference, was held from 6 to 8 August 2006 at Harvard Law School 's Berkman Center for Internet & Society in Cambridge in Massachusetts, United States, with about 400 [2] –500 [14] attendees.
Speakers included Jimmy Wales , Lawrence Lessig , Brewster Kahle , Yochai Benkler , Mitch Kapor , Ward Cunningham , and David Weinberger . Dan Gillmor held a citizen journalism unconference the day after.
Wales' plenary speech was covered by the Associated Press , and printed in numerous worldwide newspapers. He chronicled how the Foundation evolved from him "sitting in his pajamas" to the maturing corporate structure that it is now; the frequent push for quality over quantity; Wikipedia will be included on computers distributed through One Laptop per Child ; both Wikiversity and the creation of an advisory board were approved by the Foundation board; and that Wiki-WYG is in development thanks to private investment by Wikia, Inc. and Socialtext . [15]
Answers.com was the Wikimania 2006 patron sponsor, while Amazon.com , the Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard Law School , Nokia , WikiHow were Benefactors-level sponsors, Wetpaint , Ask.com , Yahoo! , and Socialtext were Friends-level sponsors, and IBM , FAQ Farm , Elevation Partners , One Laptop per Child , and the Sunlight Foundation were Supporter-level sponsors of the conference. [16]
Three other teams submitted hosting bids, for the cities of London, Milan , Boston, and Toronto ; only Toronto and Boston were passed to the second round of consideration by Wikimania organizers. In Toronto's case the event would have been hosted in the University of Toronto 's Bahen Centre .

2007
As announced on September 25, 2006, Wikimania 2007 , [17] the third Wikimania conference, was held from 3 to 5 August 2007 in Taipei , Taiwan . It was the first Wikimania event to hold a volunteer training course. [18]
Three other teams submitted hosting bids, for the cities of London, Alexandria , and Turin . Bids for Hong Kong, Singapore, Istanbul , and Orlando failed to make the shortlist. [19] The winner was announced on 25 September 2006. [17]
On August 3, 2007, New York Times reporter Noam Cohen reported: "The conference has attracted about 440 attendees, a little more than half from Taiwan , who want to immerse themselves for three days in the ideas and issues that come up making an entirely volunteer-written encyclopedia. [3] The workshops cover practical topics like how to collaborate peacefully; what importance to give 'expertise' in a project that is celebrated for allowing anyone to contribute, including anonymous editors". [3]

2008
Wikimania 2008 , the fourth Wikimania conference, was held from 17 to 19 July 2008 at the Bibliotheca Alexandrina in Alexandria , Egypt , with 650 attendees from 45 countries. [4] Alexandria was the location of the ancient Library of Alexandria . [20]
Three proposed cities were in the running at the end, the other two being Atlanta and Cape Town . Proposals for Karlsruhe , London and Toronto were also submitted, but later withdrew. There was a controversy about the conference, and even a call to boycott Wikimania 2008 because of Egypt's alleged censorship and imprisoning of bloggers during Mubarak's era. [21] [22] Mohamed Ibrahim, a graduate of Alexandria University who worked to bring the conference to Alexandria, told the BBC "I think we have the right to develop and to make freedom of expression on a larger scale." [23] One of his goals was to help grow Arabic Wikipedia which he contributes to since early 2005. An Egyptian cabinet minister spoke at the opening ceremonies on Mubarak's behalf. [20]

2009
Wikimania 2009 , the fifth Wikimania conference, was held from 26 to 28 August 2009 in Buenos Aires , Argentina, with 559 attendees. [24] The final selection was made between Buenos Aires, Toronto , Brisbane and Karlsruhe , with the final selection coming down to Buenos Aires and Toronto.

2010
Wikimania 2010 , [25] the sixth Wikimania conference, was held from 9 to 11 July at the Polish Baltic Philharmonic in Gdańsk , Poland. The starting day on July 9 overlapped with the end of the WikiSym academic conference. Bids for Amsterdam and Oxford for Wikimania 2010 lost by a small margin. [6]
It was the first conference which included a big focus on the cultural aspects of the hosting nation, particularly a concert of a philharmonic orchestra, celebrating the tenth anniversary of the death of the most important contemporary Polish composer Władysław Szpilman and the premiere of the film Truth in Numbers? . At the conference, Sue Gardner , executive director of the Wikimedia Foundation, said that the foundation's aim was to grow the number of visitors to Wikimedia sites from 371 million to 680 million a month, over the next five years.

2011
Wikimania 2011 , the seventh Wikimania conference, was held from 4 to 7 August 2011 in Haifa , Israel. [26] The conference venue was the Haifa Auditorium and adjoining Beit Hecht cultural center on Mount Carmel . Keynote speakers at the conference included Yochai Benkler , a fellow at the Berkman Center for Internet and Society at Harvard University and Joseph M. Reagle Jr. of MIT , author of Good Faith Collaboration: The Culture of Wikipedia . [27] Head of the Science and Technology Committee at the Knesset , Meir Sheetrit , also spoke at the conference, as did Yonah Yahav , the Mayor of Haifa . [28] One of the sponsors of the event was Haifa University . [29] The conference featured 125 sessions in five simultaneous tracks and was attended by 720 Wikimedians [7] from 56 different countries, [28] including some that have no diplomatic relations with Israel. [30]
In an interview with Haaretz , Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales noted that there had been boycott calls against the conference in Israel, as there had been against having it in Egypt in 2008. He said that despite conflicts among editors on the Israel-Palestinian conflict , and efforts by a pro-Israel group to recruit more Wikipedia editors, he believes Wikipedia articles largely remained neutral on the topic; he stated " NPOV is non-negotiable." [31]
Wikimedia Foundation executive director Sue Gardner spoke to the conference about the Western, male-dominated mind-set characterizing Wikipedia. [32] At the end of the August 7 closing ceremony, Jimmy Wales was presented with the first day cover of a special stamp edition issued by the Israeli postal service in honor of Wikipedia's 10th anniversary. [33] Among new projects discussed was collaboration with cultural institutions such as galleries, libraries, archives and museums. [34] After the conference, participants were offered a free tour of Haifa, Jerusalem , Nazareth or Acre . Shay Yakir, outgoing chairman of Wikimedia Israel, said that for Israel, holding the conference in Haifa was like hosting the Olympic Games. [35]

2012
Wikimania 2012 , the eighth Wikimania conference, was held from 12 to 15 July 2012 at The George Washington University in Washington, DC , United States, with over 1400 attendees from 87 countries. [36] In addition, the U.S. Department of State , in conjunction with Wikimania 2012, hosted a conference labeled Tech@State :Wiki.Gov which focused on "Collaborative knowledge and the use of wikis in the public sector". [37]
Prominent conference themes were the need to update the old and "dowdy" interface [38] with new Wikimedia tools in order to attract and retain more editors and to make Wikimedia sites more inviting and friendly to users, including especially women. [39] The Atlantic featured charts displayed at the conference which showed how the number of new administrators has dropped precipitously over the last few years. [40]
During the opening plenary founder Jimmy Wales commented on Wikipedia Blackout of January 2012, stating "When I go and visit government officials now, they’re a little bit afraid." However he reiterated Wikimedia’s commitment to political neutrality except regarding "the most serious things that directly impact our work." [41] [42] Wales agreed with keynote speaker Mary Gardiner , co-founder of the Ada Initiative , that Wikimedia had to do more to increase the number of women editors. She stated: "As a project of social change, even if it's not an activist project, the Wikipedia community has a responsibility both to its mission and to the people out there in the world to always be on a journey toward diversity — to increase the size of the umbrella of the world." [43] [44]

2013
Wikimania 2013 , the ninth Wikimania conference, was held from 7 to 11 August 2013 at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University , with 700 attendees from 88 countries. Candidate cities were London (UK), Bristol (UK), Naples (Italy) and Surakarta ( Indonesia ).
One of the parties for the event was held at the tallest building in Hong Kong, the International Commerce Centre . A closing party was held at Shek O Beach . Topics discussed included Wikipedia's gender disparity [45] and Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales ' proposal for Wikipedia to begin using Secure Socket Layer to encrypt its pages. [46]

2014
Wikimania 2014 , the tenth Wikimania conference, was held from 8 to 10 August 2014 [47] at the Barbican Centre in London , England, United Kingdom. Bidding officially opened in December 2012. London was chosen in May 2013 as the host city [48] with the only other bid coming from Arusha (Tanzania). The conference was held from 8–10 August 2014 at the Barbican Centre . [49] [50] The keynote address was given by Salil Shetty , Secretary General of Amnesty International . [51] The event was also the first Wikimania addressed by the Wikimedia Foundation's new Executive Director, Lila Tretikov . [51] The event was preceded by a two-day hackathon , and a series of fringe events. [51]
The conference had five tracks, alongside the annual 'State of the Wiki' round up. These were: Social Machines, The future of Education, Democratic Media, Open Scholarship, and Open Data. [ citation needed ] The conference was documented by the television program 60 Minutes in a program titled 'Wikimania'. [52]

2015
Wikimania 2015 , the eleventh Wikimania conference, was held from 15 to 19 July 2015 [53] at the Hotel Hilton Mexico City Reforma in Mexico City , Mexico . Bidding officially opened in December 2013.
Other candidate cities were: Arusha , northern Tanzania ; Bali , a province in Indonesia ; Cape Town , in South Africa ; Dar es Salaam , in Tanzania ; Esino Lario , province of Lecco , Lombardy , Italy , and Monastir , in Tunisia . [54] [55] Shortlisted were Mexico City, Cape Town and Monastir. [56] Mexico City was selected in April 2014. [54] [55]
The main venue was the Hilton Mexico City Reforma hotel. [57] [55] The organising entity was Wikimedia México, A.C., the Mexican local chapter representing the interests and goals of the Wikimedia Foundation . [58]

2016
Wikimania 2016 , the twelfth Wikimania conference, took place from 24 to 26 June 2016, with peripheral events from 21-28 June, in the mountain village of Esino Lario , Italy . [59] Esino Lario had bid unsuccessfully for the 2015 Wikimania. The venue is the first that is not a major city. During the event, it was announced that the Wikimedia Foundation's interim Executive Director, Katherine Maher , was appointed permanently.

2017
Wikimania 2017 , the thirteenth Wikimania conference, is scheduled to be held in Montreal , Canada , from 9 to 13 August 2017. [60]

See also
WebPage index: 00132
United States Congressional staff edits to Wikipedia
Some edits to the online encyclopedia Wikipedia by staff of the United States Congress have created controversy, notably in early to mid-2006. Several such instances, such as those involving Marty Meehan , Norm Coleman , Conrad Burns , [1] and Joe Biden , received significant media attention. [2] Others, such as those involving Gil Gutknecht , were reported but received less widespread coverage.
Biographical information on various politicians was edited by their own staff to remove undesirable information (including pejorative statements quoted, or broken campaign promises), add favorable information or "glowing" tributes, add negative information to opponents' biographies, or replace the article in part or whole by staff-authored biographies. [2]

Background
On January 27, 2006, The Sun of Lowell, Massachusetts , published an article entitled "Rewriting history under the dome" , which revealed the editing by Congressional staff members of Congressman Marty Meehan 's Wikipedia entry. [2] [3]
Further investigation by Wikipedia editors discovered over a thousand edits by IP addresses allocated to either the House of Representatives or the Senate . Wikipedia editors considered most of the edits were considered to be in good faith , but a minority of edits were considered improper. At least one of the addresses involved was prohibited from further editing. [4]

Incidents

Norm Coleman
Later in January 2006, Senator Norm Coleman 's chief of staff, Erich Mische , verified that Coleman's staffers had edited his page "to correct inaccuracies and delete information." [5] Mische stated: "What's to stop someone from writing in that Norm Coleman was 7 feet 10 inches, with green hair and one eye smack dab in the middle of his head? That's about as silly as this gets ... When you put 'edia' in there, it makes it sound as if this is a benign, objective piece of information." [5]
Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales said, "It appears to be a major rewrite of the article to make it more favorable." [5]

Joe Biden
The Wikipedia investigation found that Biden staffers had removed and modified descriptions of incidents of alleged plagiarism and had recast discussion of a possible Biden 2008 presidential candidacy in a more favorable light. [6] [7] In February 2006, The Washington Post quoted Biden spokesperson Norm Kurz as saying that the changes that were "made to Biden's site by this office were designed to make it more fair and accurate." [7]

Gil Gutknecht
On August 16, 2006, the Minneapolis-St. Paul Star Tribune reported that the office of Representative Gil Gutknecht tried twice—on July 24 and August 14, 2006—to remove a 128-word section in the Wikipedia article on him, replacing it with a more flattering 315-word entry from his official congressional biography. [3] [8] Gutknecht's office used the account "Gutknecht01" for the first edits on July 24, [9] which was then notified of Wikipedia policies against self-editing. For the second set of edits on August 16, his office used an anonymous Congressional IP address. [10]
Most of the removed text was about the 12-year term limit Gutknecht imposed on himself in 1995, as Gutknecht had run for re-election in 2006. He broke his promise and was subsequently defeated, though not specifically as a result of this pledge. A spokesman for Gutknecht did not dispute that his office tried to change his Wikipedia entry, but questioned the reliability of the encyclopedia. [3] [8]

U.S. Rep. David Davis and Tennessee Rep. Matthew Hill
In August 2007, U.S. Rep. David Davis 's press secretary Timothy Hill at first denied—and later acknowledged, during a second press interview with the Knoxville News Sentinel —that he had used a congressional office computer and resources to edit Wikipedia in June 2007. His edits were to delete blocks of information (termed as "blanking vandalism") about his employer and his brother Tennessee Representative Matthew Hill from their respective Wikipedia biographies. [11] The information that was deleted "concerned political contributions to both his brother and Davis by former King Pharmaceuticals CEO John Gregory , as well as other ties to the Gregory family." [12]

U.S. Rep Mike Pence
In August 2011, a writer for the Huffington Post discovered that Vice President Mike Pence , then an Indiana congressman, had been editing his own Wikipedia page to make the Congressman look more flattering. [13]

Edward Snowden
On August 2, 2013, an editor using an IP address linked to the U.S. Senate edited the Wikipedia page of whistleblower Edward Snowden to change his description from "dissident" to "traitor". [14]
On August 5, 2014, an editor using an IP address linked to the U.S. House of Representatives edited the Wikipedia page of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay , to describe Edward Snowden as an "American traitor." [15]

Laverne Cox
On August 21, 2014, an editor using an IP address linked to the U.S. House of Representatives edited the page on the Netflix original series Orange Is the New Black to describe actress Laverne Cox as a "real man pretending to be a woman." [16]

Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture
On December 9 and 10, 2014, an anonymous user using an IP address registered to the U.S. Senate edited the article on the Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture , removing a sentence characterizing the CIA's "enhanced interrogation techniques" as "torture." [17]

Congressional edits
The Wikimedia system has responded in at least three ways to questionable edits. The most obvious response is case-by-case, based on the "watch" button at the top of each article: A user who sets that switch can get emails when that article is changed. Another is an occasional (usually temporary) block. At least some of these are documented in Wikipedia:Congressional staffer edits .
For edits from IP addresses associated with the U.S. Congress, Wikimedians also created a Twitter feed to notify the world of any changes made from those addresses: @congressedits is an automated Twitter account created in 2014 that tweets changes to Wikipedia articles that originate from IP addresses belonging to the United States Congress. The changes are presumed to be made by the staffs of US elected representatives and senators.
Prior to the Twitter feed, the best information about what congressional staffers were editing was found in the present article on U.S. Congressional staff edits to Wikipedia and in the Wikipedia project page for congressional staffer edits , both of which are manually updated.

Proponents
In August 2014, the Cato Institute suggested that Congressional staffers should spend spare time editing Wikipedia. A panel hosted by the institute endorsed the idea so that congressional staffers could use their time to write neutral and informative articles about proposed legislation to better educate the public. Experts on the panel considered the two main obstacles to doing this as being skepticism towards Wikipedia and the history of biased editing from Congressional staffers. The Cato Institute suggested one way to overcome these issues would be for the staffers to create user accounts and user profile pages disclosing their connections with Congress. [18]
WebPage index: 00133
Church of Scientology editing on Wikipedia
A series of incidents in 2009 led to Church of Scientology -owned networks being banned from making edits to Wikipedia articles relating to Scientology . The Church of Scientology has long had a controversial history on the Internet , and has initiated campaigns to manipulate material and remove information critical of itself from the web. From early in Wikipedia's history , conflict arose within the topic of Scientology on the website. Disputes began in earnest in 2005, with users disagreeing about whether or not to describe Scientology as an abusive cult or religion . By 2006, disagreements concerning the topic of Scientology on Wikipedia had grown more specific. Wikipedia user and Scientology critic David Gerard commented to The Daily Telegraph in 2006 that some articles were neutral due to a requirement to reference stated facts. [3]
Revelations from software produced by Virgil Griffith in 2007 called WikiScanner made public the nature of edits on Wikipedia which were able to be traced directly back to Church of Scientology-controlled computers. CBS News and The Independent reported that edits by the Church of Scientology were made in attempts to remove criticism from the main article on the topic. The Times and Forbes noted that Scientologist computers were used to remove links between the Church of Scientology and a former anti-cult organization , since taken over by Scientology, the Cult Awareness Network . Der Spiegel reported that Wikiscanner revealed Scientology computers were used to promote Scientology's critical view of psychiatry , including adding links to the Scientology-founded Citizens Commission on Human Rights (CCHR) and to websites of other groups affiliated with Scientology. [4]
In January 2009, The Register reported on a case involving Scientology before Wikipedia's Arbitration Committee . The Arbitration Committee on Wikipedia is composed of a group of volunteers elected by the editing community to resolve especially difficult conflicts. Wikipedia administrators presented evidence during the case that Scientology-controlled computers were used to promote the organization, using multiple user accounts. One user going by the pseudonym "COFS" admitted this pattern of editing, and stated the edits from Scientology computers would continue. In May 2009, the Arbitration Committee decided to restrict editing from IP addresses belonging to the Church of Scientology, to prevent biased edits by editors within Church of Scientology-administered networks. The decision accorded Scientology-controlled IP addresses the same blockable status as open proxies on the site. A large number of Scientology critics were banned as well. The committee concluded that both sides had "gamed policy" and resorted to "battlefield tactics", with articles on living persons being the "worst casualties". [5] [6]
Arbitration Committee member Roger Davies wrote the majority of the decision, and commented to The New York Times that due to the controversial nature of the case, the decision was crafted so as not to focus directly upon any particular individual. [7] Wikipedia media contact Dan Rosenthal emphasized in a statement to ABC News that it was generally accepted procedure on the site to ban users that had violated policy intended to prevent them from promoting propaganda. [8] Wikimedia Foundation spokesman and head of communications Jay Walsh said to Bloomberg BusinessWeek the Arbitration decision was intended to help restore Scientology-related articles to an acceptable state on the site. [9] Wikimedia Germany spokesperson Catrin Schoneville stated to Computerwoche that the decision impacted the English Wikipedia , and noted it was unclear whether a similar ruling might be applied to the German Wikipedia . [10] Statements from Scientology spokeswoman Karin Pouw labelled the Arbitration ruling as a routine matter, and maintained there were still "gross inaccuracies" on the Scientology article. [9] In a statement to CNN , Pouw denied the presence of an organized campaign by the Church of Scientology to manipulate Wikipedia. [11] Scientology representative Tommy Davis emphasized to the St. Petersburg Times that users critical of the organization were also banned, and similarly denied that Scientology leadership arranged a campaign to manipulate entries on Wikipedia. [12]

Background
The Church of Scientology has a controversial history on the Internet . [13] It has been criticized for attempting to restrict freedom of speech on the Internet; this conflict has come to be known as Scientology versus the Internet , [14] [15] [16] or Scientology v. The Net . [17] [18] [19] The organization has attempted to manipulate and maintain power over its public image on the web. [13] [14] Early lawsuits involved in this dispute have included Religious Technology Center v. Netcom , [18] as well as Religious Technology Center v. F.A.C.T. Net . [20] Writing in his book, Cyber Rights: Defending Free Speech in the Digital Age , author Mike Godwin noted, "In one of the earliest widely publicized sets of cases involving intellectual property on the Net, the Church of Scientology has been exploring the uses of copyright and trade secret law when it comes to silencing its critics, many of them former members of the church." [18] The Guardian noted, "According to insiders and security experts, Scientologists have been conducting concerted campaigns for more than a decade to remove online information critical of the organisation." [13] In response to criticism over its actions on the Internet, Scientology has stated its efforts are aimed at defending the copyrights over its secretive spiritual documents. [14] [15]
Legal cases have involved a newsgroup focused on the topic called alt.religion.scientology , which revealed information from advanced Scientology methods including the Operating Thetan (OT) levels that describe the story of Xenu . [14] [15] In 1995, attorneys representing the Church of Scientology tried to get alt.religion.scientology removed from Usenet . [14] [16] This maneuver had the opposite impact for Scientology, serving to drive up popularity of alt.religion.scientology and resulting in a "declaration of war" from the hacker organization Cult of the Dead Cow . [16] Professor David S. Touretzky of the computer science department and Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania, is a critic of Scientology and proponent of freedom of speech on the Internet. [15] He noted the Scientology organization was, "trying to threaten freedom of speech on the Internet by making service providers legally responsible for their customers' speech." [15] Wendy M. Grossman , journalist and founder of The Skeptic , observed of Scientology's attempts to suppress information on the Internet,

History

Early conflict
Conflict within the topic of Scientology on Wikipedia arose early on from the website's beginnings. [22] Author Jonathan Zittrain noted in The Future of the Internet – And How to Stop It , his 2009 book published by Yale University Press , that "as Wikipedia grew it began to attract editors who had never crossed paths before, and who disagreed on articles they were simultaneously editing. One person would say that Scientology was a 'cult', the other would change that back to 'religion,' and the first would revert it back again." [22] In a 2005 article about Wikipedia for The Guardian , Charles Arthur noted individuals debated online, "whether Scientology should be classed as a cult", and he compared the "cultism" of Scientology to that of Wikipedia itself. [23] ABC News noted in a 2009 article, "Wikipedia disputes about Scientology have gone on since 2005." [8]
In 2006, conflict on Wikipedia within the topic of Scientology was drawn out over specific disagreements. [24] Journalist Alan Bjerga of McClatchy Newspapers reported in August 2006, "Wayne Saewyc, a Wikipedia spokesman, said debates on controversial topics can become incredibly time-consuming and sometimes maddening. In the entry covering Scientology, for example, contributors argued for nine months over whether the Scientologist method of childbirth should be called 'silent birth' or 'quiet birth. ' " [24] In an October 2006 article about Wikipedia, Paul Vallely of The Independent commented that, "Some pages seem to have been taken over by fanatics and special interest groups (try the Scientology page)." [25] Wikipedia user and Scientology critic David Gerard commented to The Daily Telegraph in October 2006 about the state of Scientology articles on the site, saying "he believes the Wikipedia entry is the most balanced and informative account to be found anywhere on the web." [3] Gerard commented on "NPOV" (neutral point of view) in the topic, "This is a good example of why NPOV is one of the most revolutionary things about Wikipedia. On the web you'll find a lot of Church of Scientology sites, and a lot of critics' sites, which are generally very bitter. On Wikipedia you have to be neutral, and you have to be able to reference your facts." [3]

WikiScanner revelations
The development of the WikiScanner software by Virgil Griffith in 2007 revealed changes made to Wikipedia articles by Scientology organization computers. [26] CBS News reported, "Many of the edits are predictably self-interested: PCs in Scientology officialdom were used to remove criticism in the church's Wikipedia entry." [27] The Independent noted, "Computers with IP addresses traced to the Church of Scientology were used to expunge critical paragraphs about the cult's world-wide operations." [28] The Times reported that a computer operated by the Church of Scientology was used to manipulate information in the Wikipedia article about the Cult Awareness Network , "A computer linked to the Church of Scientology's network was used to delete references to links between it and a group dubbed the 'Cult Awareness Network. ' " [29] Forbes noted, "Scientology officials appear to have removed critical comments from an anti-cult organization." [30]
Der Spiegel reported in more depth on some of the edits revealed by Wikiscanner to have been made on Wikipedia by computers associated with the Church of Scientology. From 2003 to 2007, 170 edits were made, a large proportion of which focused on Scientologist views critical of psychiatry . The article " Kurt Cobain " was edited by Scientologists in order to include a link to the Scientology-founded " Citizens Commission on Human Rights " (CCHR); [4] and an edit to the article put forth the notion that, "the singer's childhood Ritalin prescription led him to suicide". [31] Multiple edits involved adding links to webpages of organizations affiliated with Scientology. [4]
Reporting for Slate , journalist Michael Agger observed that an edit by a Scientology-associated IP address to a Scientology-related article on Wikipedia does not necessarily indicate such an edit was made by an employee of the organization. Virgil Griffith explained, "Technically, we don't know if it came from an agent of that company. However, we do know that edit came from someone with access to their network. If the edit occurred during working hours, then we can reasonably assume that the person is either an employee of that company or a guest that was allowed access to their network." [31]

Project Chanology
After the Scientology organization tried to remove a promotional film of Scientology featuring celebrity member Tom Cruise from the Internet, a group of web-based activists known as " Anonymous " focused efforts against Scientology. [13] Anonymous disrupted Scientology websites and spread anti-Scientologist materials online. [13] In July 2008, Messenger Newspapers noted, "A war between internet collective Anonymous and the Church of Scientology" had been "fought out largely on the battlefields of YouTube, Wikipedia and other websites", before emerging to become a movement with protests taking place in front of Scientology buildings. [32] Known as Project Chanology , the movement was "Organised from a Wikipedia-style website (editable by anyone) and through anonymous internet chat rooms". [33] The New York Times noted that through its actions related to attempts to remove the Tom Cruise video from the Internet, the Church of Scientology became a victim of the Streisand effect – a phenomenon whereby attempts to suppress information on the Internet end up having the opposite impact. [34]

Arbitration Committee ban
In January 2009, The Register reported on an ongoing case involving Scientology before Wikipedia's Arbitration Committee, "According to site administrators, several pro-Scientology accounts have been editing the site using Scientology-owned computers." [35] The Arbitration Committee on Wikipedia is composed of a group of volunteers elected by the editing community to resolve especially difficult conflicts. [36] [37] During the Arbitration case, the page about Scientology was modified by members of the organization. [35] [38] Scientology members had doctored entries in order to advertise for their cause. [39] The Register noted that one of the Wikipedia users admitted he had edited from computers operated by the Scientology organization, "One of these pro-Scientology editors – who once used the handle 'COFS' – has admitted as much. And he vows to continue editing Scientology articles from Scientology computers." [35] The Register quoted the "COFS" user as saying, "I am not going to leave voluntarily and I will continue to use a) my own computer, b) public computers, c) my wireless laptop, d) computers in the Church of Scientology and any station I please". [35] The Guardian cited The Register , and noted, "The technology news website The Register alleges the church has an organised operation to challenge internet criticism." [40]
In an effort to adhere to Wikipedia policy , Wikipedia's Arbitration Committee decided on May 28, 2009, [41] to restrict editing from Scientology organization IP addresses in order to prevent self-serving edits by editors within Church of Scientology-administered networks. [5] [42] The decision accorded Scientology-controlled IP addresses the same blockable status as open proxies on the site. [43] [44] [45] Ten members of the Arbitration Committee voted in favor of the ruling, [46] [47] [48] thus preventing such users from editing existing articles or creating new articles on the site. [49] Wikipedia previously frequently had banned individual users from the site, but not entire organizations. [50] The Arbitration decision came as the culmination of a "longstanding struggle" involving promoters of the organization and critics of its practices. [51] ABC News noted the conflict was "one of the longest-running disputes in Wikipedia's history". [8] The conflict involved over 400 articles within the topic of Scientology. [52] [53] It was the fourth such Arbitration Case before Wikipedia's Arbitration Committee on the topic of Scientology in the prior four years. [8] [54] [55] The case was drawn out for six months, prior to the decision of the Arbitration Committee. [56]
The committee ruled that the Scientology organization had a responsibility to "ensure appropriate use of its servers and equipment", [1] and pointed to a conflict of interest involved with edits from Scientology-associated computers. [57] The block on IP addresses includes those originating from the Church of Scientology's offices in Los Angeles , California ; [58] the organization additionally maintains headquarters in Clearwater , Florida. [12]
News.com.au reported, "According to evidence found by Wikipedia, multiple users with known scientology IP addresses had been 'openly editing (Scientology-related articles) from Church of Scientology equipment and apparently coordinating their activities'." [59] Sky News noted that the ban on Scientology computers applies to "Any computer addresses 'owned or operated' by the Church or associates linked to it". [60] Fox News Channel reported on the decision, "The encyclopedia's administrators found that Scientology computers had been repeatedly changing more than 400 pages related to the Church, deleting negative references and adding positive ones. The volume of changes was overwhelming administrators' ability to reverse them, hence the block." [61] Fox News Channel described the decision by the Arbitration Committee to block Scientology-controlled IP addresses as "an unprecedented move"; [61] The Guardian similarly noted, "whatever your feelings towards the world of Scientology, Wikipedia's decision to enact a blanket ban appears to be unprecedented." [13] InfoWorld wrote that edits by the Scientology organization were motivated by, "a massive organized effort to make the CoS look good and/or counter the relentless public criticism that has shadowed the organization since the earliest days of the Net." [62] Wired News reported that the ban on the Scientology organization was triggered by "repeated and deceptive editing of articles related to the controversial religion". [63] The Los Angeles Times noted that the ban stemmed from "the church's self-serving wiki-revisionism". [64] Der Spiegel noted that skeptics doubted the efficacy of the ban on the Scientology-controlled IP addresses, and commented on the likelihood of individuals creating multiple account names. [65]
A "host of anti-Scientologist editors" were topic-banned as well by the arbitration committee. [5] [42] The committee noted that an "aggravating factor" had been "the apparent presence of notable critics of Scientology, from several Internet organisations, apparently editing under their own names and citing either their own or each other's self-published material." [5] The committee concluded that both sides had "gamed policy" and resorted to "battlefield tactics" to create articles that were either "disparaging or complimentary", with articles on living persons being the "worst casualties". [5] [6]

Wikimedia comments
Arbitration Committee member Roger Davies wrote the majority of the decision in the Scientology case. [7] Davies commented in an interview with The New York Times , "It was obvious that this case was going to be controversial pretty much from the start. What we have done is we've really tried to make sure that we have not directed our fire at anyone in particular." [7] He noted there was a recurring pattern of disputed editing on controversial topics, "One of the problems we keep bumping into is what I call core belief issues — politics, religion, nationalism. Fringe faiths, fringe nationalities." [7]
Wikimedia Foundation spokesman and head of communications, Jay Walsh, [9] stated the decision was focused on reducing hostility within the subject and getting articles back to an appropriate state. [66] Walsh emphasized to Bloomberg BusinessWeek that edits which serve the interests of organizations are acceptable, but must be within the procedure of "adding valuable context" to articles. [9] In a statement to The Wall Street Journal , Walsh said, "This is about people reducing the hostility around the topic, and getting the articles back to a state where they make sense. I think the arbitration committee wants to send the message that Wikipedians have to be neutral on all accounts and all fronts. They don't take these situations lightly. They understand there's a perspective of: Are we censoring people or individuals? It's really about what can we do that's best for Wikipedia and the people who read it." [67] When asked by Ross Reynolds of National Public Radio affiliate KUOW-FM why the Arbitration decision included a "ban on IP addresses at the Church of Scientology", Walsh answered, "So the simple answer is that within looking at these computers and where these edits were coming from, the decision is that ultimately most of the edits within these ranges have been from single-user-accounts, people who have a single intention to change or move or in some cases remove information, which could be considered censorship, which is really something that doesn't work out well on Wikipedia. And this is an effort to kind of calm that effect, and to bring some neutrality and some quality back to these articles." [68]
Wikipedia media contact, Dan Rosenthal, stated to ABC News , "Scientology is up there among the most controversial on Wikipedia. You can compare it to articles on abortion, the presidential election and the like and there's been nowhere near the level of bitterness and fighting." [8] Rosenthal commented, "You could imply that there is a conflict of interest. Rather than two unrelated people getting together", promoters of the Scientology organization were "getting together, saying, 'Let's work together to make this a more pro-scientology article. ' " [8] Rosenthal noted that "it is standard practice to ban users found violating rules designed to keep people with an agenda from propagandizing." [69] [70] Rosenthal said that approximately 300 users are blocked or banned per day from Wikipedia in order to stop vandalism, or for violating regulations created to prevent propaganda. [71] Catrin Schoneville, spokesperson for Wikimedia Germany, stated to Computerwoche that the decision impacted the English Wikipedia version, and it was unknown whether a similar decision in the future would be applied to the German Wikipedia site. [10]

Scientology statements
Scientology spokeswoman, Karin Pouw , stated of the Wikipedia Arbitration decision, "Do Scientologists care what has been posted on Wikipedia? Of course. Some of it has been very hateful and erroneous." [72] Pouw commented, "We hope all this will result in more accurate and useful articles on Wikipedia." [60] She characterized the Arbitration Committee decision as "a routine internal action by Wikipedia to clean up its editing process". [73] Pouw emphasized, "More importantly is the fact that Wikipedia finally banned those who were engaged in unobjective and biased editing for the purposes of antagonism as opposed to providing accurate information." [2] [74] Pouw commented to ABC News , "People have conflicts on Wikipedia all the time, and it's obvious why — anybody can post." [8] Bloomberg Businessweek reported on Pouw's statements, "[Pouw] says her organization regularly monitors the Internet for wrong information about its belief system and members. After this ruling, Pouw says there remain 'gross inaccuracies' on the Scientology article on Wikipedia that she hopes will eventually be corrected. But for the time being, her group's ability to do that have been weakened." [9] In a statement to CNN , Pouw asserted "she is unaware of any coordinated effort to alter Wikipedia". [11]
Tommy Davis , a representative of the Scientology organization, stated to the St. Petersburg Times that members of the organization were attempting to correct what they perceived as factual inaccuracies: "The story that's being missed is there were people who were doing nonstop attacks on the church and using Wikipedia to do it. Those people have been banned." [12] Davis denied that Scientology leadership arranged a campaign to manipulate entries on Wikipedia. He asserted, "The church is huge ... Scientologists are going to say what they're going to say about their own religion." [12]

Reception
Writing in the 2009 book Scientology , contributor Mikael Rothstein commented positively about the Wikipedia article on " Xenu ", "The most sober and enlightening text about the Xenu myth is probably the anonymous article on Wikipedia..." [75] Writing about Scientology in her 2010 book Insiders' Guide to the Greater Tampa Bay Area , author Anne W. Anderson noted, "In May 2009, Wikipedia ... imposed a very rare ban on some computers that were repeatedly editing entries about Scientology." [76] In an August 2009 article for TIME , titled "A Brief History of Wikipedia", journalist Dan Fletcher noted, "In May, Wikipedia banned IP addresses owned by the Church of Scientology on the grounds that Scientologists were making edits that didn't suggest a 'neutral point of view' — the encyclopedia's golden rule." [77]
Stephen Colbert discussed the Arbitration decision on his comedy program The Colbert Report [78] Colbert commented, "Folks, I think this is the worst tragedy to befall Scientologists, since galactic overlord Xenu stacked billions of frozen people around volcanoes which he detonated with hydrogen bombs." [78] [79]
In an interview with ABC News , sociologist of the University of Alberta , Stephen A. Kent commented, "Historically, Scientology has tried to control what critics say about it. The Internet, however, has posed insurmountable problems regarding control and censorship and Wikipedia's action is just one of many disputes that have occurred when Internet users have pushed back. Scientology can't roll over and give up on this issue. It will continue to attempt to have its representation." [8] Evgeny Morozov of Foreign Policy wrote a blog post critical of the Arbitration decision, and stated, "I am no fan of Scientology, but I think that banning them from Wikipedia is going to be counterproductive. Unfortunately, it presents the Wikipedia admins/editors as a non-neutral group that opposes a particular set of ideas." [80] In an August 2010 article in The Guardian , journalists Rachel Shabi and Jemima Kiss observed, "Editors can remain anonymous when changing content, but conflicts are passed to Wikipedia's arbitration committee. Scientology was a regular source of conflict until the committee blocked editing by the movement." [81]

See also
WebPage index: 00134
Lsjbot
Lsjbot is an automated Wikipedia article-creating program, or internet bot , developed by Sverker Johansson for the Swedish Wikipedia . The bot primarily focuses on articles about living organisms.

History
The program is responsible for 2.7 million articles as of July 2014 [update] , two thirds of which appear in the Cebuano Wikipedia (the native language of Johansson's wife Smiley); the other third appear in the Swedish Wikipedia. The bot can produce up to 10,000 articles per day. Its operation has generated some criticism, from those who suggest the stub articles lack meaningful content and a human touch. [1] Worldwide attention was brought to the bot in July 2014 when a profile of it appeared in The Wall Street Journal . [2] The Sydney Morning Herald compared the bot to Phil Parker , allegedly the most published author in human history, who has published over 85,000 books, each of which is completed in less than an hour using computers. [3] Others compared the development to the recent announcement by the Associated Press that it planned to use bots to write articles. [4] Johansson countered attacks on his methods by noting that if the bot does not write articles, "otherwise they're mainly written by young, white, male nerds and reflect male interests." [5]
On June 15, 2013, the Swedish Wikipedia hit one million articles, the eighth language Wikipedia to reach that goal. The millionth article was created by Lsjbot – which at that point had created 454,000 articles, almost half the entire article count of the Swedish Wikipedia. [6] Lsjbot was also responsible for helping the Swedish Wikipedia become the second edition of Wikipedia to reach 2 million articles, which subsequently became the second largest edition of Wikipedia behind only its English counterpart .

Scope
According to its description page on the Swedish Wikipedia, [7] the program is devoted primarily to articles on all the world's living creatures. Completed projects include creating articles for all the world's recognised bird and fungal species. A future goal in the long term is to create articles for the million species that lack articles and which it is not realistic to expect that any human will create. The creation is now underway, and is expected to be completed during 2014. [ needs update ] All recognised animal species are done, and the plants are in progress. [ citation needed ]
Another bot project is to improve the Swedish Wikipedia's articles on the Philippines. The bot is able to create stub articles on Filipino towns using information from the Tagalog Wikipedia . [ citation needed ]
Johansson says he avoids having the bot use databases on topics where there is likely to be bias, such as present-day companies. [2]
Lsjbot is also active in the Cebuano and Waray Wikipedias, and has created the majority of the Wikipedia articles available in these languages. [ citation needed ] Since then, the Cebuano edition of Wikipedia overtook the German edition to become the third-largest edition of Wikipedia.
In autumn 2016, Lsjbot is concentrating on geography articles on Iceland for Swedish Wikipedia.
WebPage index: 00135
WikiScanner
WikiScanner (also known as Wikipedia Scanner ) was a publicly searchable database that linked millions of anonymous edits on Wikipedia to the organizations where those edits apparently originated, by cross-referencing the edits with data on the owners of the associated block of IP addresses (WikiScanner did not investigate edits made under a username .) It was created by Virgil Griffith and released on August 14, 2007. [1] [2] In his "WikiScanner FAQ" Griffith stated his belief that WikiScanner could help make Wikipedia more reliable for controversial topics. [3] He also indicated that he had never been employed by the Wikimedia Foundation and claimed his work on WikiScanner was "100% noncommercial." [3] On December 21, 2012, a research group from Fondazione Bruno Kessler ( it ) released an open-source clone of WikiScanner called WikiWatchdog . [4]
By April 2013, attempts to run "WikiScanner Classic" from wikiscanner.virgil.gr returned to the WikiScanner home page, which identified itself as "WIKIWATCHER.COM"; and invoking "WikiScanner2 Preview New! " led to a "failure to load the page due to timeout " error. [5]
In the end, Virgil Griffith says he had to take wikiscanner.gr down, as it was costing him "several thousand USD per month." [6]

Design
The tool's database contained 34,417,493 entries on anonymous edits (those by users who were not logged into Wikipedia) between February 7, 2002 and August 4, 2007. [3] Griffith stated that the database was constructed by compiling the anonymous edits included amongst the monthly public database dumps of Wikipedia. He claimed to have connected the organizations to their IP address with the assistance of the IP2Location , and through comparison had found "187,529 different organizations with at least one anonymous Wikipedia edit." [3]
WikiScanner only worked on anonymous edits that have provided an IP address, not edits by anyone logged-in under a username. It could also not distinguish between edits made by authorized users of an organization, unauthorized intruders, or users of public-access computers that may have been using an organization's network. In discussing edits made from computers in the Vatican , computer expert Kevin Curran was quoted by the BBC as saying that it was "difficult to determine if the person was an employee or if they had maliciously hacked into the Vatican system and were 'spoofing' the IP address." [7]
The WikiScanner FAQ noted that edits cannot be positively attributed to representatives of a company, only to a computer logged into a company's network. The FAQ goes on to say there is no guarantee that an edit was made by an authorized user rather than an intruder. [3] The likelihood of such intrusions depend upon an organizations' network security, organizations such as the Vatican Library have public access terminals or networks. [8]

Media coverage and reaction
According to Wired , which first broke the story on 13 August 2007, most edits were "fairly innocuous". [2] Wired asked users to submit "The most shameful Wikipedia spin jobs", [9] which generated many news stories about organizations, such as the Al-Jazeera network, Fox News Channel , staffers of Democratic Senator Robert Byrd and the CIA , that had edited Wikipedia articles.
On August 21, 2007, satirist Stephen Colbert who had long featured stories about Wikipedia and its " truthiness " on his program mocked WikiScanner creator Virgil Griffith 's ambivalent stance on anonymity on Wikipedia, declaring it the "right" of corporations and governments to participate in the democratic process of deciding what is and is not true on Wikipedia. [10]
According to the BBC from August 15, 2007, WikiScanner found that some editorial contributions to Wikipedia had originated from computers operated by the Diebold company, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee as well as the Vatican . [11] The Times reported that an IP address at the BBC had made edits to Wikipedia. [12] The BBC's Head of Interactive News, Pete Clifton published a blog on August 16 acknowledging the earlier omission, but characterized the BBC's edits of Wikipedia in this manner: "Some of the examples are pretty unedifying, but for every dodgy one there are many, many more uncontroversial edits where people at the BBC have added information or changed a detail in good faith". [13]
The Associated Press reported on August 15, 2007 that computers owned by the Church of Scientology had been used to remove criticism from articles about Scientology on Wikipedia, including edits to the article Cult Awareness Network . The Associated Press admitted that edits to Wikipedia had been made anonymously from its own computers, though the news organization did not describe the content of the edits. [14] In its story on WikiScanner, the New York Times too admitted that edits had been made from its own computers. [15] Wired.com reported the office of former Republican Senator Conrad Burns had also edited critical passages. [2]
According to Maltastar.com from August 16, WikiScanner has shown edits by other large organizations, including Amnesty International , Apple Inc. , ChevronTexaco , Coca Cola , the British Conservative Party , Dell Computers , EA Games , Exxon Mobil , the FBI , The Guardian , Microsoft , MySpace , the National Rifle Association , Nestlé , News of the World , the New York Times , the Government of Portugal , the US Republican Party , Reuters , Sony , the United Nations , Walmart , and a dog breeding association. [16] The Canadian television network CTV reported edits by other organizations including Disney and the Canadian government . [17]
On August 24, 2007, headline reports in the Australian print and electronic media were made of anonymous edits to Wikipedia by staff in the Australian Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet in order to remove potentially damaging details from articles related to the Government . Information found using WikiScanner showed 126 anonymous edits from the Department to articles on sometimes controversial issues and on government ministers. [18] [19] The Department responded by saying that Prime Minister John Howard did not direct his staff to modify the articles, [20] and later that day the head of the Department said that the changes were not made by anyone in his department or the Prime Minister's office, but by another user with the same Internet Service Provider (ISP) . [21] Wikiscanner also identified Australian Department of Defence (DoD) employees as having made over 5,000 edits, prompting an unprecedented announcement from the DoD to block Defence staff from editing Wikipedia in case edits were interpreted as official comment. [22] [23]
On August 26, 2007, The Boston Globe in “a Globe Editorial” published an article about Wikipedia, described as a “democratic fountain of facts” and related “WikiScanner” technology, reporting as among those companies found to have edited Wikipedia were Pepsi , Wal-Mart , ExxonMobil and Royal Dutch Shell , in which specific case "In 2005, someone using a computer inside Royal Dutch Shell, the oil company, rewrote a benign description of the company, claiming it is 'run by a group of geriatrics who find it impossible to make timely decisions and have an aversion to highly-profitable ventures.'” [24] The WikiScanner story was also covered by The Independent , which stated that many "censorial interventions" by editors with vested interests on a variety of articles in Wikipedia had been discovered. [25]
On December 18, 2007, Fortune magazine mentioned the use of WikiScanner in the 96th of its list of the "101 Dumbest Moments in Business" in 2007 saying, "A Washington Post employee is found to have changed a reference to the owner of a rival paper from Philip Anschutz to Charles Manson , while someone at The New York Times added the word "jerk" 12 times to the entry on George W. Bush." [26]
During the period of May 27 to June 4, 2008, edits originating from an IP address belonging to Industry Canada were made to the Jim Prentice (Federal Minister of Industry ) article on Wikipedia. The edits included the removal of references to new copyright legislation and the addition of two passages about Prentice's recent accomplishments as Minister of Industry. [27] [28]

Wikipedia reaction
Wikipedia co-founder [29] Jimmy Wales spoke enthusiastically about WikiScanner, noting in one source that "It brings an additional level of transparency to what's going on at Wikipedia" and stating in another that it was "fabulous and I strongly support it." [14] [30] The BBC quoted an unnamed Wikipedia spokesperson's praise for the tool in taking transparency "to another level" and preventing "an organisation or individuals from editing articles that they're really not supposed to." [11] In responding to the edits from the Canadian Ministry of Industry, spokesman for the Wikimedia Foundation Jay Walsh noted that neutrality of language and guarding against conflicts of interest are two of the central pillars of Wikipedia, adding that "The edits which should be trusted would come from people who don't possess a conflict of interest, in this case, it would be worthwhile saying that if someone is making edits from a computer within the government of Canada … if it was someone within that ministry, that would theoretically constitute a conflict of interest." [31] Wales has speculated on a possible warning to anonymous editors: "When someone clicks on 'edit,' it would be interesting if we could say, 'Hi, thank you for editing. We see you're logged in from The New York Times . Keep in mind that we know that, and it's public information' … That might make them stop and think." [15]

See also
WebPage index: 00136
Deletionpedia
Deletionpedia is an online archive wiki containing articles deleted from the English Wikipedia . Its version of each article includes a header with more information about the deletion such as whether a speedy deletion occurred, where the deletion discussion about the article can be found and which editor deleted the article. The original Deletionpedia operated from February to September 2008. The site was restarted under new management in December 2013. [1]

Description
The site is based on MediaWiki . [2] [3] The site functions as something of a "wikimorgue"; it automatically collects articles deleted from Wikipedia. [4]
In addition to categories preserved from Wikipedia, Deletionpedia has its own categories for articles, based upon the deletion criteria. Pages are organized by the month in which they were deleted, by the number of editors that had worked on a page and by the length of time the article had existed on Wikipedia. [5]
Deletionpedia states that it avoids hosting deleted pages that are copyright violations , pages with serious libel problems, pages whose full revision history is still available on Wikipedia's sister sites , and pages which set out to offend others. [6]
Articles preserved by Deletionpedia were deleted from Wikipedia for a variety of reasons, from "being not notable" to "manipulation by political and business interests". [7] Since the site was read-only, it sought no donations, suggesting instead that supporters donate to mySociety or to the Wikimedia Foundation . [8]

Version 1
The original Deletionpedia collected about 63,000 articles, which were deleted from Wikipedia between February and September 2008. Nearly 2000 pages were over 1000 days old before they were deleted.

Downtime issues
A message appeared on April 5, 2008, stating:

Demise
The last viewable log the site made of Wikipedia was taken on 14 June 2012 of Anime Festival Wichita . [11]
The original content is still available to view online. [10]

Reception
The Wall Street Journal cited it as a response to the culture clash that exists on Wikipedia between deletionists and inclusionists . [12] The Industry Standard calls it “a [would-be] fine research project for sociology students to study what groupthink does when applied to a community-built compendium of knowledge”. [13] Shortly thereafter, the Industry Standard again turned its attention to Deletionpedia, reporting that deletion of the article in Wikipedia about Deletionpedia was itself under discussion, suggesting that the article was not being considered for deletion based on “insignificance of the site” but rather “due to perceived criticism of Wikipedia itself”. [14] Deletionpedia also made news at De Telegraaf , the website for the largest daily morning Dutch language newspaper, [15] and The Inquirer , a British technology tabloid website. [16]
The site has been more fully explored by Ars Technica [17] in an article that not only describes aspects of the website but mentions the controversy over deleting the Wikipedia article on Deletionpedia.

Version 2
The website was reregistered by a new owner, Kasper Souren, and began operation anew in December 2013. [18] As of May 2016, it had amassed 29,156 content pages. [19]

Other wikis
There are similar projects for other Wikipedia languages, for example:

See also
WebPage index: 00137
List of wikis
This page contains a list of notable websites that use a wiki model. These websites will sometimes use different software in order to provide the best content management system for their users' needs, but they all share the same basic editing and viewing website model.

Table

See also
WebPage index: 00138
Semantic wiki
A semantic wiki is a wiki that has an underlying model of the knowledge described in its pages. Regular, or syntactic, wikis have structured text and untyped hyperlinks . Semantic wikis, on the other hand, provide the ability to capture or identify information about the data within pages, and the relationships between pages, in ways that can be queried or exported like a database [1] [2] through semantic queries .
Semantic wikis were first proposed in the early 2000s, and began to be implemented seriously around 2005. As of 2013, the best-known semantic wiki software, and the only one with significant usage on public websites, is Semantic MediaWiki .

Key characteristics

Formal notation
The knowledge model found in a semantic wiki is typically available in a formal language , so that machines can process it into an entity-relationship or relational database .
The formal notation may be included in the pages themselves by users, as in Semantic MediaWiki , or it may be derived from the pages or the page names or the means of linking. For instance, using a specific alternative page name might indicate that a specific type of link was intended.
Providing information through a formal notation allows machines to calculate new facts (e.g. relations between pages) from the facts represented in the knowledge model.

Semantic Web compatibility
The technologies developed by the Semantic Web community provide one basis for formal reasoning about the knowledge model that is developed by importing this data. However, there are also a wide array of technologies that work on ERD or relational data.

Example
Imagine a semantic wiki devoted to food . The page for an apple would contain, in addition to standard text information, some machine-readable or at least machine-intuitable semantic data. The most basic kind of data would be that an apple is a kind of fruit —what's known as an inheritance relationship. The wiki would thus be able to automatically generate a list of fruits, simply by listing all pages that are tagged as being of type "fruit." Further semantic tags in the "apple" page could indicate other data about apples, including their possible colors and sizes, nutritional information and serving suggestions, and so on.
If the wiki exports all this data in RDF or a similar format, it can then be queried in a similar way to a database—so that an external user or site could, for instance, request a list of all fruits that are red and can be baked in a pie.

History
In the 1980s, before the Web began, there were several technologies to process typed links between collectively maintained hypertext pages, such as NoteCards , KMS and gIBIS . Extensive research was published on these tools by the collaboration software , computer-mediated communication , hypertext , and computer supported cooperative work communities.
The first known usage of the term "Semantic Wiki" was a Usenet posting by Andy Dingley in January 2001. [3] Its first known appearance in a technical paper was in a 2003 paper by Austrian researcher Leo Sauermann. [4]
Many of the existing semantic wiki applications were started in the mid-2000s, including ArtificialMemory [5] (2004), Semantic MediaWiki (2005), Freebase (2005) and OntoWiki (2006).
June 2006 saw the first meeting dedicated to semantic wikis, the "SemWiki" workshop, co-located with the European Semantic Web Conference in Montenegro . [6] This workshop ran annually until 2010. [7]
The site DBpedia , launched in 2007, though not a semantic wiki, publishes structured data from Wikipedia in RDF form, which enables semantic querying of Wikipedia's data.
In March 2008, Wikia , the world's largest wiki farm , made the use of Semantic MediaWiki available for all their wikis on request, thus allowing all the wikis they hosted to function as semantic wikis. [8] However, since upgrading to version 1.19 of MediaWiki in 2013, they have stopped supporting Semantic MediaWiki for newly requests on the basis of performance problem. [9]
In July 2010, Google purchased Metaweb , the company behind Freebase. [10]
In April 2012, work began on Wikidata , a collaborative, multi-language store of data, whose data could then be used within Wikipedia articles, as well as by the outside world.

Semantic wiki software
There are a number of wiki applications that provide semantic functionality. Some standalone semantic wiki applications exist, including OntoWiki . Other semantic wiki software is structured as extensions or plugins to standard wiki software. The best-known of these is Semantic MediaWiki , an extension to MediaWiki . Another example is the SemanticXWiki [11] extension for XWiki .
Some standard wiki engines also include the ability to add typed, semantic links to pages, including PhpWiki and Tiki Wiki CMS Groupware .
Freebase , though not billed as a wiki engine, is a web database with semantic-wiki-like properties.

Common features
Semantic wikis vary in their degree of formalization. Semantics may be either included in, or placed separately from, the wiki markup. Users may be supported when adding this content, using forms or autocompletion , or more complex proposal generation or consistency checks. The representation language may be wiki syntax, a standard language like RDF or OWL , or some database directly populated by the tool that withdraws the semantics from the raw data. Separate versioning support or correction editing for the formalized content may also be provided. Provenance support for the formalized content, that is, tagging the author of the data separately from the data itself, varies.
What data can get formalized also varies. One may be able to specify types for pages, categories or paragraphs or sentences (the latter features were more common in pre-web systems). Links are usually also typed. The source, property and target may be determined by some defaults, e.g. in Semantic MediaWiki the source is always the current page.
Reflexivity also varies. More reflexive user interfaces provide strong ontology support from within the wiki, and allow it to be loaded, saved, created and changed.
Some wikis inherit their ontology entirely from a pre-existing strong ontology like Cyc or SKOS , while, on the other extreme, in other semantic wikis the entire ontology is generated by users.
Conventional, non-semantic wikis typically still have ways for users to express data and metadata, typically by tagging, categorizing and using namespaces . In semantic wikis, these features still typically exist, but integrated these with other semantic declarations, and sometimes with their use restricted.
Some semantic wikis provide reasoning support, using a variety of engines. Such reasoning may require that all instance data comply with the ontologies.
Most semantic wikis have simple querying support (such as searching for all triples with a certain subject, predicate, object), but the degree of advanced query support varies; some semantic wikis provide querying in standard languages like SPARQL , while others instead provide a custom language. User interface support to construct these also varies. Visualization of the links especially may be supported.
Many semantic wikis can display the relationships between pages, or other data such as dates, geographical coordinates and number values, in various formats, such as graphs, tables, charts, calendars and maps.

See also
WebPage index: 00139
History of wikis
The history of wikis is generally dated from 1994, when Ward Cunningham gave the name " WikiWikiWeb " to the knowledge base, which ran on his company's website at c2.com, and the wiki software that powered it. c2.com thus became the first true wiki , or a website with pages and links that can be easily edited via the browser , with a reliable version history for each page. He chose "WikiWikiWeb" as the name based on his memories of the " Wiki Wiki Shuttle " at Honolulu International Airport , and because "wiki" is the Hawaiian word for "quick". [1]
Wiki software has some conceptual origins in the version control and hypertext systems used for documentation and software in the 1980s, and some actualized origins in the 1970s "Journal" feature of NLS . Its distant ancestors include Vannevar Bush 's proposed " memex " system in 1945, the collaborative hypertext database ZOG in 1972, the NoteCards system from Xerox , the Apple hypertext system HyperCard . As was typical of these earlier systems, Cunningham's motive was technical: to facilitate communication between software developers.
Many alternative wiki applications and websites appeared over the next five years. In the meantime, the first wiki, now known as "WardsWiki", evolved as features were added to the software and as the growing body of users developed a unique "wiki culture". By 2000, WardsWiki had developed a great deal of content outside its original stated purpose, which led to the spinoff of content into sister sites, most notably MeatballWiki .
The website Wikipedia , a free content encyclopedia, was launched in January 2001, and quickly became the most popular wiki, which it remains to this day. Its meteoric rise in popularity (it entered the top ten most popular sites in 2007) played a large part in introducing wikis to the general public. [ citation needed ] There now exist at least hundreds of thousands of wiki websites, and they have become increasingly prevalent in corporations and other organizations. [ citation needed ]

Hypertext editing pre-1994
A distant precursor of the wiki concept was Vannevar Bush 's vision of the " memex ," a microfilm reader which would create automated links between documents. In a 1945 essay in Atlantic Monthly titled " As We May Think ," Bush described an imaginary future user interface: "Before him are the two items to be joined, projected onto adjacent viewing positions… The user taps a single key, and the items are permanently joined… Thereafter, at any time, when one of these items is in view, the other can be instantly recalled merely by tapping a button below the corresponding code space. Moreover, when numerous items have been thus joined together to form a trail, they can be reviewed in turn…" [2] This vision, though it has been described as predicting the World Wide Web , resembles wikis more than the web in one important way: the system being described is self-contained, not a loose network.
In 1972 Kristo Ivanov published a PhD dissertation on Quality-control of information , [3] containing a theoretical basis for what corresponds to the wiki-idea, in terms of systemic social interaction. Information turns into knowledge as a net of contributions and negotiations converge about a core concept, or entity. The emphasis is on a dynamically documented "agreement in the context of maximum possible disagreement," akin to the discussions in talk pages and the results of view history of Wikipedia.

Pre-World-Wide-Web hypertext systems
An indirect precursor of the wiki concept was the ZOG multi-user database system, developed in 1972 by researchers at Carnegie-Mellon University . The ZOG interface consisted of text-only frames, each containing a title, a description, a line with standard ZOG commands, and a set of selections ( hypertext links) leading to other frames.
Two members of the ZOG team, Donald McCracken and Robert Akscyn , spun off a company from CMU in 1981 and developed an improved version of ZOG called Knowledge Management System (KMS). KMS was a collaborative tool based on direct manipulation , permitting users to modify the contents of frames, freely intermixing text, graphics and images, any of which could be linked to other frames. Because the database was distributed and accessible from any workstation on a network, changes became visible immediately to other users, enabling them to work concurrently on shared structures (documents, programs, ...). [4]
Three notable hypertext-based systems emerged in the 1980s, that may have been inspired by ZOG, KMS and/or one another: the NoteCards system, developed in 1984 and released by Xerox in 1985; Janet Walker's Symbolics Document Examiner , created in 1985 for the operation manuals of Symbolics computers; and Bill Atkinson 's WildCard application, on which he began work in 1985, and which was released in 1987 as HyperCard . [4] Ward Cunningham has stated, that the wiki idea was influenced by his experience using HyperCard: he was shown the software by fellow programmer Kent Beck , before its official release (it was still called "WildCard" at the time), and, in his words, was "blown away" by it. [5] [6]
Cunningham used HyperCard to make a stack holding three kinds of information: ideas, people who hold ideas, and projects where people share ideas. (He would later use this same architecture for the Patterns, People and Projects listed on the front page of his original wiki, the WikiWikiWeb.) Cunningham made a single card that would serve for all uses. It had three fields: Name, Description and Links. Cunningham configured the system so that links could be created to cards that didn't exist yet; creating such a link would in turn create a new blank card. [5]

The World Wide Web
In 1990, Tim Berners-Lee of CERN built the first hypertext client, which he called World Wide Web (it was also a Web editor), and the first hypertext server (info.cern.ch). In 1991 he posted a short summary of the World Wide Web project on the alt.hypertext newsgroup , marking the debut of the Web as a publicly available service on the Internet.
Early adopters of the World Wide Web were primarily university-based scientific departments or physics laboratories. In May 1992 appeared ViolaWWW , a graphical browser providing features such as embedded graphics, scripting, and animation. However, the turning point for the World Wide Web was the introduction of the Mosaic graphical browser in 1993, which gained wide popularity due to its strong support of integrated multimedia. In April 1994, CERN agreed that anyone could use the Web protocol and code for free.

WikiWikiWeb and the birth of wikis (1994–2001)

WikiWikiWeb, the first wiki
Ward Cunningham started developing the WikiWikiWeb in 1994 as a supplement to the Portland Pattern Repository , a website containing documentation about Design Patterns , a particular approach to object-oriented programming . [6]
The WikiWikiWeb was intended as a collaborative database, in order to make the exchange of ideas between programmers easier; it was dedicated to "People, Projects and Patterns." [6] Cunningham wrote the software to run it using the Perl programming language. He considered calling the software "quick-web," but instead named it using the Hawaiian word "wiki-wiki," which means "quick-quick" or "very quick," [6] based on his memory of the Wiki Wiki Shuttle at Honolulu International Airport .
Cunningham installed a prototype of the software on his company Cunningham & Cunningham 's website c2.com. [7] On March 16, 1995, when the site was functioning, Cunningham sent to a colleague the following email:
Cunningham dates the official start of WikiWikiWeb as March 25, 1995. [6] On May 1, 1995 he sent an email about the website to a number of programmers, which caused an increase in participation. [6] This note was posted to the "Patterns" listserv , a group of software developers gathered under the name " The Hillside Group " to develop Erich Gamma 's use of object-oriented patterns. Cunningham had noticed that the older contents of the listserv tended to get buried under the more recent posts, and he proposed instead to collect ideas in a set of pages which would be collectively edited. Cunningham’s post stated: "The plan is to have interested parties write web pages about the People, Projects and Patterns that have changed the way they program." He added: "Think of it as a moderated list where anyone can be moderator and everything is archived. It's not quite a chat, still, conversation is possible." [8]
The site was immediately popular within the pattern community. [6]

CamelCase and internal links
Among Cunningham's innovations in creating WikiWikiWeb was the ability to easily link internally between pages; something that was often cumbersome to do in previous intranet and document management systems. Cunningham's solution to this was to automatically link any text expressed in CamelCase ; including text for which a corresponding page didn't yet exist.
This CamelCase convention was used by most wiki software for the first few years of wikis' existence. In 2001, the software UseModWiki , which at the time was in use on Wikipedia , switched to allow internal links to be done using standard spelling and double square bracket instead, in order to improve Wikipedia's usability. [9] This square bracket syntax has since become more of a default convention for internal links within wiki software in general.

Release of the Wiki Base software
Ward Cunningham wrote a version of his wiki software meant for public usage, called "Wiki Base". In his announcement, he wrote: "WikiWikiWeb is almost public. Actually, a pretty good clone of it is public at: http://c2.com/cgi/wikibase . I've translated almost all of the actual wiki script into HyperPerl , a wiki-literate programming system that I think you will like." Visitors were requested to register on the wiki before they took the Wiki Base code. [6] Cunningham expected users to fold changes back into his editable version, but those who implemented changes generally chose to distribute the modified versions on their own sites. [6]
Alternate applications for wikis began to emerge, usually imitating the look-and-feel of WikiWikiWeb/Wiki Base; such applications were originally known as "WikiWikiClones." The first one was most likely created by IBM programmer Patrick Mueller, who wrote his in the REXX language, even before Wiki Base was released. [6]

Early wiki websites for software development
Inspired by the example of the WikiWikiWeb, programmers soon started several other wikis to build knowledge bases about programming topics. Wikis became popular in the free and open-source software ( FOSS ) community, where they were used for collaboratively discussing and documenting software. [ citation needed ] However, being used only by specialists, these early software-focused wikis failed to attract widespread public attention. [10]

Growth and innovations in WikiWikiWeb from 1995 to 2000
The WikiWikiWeb website approximately doubled in size every year 1995 to 2000, with disk usage rising from around 2 megabytes in 1995 to around 60 megabytes at the end of 2000. [6] During that time, various innovations were put in place, many suggested by users, to help with navigation and editing. These included: [6]
"ThreadMode" was defined as "a form of discussion where our community holds a conversation." It consists of a series of signed comments added down the page in chronological order. Ward Cunningham generally frowned on ThreadMode, writing: "Chronological is only one of many possible organizations of technical writing and rarely the best one at that." [11]
Cunningham encouraged contributors to "refactor" (rewrite) the ThreadMode discussions into DocumentMode discourse. In practice many pages started out at the top in DocumentMode and degenerated into ThreadMode further down. When ThreadMode became incomprehensible the result was called "ThreadMess." [12] (In most modern wikis the conflict between these two modes has been resolved by putting all document text on the main page of an article, and all discussion text on a talk page.)
The use of categories was proposed by user Stan Silver on August 27, 1996. [13] His initial post suggested: "If everyone adds a category and topic to their page, then the category and topic pages themselves can be used as automatic indexes into the pages." [14] Initially Silver had proposed both categories and topics: categories denoted the specific nature of the page's subject (a book, a person, a pattern), while topics denoted the theme of the page (Java, extreme programming, Smalltalk). However, people ignored this separation, and topics were collapsed into the categories. [13]
The "ChangeSummary" option began as an aid to telling which changes added interesting new content, and which were just minor adjustments of spelling, punctuation, or correction of web links. It started when some users began taking the RecentChanges page, annotating each line with a brief description of each change, and posting the result to the ChangeSummary page. This practice was highly time-consuming and rapidly petered out, but was replaced by the "MinorEdit/RecentEdits" feature, designed to reduce the RecentChanges clutter. [6]

Tensions within WikiWikiWeb and the creation of sister sites
Between early 1998 and the end of 2000 participation in WikiWikiWeb snowballed, and the disk space consumed by wiki pages more than quadrupuled. With increased participation tensions began to appear.
In 1998 proponents of Extreme Programming showed up on the site and started posting comments about Extreme Programming on most of the pages related to software development. This annoyed a number people who wanted to talk about patterns, leading to the tag "XpFreeZone," which was put onto pages as a request not to talk about ExtremeProgramming on that page. Eventually most of the DesignPatterns people left to discuss patterns on their own wikis, and WikiWikiWeb began to be referred to as "WardsWiki" instead of the "PortlandPatternRepository." [6]
Around the summer of 1999, user Sam Gentile posted the comment "I'm through here" on his user page, and began systematically removing his text from all pages on WikiWikiWeb that he had contributed to. Gentile worked at Microsoft and had been hurt by what he perceived as anti-Microsoft bias on WikiWikiWeb. His deletions led to controversy about whether he had the right to remove his own material, and whether others had the right to put it back in (which some began to do). [ citation needed ] This event became referred to as the "WikiMindWipe." [15]
In April 2000, four WikiWikiWeb users independently tried to reduce the amount of text on the site via a large number of deletions. They mainly tried to delete material that was related to wikis and not software design patterns. [16] They considered this material to be dead weight, and would have preferred to see it all replaced by concise guidance to newcomers. Contributors who disagreed with these deletions began copying all of the deleted text back in again. A vote was taken on the issue, and it was proposed that any major reductions should be pre-announced, with an opportunity for response before action was taken. [17]
The longer-term result of the deletions was the formation of WikiWikiWeb "sister sites" later in 2000. Sunir Shah created a wiki called MeatballWiki , intended strictly for wiki-based documentation and discussions. A few months later, Richard Drake created the WhyClublet (or "Why?") wiki to host discussion of Christian issues, and Peter Merel created GreenCheeseWiki and The Reform Society to host, respectively, whimsical and political pages. Earle Martin subsequently created a catch-all for C2 off-topic pages called TheAdjunct. Many pages were moved from WikiWikiWeb to these alternative sites, with a stub of the moved page left on the WikiWikiWeb, containing a link to the new page and the message "This page exists only on SisterSites."
In 2001, Cunningham and user Bo Leuf published a book, The Wiki Way , which distilled the lessons learned during the collective experience of the first wiki . [18]

Other wiki websites, 1999–2000
While many early wiki websites were devoted to the development of open source software, one early wiki was created by the FoxPro user community. The FoxPro Wiki was founded in 1999 by Steven Black and evolved into a popular site with many pages. [19]
World66 was a Dutch company which tried to transform the open content idea into a profitable business. The website was founded in 1999 by Richard and Douwe Osinga, and contains travel-related articles covering destinations around the world.
A wiki forum was created in 1999 for discussion of the newly created PhpWiki software. This became one of the larger software-related wikis. Sensei's Library , a wiki dedicated to discussion of the game of Go , was created by Morten G. Pahle and Arno Hollosi in October 2000. For its first few years of operation, it was one of the largest and most active wikis outside Wikipedia.

Other wiki applications, 1997–2000
Clones of the WikiWikiWeb software began to be developed as soon as Ward Cunningham made the Wiki Base software available online. One of the early clones was CvWiki , developed in 1997 by Peter Merel, which was the first wiki application to have functioning transclusion , backlinks , and "WayBackMode."
JWiki [20] (short for JavaWiki), released in 1997, was the first implementation of WikiWikiWeb in the Java language, and the first to be back-ended by a database. It was developed by Ricardo Clements, a former co-worker of Cunningham's.
Another early wiki engine was JosWiki, developed by an international group of Java programmers who were trying to create a free and open "Java Operating System" (JOS). [21]
TWiki was created in Perl by Peter Thoeny in 1998, based on JosWiki. TWiki was aimed at large corporate intranets . It stored data in plain text files instead of in a database.
PikiPiki was created by Martin Pool in 1999 as a rewrite of WikiWikiWeb in Python . [ citation needed ] It was made to be a small program, using flat files and doing away with versioning (Pool felt that a wiki is not meant to be a document-management system). [22]
PhpWiki , created by Steve Wainstead in 1999, was the first wiki software written in PHP . [ citation needed ] The initial version was a feature-for-feature reimplementation of the WikiWikiWeb software. Subsequent versions adopted many features from UseModWiki.
Swiki was written in Squeak by Mark Guzdial and Jochen Rick in 1999. [ citation needed ]
Zwiki , written in Python in 1999, is based on the Zope web application server (it can also co-exist with the Plone content management system). It was initially developed by Simon Michael and Joyful Systems . [ citation needed ] It uses a ZODB Object Database.
Traction TeamPage was released in December 1999; it was the first proprietary wiki application aimed at enterprise customers.
UseModWiki was developed from 1999 to 2000 by Clifford Adams. UseModWiki is a flat-file wiki written in Perl. It was based on Markus Denker's AtisWiki, which was in turn based on CvWiki. It introduced the square bracket syntax for linking words that was later adopted by many other wiki engines, such as MediaWiki.
MoinMoin , created in Python by Jürgen Hermann and Thomas Waldmann in mid-2000, was initially based on PikiPiki. It is a flat-file wiki with a simple code base but many possible extensions. MoinMoin uses the idea of separating the parsers (for parsing the wiki syntax ) from the formatters (for outputting HTML code), with an interface between them, so that new parsers and output formatters can be written.

2001–2003: Wikipedia's early years

The creation of Wikipedia
Until 2001, wikis were virtually unknown outside the restricted circles of computer programmers. [ citation needed ] Wikis were introduced to the general public by the success of Wikipedia, [ citation needed ] a free content encyclopedia that can be edited by anyone.
Wikipedia was originally conceived as a complement to Nupedia , a free on-line encyclopedia founded by Jimmy Wales , with articles written by highly qualified contributors and evaluated by an elaborate peer review process. The writing of content for Nupedia proved to be extremely slow, with only 12 articles completed during the first year, despite a mailing-list of interested editors and the presence of a full-time editor-in-chief recruited by Wales, Larry Sanger . [ citation needed ] Learning of the wiki concept, Wales and Sanger decided to try creating a collaborative website to provide an additional source of rapidly produced draft articles that could be polished for use on Nupedia.
Nupedia's editors and reviewers resisted the idea of associating Nupedia with a wiki-style website, so Wikipedia was launched on its own domain, wikipedia.com, on January 15, 2001. [ citation needed ] It initially ran on UseModWiki software, with the original text stored in flat-files rather than in a database, and with articles named using the CamelCase convention. UseModWiki was replaced by a PHP wiki engine in January 2002 and by MediaWiki in July 2002. [ citation needed ]
Wikipedia attracted new participants after being mentioned on Slashdot as well as in an article on the community-edited website Kuro5hin . [23] It quickly overtook Nupedia. In the first year of its existence, over 20,000 encyclopedia entries were created.

Wikimedia Foundation and first Wikipedia sister projects
Wales, and other members of the Wikipedia user community, founded Wikipedia's first "sister site," "In Memoriam: September 11 Wiki," [24] in October 2002; [25] it detailed the September 11 attacks . (This project was closed in October 2006.) A second sister site, Wiktionary , was created in December 2002; the site was meant to be a collaboratively created dictionary.
In June 2003, Wales founded the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization, to manage Wikipedia and all its sister projects going forward. Two additional Wikimedia projects were added soon thereafter: Wikiquote , a reference for notable quotations, and Wikibooks , for collaboratively creating textbooks, both in July 2003. Another project, Wikisource , was added in November 2003; it was originally named "Project Sourceberg" (a play on Project Gutenberg ), then renamed "Wikisource" in December 2003.

Other wiki websites, 2001–2003
MeatballWiki rapidly became a popular wiki for discussions of wiki-related topics. The users of MeatballWiki came up with several ideas on the linking together of wikis, including: [26] [27]
Some of these ideas were later implemented. For example, WikiIndex , a wiki that lists other wikis, was created in 2006, in an attempt to implement the MetaWiki and SwitchWiki ideas. The site also includes a WikiNode of its own and catalogs sites which include their own WikiNodes.
Disinfopedia was launched by Sheldon Rampton in March 2003. It aimed to produce a directory of public relations firms and industry-funded organizations that attempt to influence public opinion and public policy. It was later renamed SourceWatch , and is currently run by the Center for Media and Democracy (CMD).
Javapedia was a wiki inspired by Wikipedia. The project was launched in June 2003 during the JavaOne developer conference, and was intended to cover all aspects of the Java platform.
Wikitravel was started in July 2003 by Evan Prodromou and Michele Ann Jenkins.
Memory Alpha is a wiki devoted to the Star Trek fictional universe. It was launched by Harry Doddema and Dan Carlson in December 2003. For its first several years, it was one of the largest wiki projects.
This period also saw the creation of several other general wiki encyclopedias, created either independently of Wikipedia or meant to serve as an alternative to Wikipedia in order to fix some perceived weakness in it:

Development of wiki software, 2001–2003
JSPWiki, created by Janne Jalkanen in 2001, is flat-file wiki software built around JavaServer Pages (JSP). JSPWiki adapted and extended the PhpWiki markup. It is primarily used for company and university intranets as a project wiki or a knowledge management application. It has also been used as a personal information manager (PIM).
MediaWiki was written for Wikipedia in 2002 by Lee Daniel Crocker , based on the user interface design of an earlier PHP wiki engine developed by Magnus Manske . Manske's PHP-based software suffered load problems due to increased use, so Crocker re-wrote the software with a more scalable MySQL database backend. As Wikipedia grew, achieving scalability through multiple layers of caching and database replication became a major concern for the developers. Internationalization was also a major concern [ citation needed ] (the user interface has been translated into more than 70 languages). One of the earliest differences between MediaWiki and other wiki engines was the use of freely formatted links instead of links in CamelCase. MediaWiki provides specialized syntax to support rich content, such as rendering mathematical formulas using LaTeX , graphical plotting , image galleries and thumbnails , and Exif metadata . MediaWiki lacks native WYSIWYG support, but comes with a graphical toolbar to simplify editing. One MediaWiki innovation for structuring content is " namespaces ." Namespaces allow each article to contain multiple sheets with different standard names: one sheet presents the encyclopedic content, another contains the discussions surrounding it, and so on.
PmWiki was created in PHP by Patrick Michaud in 2002. It is a flat-file wiki engine that was designed to be easy to install and customize. PmWiki offers a template scheme that makes it possible to change the look and feel of the wiki. Customization is made easy through a wide selection of custom extensions, known as "recipes" available from the PmWiki Cookbook.
TikiWiki was created in PHP by Luis Argerich in 2002. It was later renamed " Tiki Wiki CMS Groupware ", or simply "Tiki", as it gained additional CMS and groupware features. TikiWiki is modular with components that can be individually enabled and customized by the administrator, and extends customization to the user with selectable skins and themes.
WakkaWiki, an open-source PHP wiki engine, was created by Carlos Zottman and Hendrik Mans in September 2002. It was discontinued in 2004. WakkaWiki spawned at least five forks: CitiWiki, UniWakka, WackoWiki, WikiNi and WikkaWiki.
Socialtext launched in 2002; it was the second proprietary enterprise-focused wiki application, after Traction TeamPage.
XWiki is an open-source Java wiki application that was created by Ludovic Dubost in January 2003. Dubost set up hosting of XWiki-based wikis on the domain xwiki.com in April 2003 - xwiki.com thus became an early (and possibly the first) wiki hosting service , or "wiki farm."
EditMe was another early wiki farm, launched in August 2003. The site used proprietary wiki software, written in Java.
As they developed, wikis incorporated many of the features used on other websites and blogs, including:

2004–2006: an explosion in interest
The period from 2004 to 2006 saw an explosion in interest in both wikis generally and Wikipedia in particular, and both started to become household terms. Corporations, organizations and other communities began to make increasing use of wikis. Many of the wiki-based sites, technologies and events that dominate today were started during that period.
In October 2004, the wiki hosting service Wikicities launched, co-founded by Wikipedia founder Jimmy Wales and Wikimedia Foundation board member Angela Beesley. In March 2006, it changed its name to Wikia . Wikia remains one of the largest and most popular wiki farms.
A large number of other notable wiki farms were released soon afterward, including Wikispaces (launched March 2005), PBwiki (launched June 2005, later renamed PBworks ), and Wetpaint (launched October 2005). Wikidot was launched in August 2006.
2005 marked the beginning of large-scale wiki-related meetings and conferences. August 2005 saw the first-ever Wikimania , an annual conference organized around Wikimedia Foundation projects, in Frankfurt , Germany . WikiSym , a more academic annual symposium about wikis in general, was first held a few months later, in October 2005, in San Diego , California . RecentChangesCamp , an unconference dedicated to wikis, was first held in February 2006 in Portland, Oregon . Wikimania and WikiSym remain the two largest wiki-related gatherings.
Around 2005 wikis began to be massively confronted with "wiki spam," produced by spammers who enter website addresses onto wikis in order to improve the ranking of the displayed websites by search engines. Various strategies have been developed to counter wiki spam. [34]

Wikipedia and other Wikimedia projects
Wikipedia experienced exponential growth in usage and readership during the period from 2004 to 2006, rising in Alexa rankings from the top 1000 websites into the top 15. [35] It was named one of the top 5 global brands of 2006 in the Brandchannel Readers' Choice Awards. [36]
In 2004 the Wikimedia Foundation launched three new sites: Wikispecies , for cataloging species, in August 2004, Wikimedia Commons , to hold images and other media used by the Wikimedia projects, in September 2004, and Wikinews , for publishing collaborative news articles, in December 2004. Wikiversity , intended for tutorials and other courseware, was later launched in August 2006.
In November 2005, journalist John Seigenthaler wrote a much-publicized article in USA Today about Wikipedia's article about him, which for over four months had contained a false statement about him, inserted as a joke, stating that he had been a suspect in the assassinations of John F. Kennedy and Robert F. Kennedy . The USA Today article generated a subsequent controversy that both caused Wikipedia to tighten its standards for creating articles, especially articles about living people, and highlighted the growing importance of Wikipedia as a source of information.
During this period, Wikipedia also began to enter the popular culture. A prominent example was the Weird Al Yankovic parody song " White & Nerdy ," which peaked at #9 on the Billboard Hot 100 in late 2006, and contained the lyric "I edit Wikipedia." In December 2006, Time magazine chose " You " as their Person of the Year , referring to the rise of Web 2.0 and web technologies that allow for user-contributed content, and cited Wikipedia as one of the key websites that allow for "community and collaboration on a scale never seen before." [37]

Other wiki websites, 2004–2006
In July 2004, OpenStreetMap , a website to create an open-source street map of the world using wiki functionality, was launched.
Most of the major satirical wikis launched at around this time. Encyclopedia Dramatica , which mocked internet culture , was founded in December 2004 (it was shut down in April 2011). Stupidedia , a German-language wiki intended as a direct parody of Wikipedia, was also founded in December 2004, a week later. Uncyclopedia , an English-language wiki also intended to parody Wikipedia, was founded the next month, in January 2005; it was later extended to dozens of other languages, and merged in other wikis, including Stupidedia. La Frikipedia , a Spanish-language parody of Wikipedia, was founded in October 2005.
In January 2005, the wiki wikiHow was created as a component of the how-to website eHow . In April 2006, its creators sold off eHow and focused full-time on wikiHow, which was launched at its own domain. [38] Both sites receive tens of millions of hits a month.
In April 2006, the company Internet Brands bought the sites WikiTravel and World66. [39] The purchase of WikiTravel by a commercial entity led to the creation of the non-commercial travel wiki Wikivoyage by some former WikiTravel authors and administrators in December 2006. Wikivoyage originally held content in German and Italian, and started as a fork of WikiTravel content; in 2013 it would become a WMF site.
Two major Chinese wiki encyclopedias began in 2006: Baidu Baike in April and Hudong in November. Both currently hold millions of articles, and exceed the popularity of the Chinese Wikipedia within China. Both are for-profit wikis, that, unlike Wikipedia, hold the copyright to their own content.

Development of wiki software, 2004–2006
This period saw the launch of many wiki applications geared toward corporate/enterprise users. Such software was usually proprietary , and it usually included additional functionality, such as blogs and project management tools . Notable wiki software launched during this time includes:
wikiCalc , a wiki-based spreadsheet application, was launched in November 2005 by spreadsheet pioneer Dan Bricklin .
In September 2004 Microsoft released its FlexWiki , making its source code available on SourceForge . [41] The code was written primarily by David Ornstein, and the engine is open source , licensed under IBM 's Common Public License . FlexWiki was the third Microsoft project to be distributed via SourceForge.net , after Windows Installer XML (WiX) and Windows Template Library (WTL). FlexWiki used .NET technology and has an integrated scripting language called WikiTalk. WikiTalk is based on the Smalltalk programming language (hence its name). It is a simple object oriented language that allows users to add dynamic behaviors to their topics. While most wiki software systems use a DBMS to store their content, FlexWiki started out with a textual storage system. Content was stored in text files, reducing some of the administrative overhead of maintaining a wiki site. With the release of v1.8.01653, it became possible to store FlexWiki's content in an SQL Server database. It was generally not necessary to scale FlexWiki due to the advanced caching, but scaling was possible using SQL Server, providing that caching is turned off. One of the primary developers of FlexWiki, Craig Andera, left the project in 2008. The internal Microsoft discussion forum Channel 9 used FlexWiki for a period of time, but no longer does.
Though it was generally well received, [42] it failed to become popular and was discontinued in December 2008. In November 2006 Microsoft released Microsoft Office SharePoint Server 2007 , [43] with wiki and blog functionality added, which subsequently replaced FlexWiki as Microsoft's wiki product.
In this period a number of semantic wiki applications were launched, including the currently most popular one, Semantic MediaWiki (which was first announced at Wikimania 2005).

2007–present: wikis enter the mainstream
A milestone in public acceptance of wikis was reached in March 2007 when the word "wiki" entered the Oxford English Dictionary . [44]
In January 2007, Amazon.com released Amapedia , a product-review wiki on its own website; it was later shut down in June 2010.
In 2007, ShoutWiki, a wiki farm, was founded as an alternative to Wikia.
In February 2007, Penguin Books launched a wiki to create the planned novel A Million Penguins , in a well-publicized experiment at creating a crowd-generated novel. The wiki was shut down a month later, not having created a coherent work. [45]
In March 2007, Larry Sanger , co-founder of Wikipedia, launched Citizendium , an "expert-guided" encyclopedia wiki requiring participants to use their real names.
In 2010, the site WikiLeaks (which had been founded in 2006) gained a great deal of both fame and notoriety as a result of a set of leaked documents the site published of classified materials from the United States government , notably footage of the July 12, 2007 Baghdad airstrike , the Afghan War documents leak and the United States diplomatic cables leak . The site runs on the MediaWiki application, and began as a wiki editable by anyone, but in 2010 had its permissions changed so that only its administrators could edit pages. [46]

Wikipedia and other Wikimedia projects, 2007–present
In 2007, Wikipedia entered the top 10 most popular websites in the world. [47] Wikipedia began to be heavily referenced in television and other media during 2007; see Wikipedia in culture .
In August 2008, then-U.S. presidential candidate John McCain was accused of plagiarizing Wikipedia in a speech about Georgia . [48] In June 2009, journalist Chris Anderson admitted to plagiarizing a series of Wikipedia articles in his book Free: The Future of a Radical Price ; he called it a "screwup," based on lack of clarity on how to cite a specific version of a Wikipedia article. [49]
January 2011 saw the 10th anniversary of the creation of Wikipedia, which occasioned a large round of coverage in the international media, most of it positive, including a cover story in German newspaper Die Zeit with the headline, "The greatest work of mankind." [50]
In March 2012, a proposal was made to have the Wikimedia Foundation host a wiki containing travel advice, [51] which led to a discussion and vote lasting several months. In August 2012 the company Internet Brands, owners of the Wikitravel site, sued two of its contributors who had spoken out in favor of the proposal. [52] That lawsuit in turn led the Wikimedia Foundation to sue Internet Brands in September 2012 to not "impede, disrupt or block the creation of" such a site. [53] The proposal to host a travel guide wiki was ultimately successful, and the decision was made to incorporate Wikivoyage , a Wikitravel spinoff site, as a project.
The project Wikidata was officially launched on October 30, 2012. [54] Wikidata is a collaborative data repository meant to provide a shared set of data that can be used by Wikipedia across all its languages.
January 14, 2013 saw the first official use of Wikidata's data: to enable the automatic display of "interlanguage links" within articles on the Hungarian Wikipedia . [55]
On January 15, which was the 12th anniversary of Wikipedia's founding, the new, Wikimedia-hosted Wikivoyage was officially launched. [56] The lawsuits regarding Wikivoyage between Wikimedia and Internet Brands were settled out of court in February 2013. [57]

Reuse of Wikipedia data
Several applications were developed during this time to make use of Wikipedia's data in order to improve both structured querying and natural-language searching. These included:
The Wikimedia Foundation project Wikidata is meant to provide a collaborative set of data that can make such querying easier, and available across all languages.

Wiki software, 2007–present
This period saw consolidation in the set of wiki software being used. A large number of wiki engines ended development during this time, including FlexWiki, MojoMojo , PhpWiki , UseModWiki and Zwiki .
In October 2008, most developers of TWiki left the project to work on a fork of the code, Foswiki , after creator Peter Thoeny took control of the TWiki code and trademark via his company, TWiki.net. [59]
In May 2009, Google announced its Google Wave platform (and its associated Federation protocol ), which would combine the functionality of wikis with e-mail, instant messaging and social networking in order to provide a collaborative, real-time, server-hosted communication platform. Google Wave was released to the general public in May 2010, but development on it was ended several months later, in August 2010. In December 2010, Google transferred control of the software's development to the Apache Foundation , and it was renamed "Apache Wave."
In December 2010, wiki functionality was added to the SAP NetWeaver Portal application. [60]
In 2011, a wiki application, named Phriction, was added to the open-source collaboration suite Phabricator .
In April 2013, MindTouch Inc. abandoned its open-source product and moved to MindTouch being only a proprietary, hosted service. [40]
In July 2013, Wetpaint sold off its wiki service to WikiFoundry, having changed its business model to the hosting of professionally generated content.

See also
WebPage index: 00140
Danese Cooper
Danese Cooper (born January 19, 1959 [1] ) is an American programmer, [2] computer scientist [3] and advocate of open source software . [4]

Career
Cooper has managed teams at Symantec and Apple Inc. and for six years served as chief open source "evangelist" for Sun Microsystems before leaving to serve as senior director for open source strategies at Intel . [4] [5] [6] In 2009 she worked as "Open Source Diva" at REvolution Computing (now Revolution Analytics ). [7] She is a board member of the Drupal Association [8] and the Open Source Hardware Association . [9] She is a board observer at Mozilla , and serves as a member of the Apache Software Foundation . [4] She was a board member at Open Source Initiative . [10] In February 2014, Cooper joined PayPal as their first Head of Open Source. [11]

Open source
Cooper's major work within the open source area of computer software has garnered her the nickname "Open Source Diva". [5] [12] She was recruited, while at a sushi bar in Cupertino, to a position at Sun working towards opening the source code to Java . Within six months she quit frustrated by the claims of open source development with Java that Sun made, only to find that little "open sourcing" was taking place. Sun sought to keep Cooper understanding her need to further open source software and re-hired her as their corporate open source officer. [13] Her six years with Sun Microsystems is credited as the key to the company opening up its source code and lending support to Sun's OpenOffice.org software suite, Oracle Grid Engine , among others. [6] [14] In 2009 she joined REvolution Computing, a "provider of open source predictive analytics solutions", to work on community outreach amongst developers unfamiliar with the programming language R and general open source strategies. [7] She has also made public speaking appearances discussing open sourcing, speaking at the Malaysian National Computer Confederation Open Source Compatibility Centre, OSCON , gov2.0 Expo, and the Southern California Linux Expo . [15] [16] [17] [18] In 2005 Cooper was a contributing author to Open Sources 2.0: The Continuing Evolution . [19]

Wikimedia Foundation
In February 2010 Cooper was appointed Chief Technical Officer of the Wikimedia Foundation, leading their technical team and developing and executing the Foundation's technical strategy, [4] [14] [20] along with which she would also be working on outreach with Wikimedia volunteers to expand on development and localizing of software. [14] Cooper credits the open source community in helping her obtain the position at Wikimedia. [21] She left the organization in July 2011. [22]

daneseWorks
In June 2011, Cooper started a consultancy, daneseWorks, whose first client was the Gates Foundation's shared learning collaborative (now called inBloom ). She is currently helping [23] numenta/nupic with their open source & machine learning strategy.

Personal life
Danese Cooper obtained her high school diploma from Chadwick School and her B.A. from the University of California, Los Angeles . Upon graduation she spent time in Morocco as a volunteer in the Peace Corps . [7] [13] Cooper credits her time with the Peace Corps as fostering her desire to travel and work within the developing world to explore policy, education and how open source software can "give certain kids another alternative". She is married to a software developer and enjoys knitting , which she often engages in during meetings. [13] [24] [25]
WebPage index: 00141
Luis Villa
Luis Villa is an American attorney and programmer who worked as Deputy General Counsel and then as Senior Director of Community Engagement at the Wikimedia Foundation . Previously he was an attorney at Mozilla , [1] where he worked on the revision of the Mozilla Public License (MPL). He continued that work in his next job at Greenberg Traurig [2] where he was part of the team defending Google against Oracle's claims concerning Android . [3] [ non-primary source needed ] Prior to graduating from Columbia Law School in 2009, he was an employee at Ximian , [4] which was acquired by Novell in 2003. He spent a year as a "senior geek in residence" at Harvard's Berkman Center for Internet & Society [5] working on StopBadware.org . [6] He has been elected four times to the board of the GNOME Foundation . [7] He was editor-in-chief of the Columbia Science and Technology Law Review, and blogs regularly. [4] He was a director of the Open Source Initiative from April 2012 to March 2015. [8] [9]
WebPage index: 00142
Serbo-Croatian Wikipedia
The Serbo-Croatian Wikipedia ( Serbo-Croatian : Srpskohrvatska Wikipedia ), is the Serbo-Croatian version of Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia . There are also Wikipedias in varieties of the Serbo-Croatian language: Bosnian , Croatian , and Serbian . The Serbo-Croatian Wikipedia is the 20th largest Wikipedia in the world. [1]
This Wikipedia was locked in early 2005 due to inactivity, but was later re-opened. [2] The Serbo-Croatian Wikipedia has 438,675 articles. A total of 40.8 million edits were made. [3]
WebPage index: 00143
Czech Wikipedia
The Czech Wikipedia ( Czech : Česká Wikipedie ) is the Czech language edition of Wikipedia . [1] [2] [3]
This Wikipedia contains 381,542 articles, 2,141 active users, and 27 administrators.
It was created on May 3, 2002 [4] on a request of a Czech editor of the Esperanto Wikipedia . [5] However, at that time, Wikipedia ran on UseMod software. The three pages the Czech version had at the time were lost during the switch to MediaWiki . The oldest currently available edit is from when the Main Page was recopied on November 14, 2002. It reached 1,000 articles, many about Esperanto topics, on October 20, 2003. An April 2004 report noted that it had 180 registered users at that time. [2]
In June 2005, the Czech Wikipedia reached 10,000 articles and it reached 20,000 in December of the same year. [6] The Main Page was re-designed with more details after reaching this milestone. By November 2006, it exceeded 30,000 articles, [1] and became the 21st language version to exceed 100,000 articles in June 2008. [3] [7] [8] As of April 10, 2015 there are more than 319,100 articles, 29 administrators, almost 293,000 registered users, and dozens of very active contributors. In December 2009, contributors to the Czech Wikipedia held a conference in Prague. [9]
In 2008, the Czech NGO Wikimedia Česká republika ( Wikimedia Czech Republic ) was founded to support the Czech Wikipedia by organizing events, helping communication with authors of free content, and promoting the Czech Wikipedia to the public. [10]
On July 24, 2014 the Czech Wikipedia reached 300,000 articles.
WebPage index: 00144
Basque Wikipedia
The Basque Wikipedia ( Euskarazko Wikipedia [1] or Euskal Wikipedia in Basque ) is the Basque language edition of Wikipedia . Founded on December 6, 2001 [2] (although its main page was created in November 2003) and reaching 58,124 articles by August 19, 2010, making it the 45th-largest Wikipedia. [3] As of May 2017, it has 331 active contributors, of which 13 are administrators, and has about 280,000 articles. [4] [5] [6]
In an August 2007 interview, Jimmy Wales , co-founder of Wikipedia, used the Basque Wikipedia as an example of the rationale for having Wikipedias in smaller languages:
On January 25, 2008, the Basque Wikipedia was awarded the Argia Saria granted by the magazine Argia in the category of Internet. [8] [9] [10]
On May 21, 2011, Basque Wikipedia published its 100,000 article, an article about the prohibition of using Basque language throughout history called Euskararen debekua . [11]
In December 2011, around 11,000 new articles were added to Basque Wikipedia by the Culture Ministry of the Basque Government. [12]

Statistics
As of February 2012, the Basque Wikipedia has the second greatest number of articles per speaker among Wikipedias with over 100,000 articles, and ranks sixth overall. [13] These figures were based on Ethnologue 's estimate of 665,800 Basque speakers.

New articles per day

Gallery
WebPage index: 00145
Kazakh Wikipedia
The Kazakh Wikipedia is the Kazakh language edition of the free online encyclopedia Wikipedia , founded on 2 June 2002.

History
The Kazakh Wikipedia was started in June 2002. The Kazakh Wikipedia had a very high growth rate in 2011, going from 7,000 articles to over 100,000 in less than one year, [1] largely due to the incorporation of materials from the Kazakh Encyclopedia , which have been released under a Creative Commons Attribution Share-Alike License (CC BY-SA). This rapid expansion was initiated by the non-profit Wikibilim Foundation . [2] The Samruk Kazyna Foundation , Kazakhstan's sovereign oil wealth fund, sponsored the expansion, with 30 million tenge spent in 2011 for paid editing, digitalization, and author rights transfer. [3] [4] At the Wikimania 2011 conference WikiBilim president Rauan Kenzhekhanuly was awarded the "Wikipedian of the Year" award by Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales for his work on the Kazakh Wikipedia expansion. [4]
In April 2012 Tengri News reported that "in 2011, the Samruk Kazyna sovereign wealth fund allocated a total of $204 thousand to develop the Kazakh-language Wikipedia. This year, another $136 thousand will be earmarked", citing the Fund’s Press Service. [5] Wales thanked the Kazakh government for its support of the Kazakh Wikipedia at Wikimania 2012 . [6]
The Kazakh Wikipedia's unique [ citation needed ] feature is that it is written in three different scripts: Cyrillic , Latin , and Arabic . On 26 October 2011, it passed the 100,000 articles threshold, and by early 2013 had just over 200,000 articles. [1]

Features
The Kazakh Wikipedia uses ZhengZhu's character mapping program to convert between Cyrillic, Latin, and Arabic scripts. [ citation needed ]

Relationship between WikiBilim and the Government of Kazakhstan
Questions have been asked about WikiBilim 's closeness to the Kazakh government, given that WikiBilim president Rauan Kenzhekhanuly had a long prior career as a Kazakh government official and the Kazakh government has been widely criticised for its crackdown on free speech. [4] [7] Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales ' friendship with ex-British Prime Minister Tony Blair , who advises the Kazakh government, has also come under scrutiny, [4] [7] as has the neutrality of the Kazakh Wikipedia's content, much of which is a reproduction of the state-published national encyclopedia. [8] [9]

Statistics
As of May 2017, the Kazakh Wikipedia counts about 219,000 articles. The overwhelming majority of its readers originate from Kazakhstan .
As of April 2013, the Kazakh Wikipedia's number of articles accounts for approximately 14% of all the articles written in a Turkic language , making it the second largest edition in the family after Turkish, which accounts for 28% of all Turkic articles. [10]

Gallery
WebPage index: 00146
Lithuanian Wikipedia
The Lithuanian Wikipedia ( Lithuanian : Lietuviškoji Vikipedija ) is the Lithuanian version of Wikipedia . It is the largest free Lithuanian internet encyclopedia . The Wikipedia started in 2003, however gained a significant number of articles only in 2004. On December 14, 2005, the Lithuanian Wikipedia reached 10,000 articles, and on February 26, 2006 it reached 40,000 articles. [1] The milestone of 50,000 articles was reached on August 1, 2007, and the next milestone, 100,000 articles, on January 18, 2010. [2] As of May 2017, it has about 182,000 articles.

Gallery
WebPage index: 00147
Belarusian Wikipedia
There are two Belarusian Wikipedias ( Belarusian : Беларуская Вікіпедыя ; Taraškievica : Беларуская Вікіпэдыя) : one in the orthography of the Belarusian language which is official in modern Belarus ( Narkomovka , prefix "be:"), [8] and another one in the pre-reform of 1933 , classical orthography ( Taraškievica , prefix "be-tarask:", formerly "be-x-old:"). [9]
As of March 2014, the most popular editions of Wikipedia within Belarus are the Russian Wikipedia (with 84.0% of all page views ) followed by the English Wikipedia (10.2%). [10]

History
The first Belarusian Wikipedia was started on August 12, 2004. One of its creators and first administrators was Uladzimir Katkouski (user name: rydel). [11] [12] Katkouski/rydel (who died in 2007) created over 1,300 articles in the Belarusian Wikipedia alone. [12]
Articles in the Belarusian Wikipedia were inconsistently written in both variants of the orthography, leading to conflicts between the adherents of the two. [13] [14]
A "clean" version in the official orthography was initiated in the Wikipedias " incubator " at Wikimedia 's Meta-Wiki. [14] However, the first application for a new Wikipedia was rejected in December 2006 by the Board of Trustees and Language Commission for technical reasons, quoting: "This discussion was created before the implementation of the Language proposal policy, and it is incompatible with the policy." [15] A redrafted proposal was approved in March 2007. [16]
Upon approval, in the evening of the same day, over 6,000 articles written in the pre-reform orthography were transferred from the "be.wikipedia.org" domain to "be-x-old.wikipedia.org", while the 3,500 pages from "Incubator" were moved [17] to "be.wikipedia.org". [14] However, due to a software bug, the move did not go smoothly: in the morning the articles seemed to have disappeared, and users could not log in. [18] This led to a number of news reports that articles in old Belarusian orthography were deleted from Wikipedia. [19] [20]
In September 2015, the domain name of the classical orthography Belarusian Wikipedias was changed from be-x-old.wikipedia.org to be-tarask.wikipedia.org, reflecting the official language subtag assigned by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority in 2007.
Including the time in the "incubator", the current variant of be-Wikipedia has existed since August 2006. [21]

Rates of contribution
Initially the official Belarusian Wikipedia overtook the classical one, but in about a year, it slowed down, and in fall 2008, the classical one was ahead. [13] Today, the official Belarusian Wikipedia has again surpassed the one in the classical orthography.
On March 15, 2008 the official Belarusian encyclopedia reached 10,000 articles. [21]
On June 17, 2009, the classical Belarusian encyclopedia reached 20,000 articles, holding the 65th place among other Wikipedias. At that time, the official Belarusian Wikipedia had about 16,000 articles, holding the 71st place. [13]
On November 16, 2010 the official Belarusian encyclopedia reached 25,000 articles.
In August 2015, the official Belarusian encyclopedia reached 100,000 articles.
WebPage index: 00148
Urdu Wikipedia
Urdu Wikipedia ( Urdu : اردو وکیپیڈیا ‎), started in January 2004, is the Urdu language edition of Wikipedia , a free, open-content encyclopedia. As of 30 February, 2017, it had more than 116,100 articles. [1] [2] [3]

History
Wikipedia started being multilingual in May 2001. As of December 2007, Wikipedia had approximately 9.25 million articles in 253 languages. The original site address for Urdu Wikipedia was ur.wikipedia.com and all pages were written in the Latin alphabet , as the software did not work with Urdu characters. [ citation needed ]
At first, Urdu Wikipedia faced technical problems with the Urdu script font, but now this matter is mostly settled; some unsolved areas remain. Urdu is written in Perso-Arabic script , a right-to-left writing system . As a result, users sometimes need to configure their operating systems and web browsers accordingly.
Currently Urdu Wikipedia uses "Urdu Naskh Asiatype" font, which was introduced and is freely distributed by BBC at BBC Urdu Service website. [4] The font is primarily used for article bodies and headings. Urdu variation of Times New Roman is used for navigation links. Both of these fonts are variations of Naskh style.
Some Pakistani variations of complex Nasta'liq script are also supported only as a secondary choice in class definitions of CSS , i.e. if default font is not found on client system, then Nasta'liq script is used.
The translation of the Wikipedia interface and project information pages into Urdu is still in progress. Some pages about how to edit have been translated.

Milestones

See also
WebPage index: 00149
Georgian Wikipedia
The Georgian Wikipedia ( Georgian : ქართული ვიკიპედია ) is a Georgian language edition of free online encyclopedia Wikipedia . Founded in November 2003, it has more than 100 000 articles by 2015.

Statistics
Currently it has 3 administrators and more than 73,000 registered users.

History

See also

External links
WebPage index: 00150
Occitan Wikipedia
The Occitan Wikipedia ( Occitan : Wikipèdia ) is the Occitan language version of Wikipedia . The Occitan version of Wikipedia had 85,475 articles on 18 October 2013 (ranked 52nd among the 287 languages versions of Wikipedia).
WebPage index: 00151
Tatar Wikipedia
The Tatar Wikipedia is the Tatar language edition of Wikipedia . Launched in September 2003, [1] It currently has 71,170 articles, making it the 67nd largest Wikipedia by article count. This Wikipedia has 3 administrators along with 21,763 registered users and 69 active users. [2]
WebPage index: 00152
Kyrgyz Wikipedia
The Kyrgyz Wikipedia is the Kyrgyz language edition of Wikipedia . Launched on 3 June 2002, [1] It currently has 66,031 articles. This Wikipedia has 4 administrators along with 14,615 registered users and 52 active users. [2]
WebPage index: 00153
List of Wikipedias
This is a list of the different language editions of Wikipedia ; as of 26 May 2017 there are 296 Wikipedias of which 285 are active.

Wikipedia edition codes
Each Wikipedia has a code, which is used as a subdomain below wikipedia.org. Interlanguage links are sorted by that code. The codes represent the language codes defined by ISO 639-1 and ISO 639-3 , and the decision of which language code to use is usually determined by the IETF language tag policy. Wikipedias also vary by how thinly they slice dialects and variants; for example, the English Wikipedia includes most modern varieties of English (American English, Indian English, South African English, etc.), but does not include other related languages such as Scots , or Anglo-Saxon , all of which have separate Wikipedias. The Spanish Wikipedia includes both Peninsular Castilian and Latin American Spanish ; Malay Wikipedia includes a large number of Malay languages; and so on.
Differences between the ISO mappings and Wikipedia codes include:
Additionally, Wikipedias vary in wikt:orthography at times. Chinese Wikipedia automatically translates from modern Mandarin Chinese into four standard forms: Mainland China and Singapore in simplified Chinese characters, and Taiwan and Hong Kong / Macau in traditional Chinese characters. Belarussian , however, has a separate Wikipedia for the 'normative' orthography (be) and Taraškievica (be-tarask).

List
An approximation to the number of active users is given in powers of ten (see common logarithm ): so "5" means at least 10,000, "4" means at least 1000, "3" means at least 100, and so on.

Detailed list

Notes

Grand total

See also
WebPage index: 00154
Marathi Wikipedia
The Marathi Wikipedia ( Marathi : मराठी विकिपीडिया ) is the Marathi language edition of Wikipedia , a free and publicly editable online encyclopedia , and was launched on 1 May 2003. The project is one of the leading Wikipedia among other South Asian language Wikipedia's in various quality matrices. [1] It has grown on to become a Wiki containing more than 42,000 articles and has more than 23,000 registered users as of February 2012 [update] . [2]
Among most visited Marathi language websites, Marathi Wikipedia is ranked tenth by alexa. [3]

History

Beginning
Marathi language Wikipedia is available in the wikipedia.org domain from 2003 May 1. 'Vasant Panchami'( वसंत पंचमी ) [4] ( Vasant Panchami ) and 'Audumbar' ( औदुंबर (कविता) ), a poem by the poet Balkavi [5] were the first articles created on Marathi Wikipedia on 2 May 2003.

Initial growth phase
Marathi language Wikipedia picked up growth from 2006 onwards. On 13 January 2006 Marathi Wikipedia had 1500 articles.
On 27 February Marathi Day is celebrated.Marathi

Users and editors

Community and events

Media coverage and increased growth
Marathi Daily news paper Maharashtra Times was the first to cover and recommend 'Marathi language Wikipedia' on 27 July 2006. [6]

Fonts and input methods
Any one of Unicode Marathi fonts input system is fine for Marathi Wikipedia. Some people use inscript . Majority uses either Google phonetic transliteration or input facility Universal Language Selector provided on Marathi Wikipedia.
Phonetic facility provided initially was java-based later supported by Narayam extension for phonetic input facility. Currently Marathi Wikipedia is supported by Universal Language Selector (ULS) , that offers both phonetic keyboard (Aksharantaran, Marathi: अक्षरांतरण) and InScript keyboard (Marathi: मराठी लिपी).
WebPage index: 00155
Chuvash Wikipedia
The Chuvash Wikipedia ( Chuvash : Чăваш Википедийĕ ) is the Chuvash language [1] edition of Wikipedia . It was founded on November 22, 2004. Its 5,000th article was created in January 2007. On March 29, 2017, it passed the 39,070 article mark.

Policies
Difficult issues are resolved through the Arbitration Committee, which handles content disputes, blocks users or prohibits certain users from editing articles on certain topics. Administrators (currently 2) are elected through a vote; aAdministrators who have become inactive (i.e. have not used administrative tools, such as "delete" or "block" buttons, at least 25 times in six months) may lose their privileges by an Arbitration Committee decision.

History
The Chuvash Wikipedia was created on November 22, 2004. Jimmy Wales used it at Wikimania 2009 as an example of the value of Wikipedia for the languages on the verge of extinction [ vague ] . [2] [ not in citation given ]

Timeline

Content

See also
WebPage index: 00156
Yoruba Wikipedia
The Yoruba Wikipedia is the Yoruba language edition of Wikipedia . Begun in October 2002, [1] it now has 31557 articles, making it the 92nd largest Wikipedia. Yoruba Wikipedia has been one of the top 3 or 4 African language Wikipedias in terms of number of articles since about 2008. [2]
A surge in number of new articles in 2011 brought the Yoruba Wikipedia article count to over 30,000, [1] making it for a time the largest African language Wikipedia. [2] At Wikimania 2012 , Jimmy Wales recognized the main contributor with the second annual "Jimbo Award." [3]

See also
WebPage index: 00157
Punjabi Wikipedia
The Punjabi Wikipedia ( Punjabi : پنجابی وکیپیڈیا ( Shahmukhi ) ; ਪੰਜਾਬੀ ਵਿਕੀਪੀਡੀਆ ( Gurmukhi ) ) is the Punjabi language edition of Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia. [3] [4] There are two Punjabi Wikipedia editions viz. Western Punjabi Wikipedia (in Shahmukhi script) and Eastern Punjabi Wikipedia (in Gurmukhi script).

Eastern edition
The Eastern edition domain came into existence on June 3, 2002 [4] [5] but the first three articles were only written in August 2004 [6] In July 2012, it had reached 2,400 articles. [4]
Since August 2012, it has about 26 million readers from all over the world. [7]
The first Punjabi Wikipedia workshop was organized in Ludhiana on July 28, 2012 [3] and later another on August 16, 2012 at the Punjabi University in Patiala [8] to inform people how to edit and add to the Wiki.
Wiki-events and workshops to improve this Wikipedia and increase number of editors are conducted on regular basis. In October 2015 a seminar was organised at an event in Amritsar, where 148 students from 17 schools participated. The aim of the seminar to increase awareness about Wikipedia among the students. [9] There are 22,963 articles on the Gurmukhi Punjabi Wikipedia as of August 10 2016. [10]

Western edition
The Western edition was started on 24 October, 2008 via the Wikimedia Incubator , and its domain came into existence on August 13, 2009. The project was pioneered by Khalid Mahmood, a college professor from Islamabad . [11]
There are 42,043 articles on the Shahmukhi Punjabi Wikipedia as of 28 July 2016. [1]
WebPage index: 00158
Samogitian Wikipedia
Samogitian Wikipedia ( Samogitian : Žemaitėška Vikipedėjė ) is a section of Wikipedia in Samogitian language . This section of Wikipedia was founded in 2006 by initiative of Zords Davini (Arnas Udovičius). [1] [2] It has over 15,000 articles.

History
WebPage index: 00159
Uyghur Wikipedia
The Uyghur Wikipedia ( Uyghur : ئۇيغۇرچە ۋىكىپېدىيە) is Uyghur language edition of Wikipedia ; spelled ۋىكىپېدىيە. Started in June 2012. [1]
WebPage index: 00160
Jamaican Patois Wikipedia
The Jamaican Creole Wikipedia ( Wikipedia ina Jumiekan ) is the Jamaican Creole language edition of Wikipedia. It started on 2 May 2016. As of August 2016, the Jamaican Creole Wikipedia has more than 1,500 articles and a community of four members with one administrator.
The Jamaican Creole Wikipedia is classified in the 226th place of Wikipedias by number of articles. [1]
WebPage index: 00161
Konkani Wikipedia
Konkani Wikipedia is Konkani language edition of Wikipedia , run by Wikimedia Foundation . It was started in July 2015. [1] Currently there are 3,345 content articles in the project. The total number of edits on this wikipedia is 154,051.

History
Konkani Wikipedia went live in July 2015. Earlier in September 2013, 4 volumes of Konkani vishwakosh (encyclopedia) were relicensed under Creative Commons Licenses . [2] Information from these volumes of encyclopedias were used to write articles on Konkani Wikipedia. [3] In the same year a Wikipedia-related workshop was organized at Goa University . [4] In April 2014, two introductory sessions on editing Wikipedia were conducted at Roshni Nilaya School of Social Work in Goa. [5]
In July 2015 the Wikipedia went live. Before that it was in Wikimedia incubation for 9 years. At the time of the official inauguration the Wikipedia contained 2500 articles. The project was supported by Goa University and Nirmala Institute of Education. Madhavi Sardesai, a professor of Goa University, played an important role to launch the project. Prakash Parienkar, head of department of Konkani department of Goa University told at that time: [6]
In January 2016, a one-day edit-a-thon was organized at Krishnadas Shama Central Library, Goa. Rahmanuddin Shaik, a Center for Internet and Society representative trained the participants about Wikipedia editing and policies. Almost 100 articles were created during this one-day event. [7]
WebPage index: 00162
Xhosa Wikipedia
The Xhosa Wikipedia is the Xhosa language edition of Wikipedia . It has 612 articles, which makes it the 257th largest Wikipedia. [1]
The Xhosa edition of Wikipedia was started in June 2003. [2] Its low number of articles has led to proposals to close it in 2008 [3] and 2013 [4] (both rejected).
As Xhosa is mutually intelligible with Zulu , both of which are Nguni languages , it is possible for articles in the Zulu edition to be easily translated into Xhosa for the Xhosa Wikipedia. Similar trans-wiki efforts have been made for Scandinavian-language editions, such as the Swedish , Norwegian , and Danish through Wikimedia 's Skanwiki collaboration tool.

See also
WebPage index: 00163
Library of Congress Control Number
The Library of Congress Control Number ( LCCN ) is a serially based system of numbering cataloging records in the Library of Congress in the United States. It has nothing to do with the contents of any book, and should not be confused with Library of Congress Classification .

History
The LCCN numbering system has been in use since 1898, at which time the acronym LCCN originally stood for Library of Congress Card Number. It has also been called the Library of Congress Catalog Card Number, among other names. The Library of Congress prepared cards of bibliographic information for their library catalog and would sell duplicate sets of the cards to other libraries for use in their catalogs. This is known as centralized cataloging. Each set of cards was given a serial number to help identify it.
Although most of the bibliographic information is now electronically created, stored and shared with other libraries, there is still a need to identify each unique record, and the LCCN continues to perform that function.
Librarians all over the world use this unique identifier in the process of cataloging most books which have been published in the United States. It helps them reach the correct cataloging data (known as a cataloging record), which the Library of Congress and third parties make available on the Web and through other media.
In February 2008, the Library of Congress created the LCCN Permalink service, providing a stable URL for all Library of Congress Control Numbers. [1]

Format
In its most elementary form the number includes a year and a serial number. The year has two digits for 1898 to 2000, and four digits beginning in 2001. The three ambiguous years (1898, 1899, and 1900) are distinguished by the size of the serial number. There are also some peculiarities in numbers beginning with a "7" because of an unsuccessful experiment applied between 1969 and 1972.
Serial numbers are six digits long and should include leading zeros. The leading zeros padding the number are a more recent addition to the format, so many older works will show less full codes. The hyphen that is often seen separating the year and serial number is optional. More recently, the Belleville Public Library of Congress has instructed publishers not to include a hyphen.

See also
WebPage index: 00164
Bibliothèque nationale de France
The Bibliothèque nationale de France ( BnF ; French: [bi.bli.jɔ.tɛk na.sjɔ.nal də fʁɑ̃s] ) is the National Library of France , located in Paris . It is the national repository of all that is published in France. The current president of the library is Laurence Engel .

History
The National Library of France traces its origin to the royal library founded at the Louvre Palace by Charles V in 1368. Charles had received a collection of manuscripts from his predecessor, John II , and transferred them to the Louvre from the Palais de la Cité . The first librarian of record was Claude Mallet, the king's valet de chambre, who made a sort of catalogue, Inventoire des Livres du Roy nostre Seigneur estans au Chastel du Louvre . Jean Blanchet made another list in 1380 and Jean de Bégue one in 1411 and another in 1424. Charles V was a patron of learning and encouraged the making and collection of books. It is known that he employed Nicholas Oresme , Raoul de Presle and others to transcribe ancient texts. At the death of Charles VI , this first collection was unilaterally bought by the English regent of France, the Duke of Bedford , who transferred it to England in 1424. It was apparently dispersed at his death in 1435. [3] [4]
Charles VII did little to repair the loss of these books, but the invention of printing resulted in the starting of another collection in the Louvre inherited by Louis XI in 1461. Charles VIII seized a part of the collection of the kings of Aragon . [5] Louis XII , who had inherited the library at Blois , incorporated the latter into the Bibliothèque du Roi and further enriched it with the Gruthuyse collection and with plunder from Milan . Francis I transferred the collection in 1534 to Fontainebleau and merged it with his private library. During his reign, fine bindings became the craze and many of the books added by him and Henry II are masterpieces of the binder's art. [4]
Under librarianship of Amyot , the collection was transferred to Paris during which process many treasures were lost. Henry IV again moved it to the Collège de Clermont and in 1604 it was housed in the Rue de la Harpe . The appointment of Jacques Auguste de Thou as librarian initiated a period of development that made it the largest and richest collection of books in the world. He was succeeded by his son who was replaced, when executed for treason, by Jérôme Bignon , the first of a line of librarians of the same name. Under de Thou, the library was enriched by the collections of Queen Catherine de Medici . The library grew rapidly during the reigns of Louis XIII and Louis XIV , due in great part to the interest of the Minister of Finance, Colbert , an indefatigable collectors of books. [4]
The quarters in the Rue de la Harpe becoming inadequate, the library was again moved, in 1666, to a more spacious house in Rue Vivienne. The minister Louvois took quite as much interest in the library as Colbert and during his administration a magnificent building to be erected in the Place Vendôme was planned. The death of Louvois, however, prevented the realization of this plan. Louvois employed Mabillon , Thévenot and others to procure books from every source. In 1688 a catalogue in eight volumes was compiled. [4]
The library opened to the public in 1692, under the administration of Abbé Louvois , Minister Louvois's son. Abbé Louvois was succeeded by the Abbé Bignon , or Bignon II as he was termed, who instituted a complete reform of the library's system. Catalogues were made which appeared from 1739–53 in 11 volumes. The collections increased steadily by purchase and gift to the outbreak of the French Revolution , at which time it was in grave danger of partial or total destruction, but owing to the activities of Antoine-Augustin Renouard and Joseph Van Praet it suffered no injury. [4]
The library's collections swelled to over 300,000 volumes during the radical phase of the French Revolution when the private libraries of aristocrats and clergy were seized. After the establishment of the French First Republic in September 1792, "the Assembly declared the Bibliotheque du Roi to be national property and the institution was renamed the Bibliothèque Nationale . After four centuries of control by the Crown, this great library now became the property of the French people." [3]
A new administrative organization was established. Napoleon took great interest in the library and among other things issued an order that all books in provincial libraries not possessed by the Bibliothèque Nationale should be forwarded to it, subject to replacement by exchanges of equal value from the duplicate collections, making it possible, as Napoleon said, to find a copy of any book in France in the National Library. Napoleon furthermore increased the collections by spoil from his conquests. A considerable number of these books was restored after his downfall. During the period from 1800 to 1836, the library was virtually under the control of Joseph Van Praet. At his death it contained more than 650,000 printed books and some 80,000 manuscripts. [4]
Following a series of regime changes in France, it became the Imperial National Library and in 1868 was moved to newly constructed buildings on the Rue de Richelieu designed by Henri Labrouste . Upon Labrouste's death in 1875 the library was further expanded, including the grand staircase and the Oval Room, by academic architect Jean-Louis Pascal . In 1896, the library was still the largest repository of books in the world, although it has since been surpassed by other libraries for that title. [6] By 1920 the library's collection had grown to 4,050,000 volumes and 11,000 manuscripts. [4]

New buildings
On 14 July 1988, President François Mitterrand announced the construction and the expansion of one of the largest and most modern libraries in the world, intended to cover all fields of knowledge, and designed to be accessible to all, using the most modern data transfer technologies, which could be consulted from a distance, and which would collaborate with other European libraries . Book and media logistics inside the whole library was planned with an automated 6.6 km Telelift system. Only with this high level of automation , the library can comply with all demands fully in time. Due to initial trade unions opposition, a wireless network was fully installed only in August 2016. In July 1989, the services of the architectural firm of Dominique Perrault were retained. The design was recognized with the European Union Prize for Contemporary Architecture in 1996. The construction was carried out by Bouygues . [8] Construction of the library ran into huge cost overruns and technical difficulties related to its high-rise design, so much so that it was referred to as the "TGB" or " Très Grande Bibliothèque " (i.e. "Very Large Library," a sarcastic allusion to France's successful high-speed rail system, the TGV ). [9] After the move of the major collections from the rue de Richelieu , the National Library of France was inaugurated on 15 December 1996. [10] As of 2016, the BnF contains roughly 14 million books on its 4 parisian sites (Tolbiac, Richelieu, Arsenal, Opéra) as well as printed documents, manuscripts, prints, photographs, maps and plans, scores, coins, medals, sound documents, video and multimedia documents, scenery elements..." [11] The library retains the use of the rue de Richelieu complex for some of its collections.

Mission
The National Library of France is a public establishment under the supervision of the Ministry of Culture . Its mission is to constitute collections, especially the copies of works published in France that must, by law, be deposited there, conserve them, and make them available to the public. It produces a reference catalogue, cooperates with other national and international establishments, and participates in research programs.

Manuscript collection
The Manuscripts department houses the largest collection of medieval and modern manuscripts worldwide. The collection includes medieval chansons de geste , Arthurian novels and chivalric romance , eastern literature, eastern and western religions, ancient history, scientific history, and literary manuscripts by Pascal, Diderot, Apollinaire, Proust, Colette, Sartre, etc. The collection is organised:

Digital library
Gallica, the digital library for online users, was established in 1997. As of January 2012, Gallica had made available on the Web about:

Popular culture
Alain Resnais directed Toute la mémoire du monde , a 1956 short film about the library and its collections.

See also
WebPage index: 00165
Content (media)
In publishing, art, and communication, content is the information and experiences that are directed towards an end-user or audience . [1] Content is "something that is to be expressed through some medium, as speech, writing or any of various arts". [2] Content can be delivered via many different media including the Internet , television, audio CDs, books, magazines, and live events, such as conferences and stage performances.

Content value
Content itself is what the end-user derives value from. Thus, "content" can refer to the information provided through the medium, the way in which the information was presented, as well as the added features included in the medium in which that information was delivered. The medium, however, provides little to no value to the end-user without the information and experiences that make up the content. Communication theory philosopher Marshall McLuhan famously coined the phrase, " The medium is the message ." [3] In the case of content, the channel through which information is delivered, the "medium", affects how the end user perceives content, the "message".
The author, producer, or publisher of an original source of information or experiences may or may not be directly responsible for the entire value that they attain as content in a specific context. For example, part of an original article (such as a headline from a news story) may be rendered on another web page displaying the results of a user's search engine query grouped with headlines from other news publications and related advertisements. The value that the original headline has in this group of query results from the search engine as a medium may be very different from the value that it had as message content in its original article.
Content also leads to influencing other people in creating their own content, sometimes in a way that the original author did not or could not plan or imagine. This feature, adding the option of user innovation in a medium, means that users can develop their own content from existing content.

Technological effects on content
Traditionally, content was edited and tailored for the public through news editors, authors, and other kinds of content creators. However, not all information content requires creative authoring or editing. Through recent technological developments, truth is found in philosopher Marshall McLuhan's idea of a global village ; new technologies allow for instantaneous movement of information from every corner to every point at the same time [4] has caused the globe to be contracted into a village by electric technology, [5] such as mobile phones and automated sensors. These new technologies can record events anywhere for publishing and converting in order to potentially reach a global audience on channels such as YouTube . Such recorded or transmitted information and visuals can be referred to as content. Content is no longer a product of only reputable sources; new technology has made primary sources of content more readily available to all. For example, a video of a politician giving a speech compared to an article written by a reporter who witnessed the speech.
Media production and delivery technology may potentially enhance the value of content by formatting, filtering, and combining original sources of content for new audiences with new contexts. The greatest value for a given source of content for a specific audience is often found through such electronic reworking of content as dynamic and real-time as the trends that fuel its interest. Less emphasis on value from content stored for possible use in its original form, and more emphasis on rapid re-purposing, reuse, and redeployment has led many publishers and media producers to view their primary function less as originators and more as transformers of content. Thus, one finds out that institutions, that used to focus on publishing printed materials, are now publishing both databases and software to combine content from various sources for a wider variety of audiences.

Criticism
While marketing and media interests have broadly adopted the term "content", some writers complain about the term's inherent ambiguity. [6] [7] Others assert that the term devalues the work of authors or sets up a false analogy of information as material objects which biases any discussion using the word, [8] [9] and still others argue that it overemphasizes the work of authors. [10]

See also
WebPage index: 00166
License
A license or licence [1] ( American and British English spelling differences ) is an official permission or permit to do, use, or own something (as well as the document of that permission or permit). [1]
A license may be granted by a party ("licensor") to another party ("licensee") as an element of an agreement between those parties. A shorthand definition of a license is "an authorization (by the licensor) to use the licensed material (by the licensee)."
particular, a license may be issued by authorities, to allow an activity that would otherwise be forbidden. It may require paying a fee or proving a capability. The requirement may also serve to keep the authorities informed on a type of activity, and to give them the opportunity to set conditions and limitations.
A licensor may grant a license under intellectual property laws to authorize a use (such as copying software or using a ( patented ) invention) to a licensee, sparing the licensee from a claim of infringement brought by the licensor. [2] A license under intellectual property commonly has several components beyond the grant itself, including a term , territory , renewal provisions, and other limitations deemed vital to the licensor.
Term: many licenses are valid for a particular length of time. This protects the licensor should the value of the license increase, or market conditions change. It also preserves enforceability by ensuring that no license extends beyond the term of the agreement.
Territory: a license may stipulate what territory the rights pertain to. For example, a license with a territory limited to "North America" (Mexico/United States/Canada) would not permit a licensee any protection from actions for use in Japan.
A shorthand definition of license is "a promise by the licensor not to sue the licensee." That means without a license any use or exploitation of intellectual property by a third party would amount to copying or infringement. Such copying would be improper and could, by using the legal system, be stopped if the intellectual property owner wanted to do so. [3]
Intellectual property licensing plays a major role in business, academia and broadcasting. Business practices such as franchising, technology transfer, publication and character merchandising entirely depend on the licensing of intellectual property. Land licensing (proprietary licensing) and IP licensing form sub-branches of law born out of the interplay of general laws of contract and specific principles and statutory laws relating to these respective assets.

Mass licensing of software
Mass distributed software is used by individuals on personal computers under license from the developer of that software. Such license is typically included in a more extensive end-user license agreement (EULA) entered into upon the installation of that software on a computer. Typically, a license is associated with a unique code, that when approved grants the end user access to the software in question.
Under a typical end-user license agreement, the user may install the software on a limited number of computers.
The enforceability of end-user license agreements is sometimes questioned .

Patent license

Trademark and brand licensing
A licensor may grant permission to a licensee to distribute products under a trademark . With such a license, the licensee may use the trademark without fear of a claim of trademark infringement by the licensor. The assignment of a license often depends on specific contractual terms . The most common terms are, that a license is only applicable for a particular geographic region, just for a certain period of time or merely for a stage in the value chain . Moreover, there are different types of fees within the trademark and brand licensing. The first form demands a fee independent of sales and profits , the second type of license fee is dependent on the productivity of the licensee.
When a licensor grants permission to a licensee to not only distribute, but manufacture a patented product, it is known as licensed production .

Artwork and character licensing
A licensor may grant a permission to a licensee to copy and distribute copyrighted works such as "art" (e.g., Thomas Kinkade 's painting "Dawn in Los Gatos") and characters (e.g., Mickey Mouse ). With such license, a licensee need not fear a claim of copyright infringement brought by the copyright owner.
Artistic license is, however, not related to the aforementioned license. It is a euphemism that denotes freedom of expression, the ability to make the subject appear more engaging or attractive, by fictionalising part of the subject.

Academia
A licentiate is an academic degree that traditionally conferred the license to teach at a university or to practice a particular profession. The term survived despite the fact that nowadays a doctorate is typically needed in order to teach at a university. The term is also used for a person who holds a licentiate. [4] [5] In English, the degree has never been called a license. In French-speaking countries, the bachelor's degree is called a licence .
In Sweden , Finland , and in some other European university systems, a 'licentiate' is a postgraduate degree between the master's degree and the doctorate. The licentiate is a popular choice in those countries where a full doctoral degree would take five or more years to achieve.

Vehicle licensing
A license to driving certain vehicles has been applied to many countries around the world. Being allowed to drive a certain vehicle requires a specific driving license, the type of license depending on the type of vehicle.

See also
WebPage index: 00167
Open Knowledge International
Open Knowledge International ( OKI ) (known as the Open Knowledge Foundation ( OKF ) until April 2014, [2] then Open Knowledge until May 2016 [3] ) is a global non-profit network that promotes and shares information at no charge, including both content and data. [4] It was founded by Rufus Pollock on 24 May 2004 [5] in Cambridge , UK.

Aims
The aims of Open Knowledge International are: [1]

People
In April 2015 Pavel Richter took on the role of CEO of Open Knowledge International. Pavel was formerly Executive Director of Wikimedia Deutschland . Pollock remains in a leadership role. [8]
The Open Knowledge International Advisory Council includes people from the areas of open access , open data , open content , open science , data visualization and digital rights . In 2015, it consisted of: [9]

Network
As of 2015, Open Knowledge International has 9 official chapters and 49 groups in different countries. [10]

Chapters

Local groups

Working groups
It also supports 19 working groups.

Operations
Many of Open Knowledge International's projects are technical in nature. Its most prominent project, CKAN , is used by many of the world's governments to host open catalogues of data that their countries possess. [12]
The organisation tends to support its aims by hosting infrastructure for semi-independent projects to develop. This approach to organising was hinted as one of its earliest projects was a project management service called KnowledgeForge, which runs on the KForge platform. KnowledgeForge allows sectoral working groups to have space to manage projects related to open knowledge. More widely, the project infrastructure includes both technical and face-to-face aspects. The organisation hosts several dozen mailing lists [13] for virtual discussion, utilises IRC for real-time communications and also hosts events.

Advocacy
Open Knowledge International is an active partner with organisations working in similar areas, such as open educational resources. [14]
Open Knowledge International has produced the Open Knowledge Definition , an attempt to clarify some of the ambiguity surrounding the terminology of openness, [15] as well as the Open Software Service Definition . [16] It also supported the development of the Open Database License (ODbL). [17]
Outside of technology, Open Knowledge International plays a role in advocating for openness broadly. This includes supporting the drafting of reports, facilitating consultation [18] [19] and producing guides. [20]
Rufus Pollock, one of Open Knowledge International's founders, and current board secretary sits on the UK government 's Public Sector Transparency Board . [21]

Technical
The foundation places a strong interest in the use of open source technologies. Its software projects are hosted on GitHub , which utilises the Git version control software . Some of the projects are listed below: [22]

Events
Much of the collaboration with other related organisations occurs via events that the foundation hosts. [38] Its premier event is the Open Knowledge Conference (OKCon), which has been held occasionally since 2007. [39] Other events have been organised within the areas of data visualisation [40] and free information network infrastructure. [41]
Annually, Open Knowledge International supports International Open Data Day

Panton Principles and Fellowships (Open data in Science)
The Panton Principles (for Open Data in Science) in 2010 had large contributions from Open Knowledge people and in 2011 Jonathan Gray and Peter Murray-Rust successfully obtained funding from OSF for two fellowships, held by Sophie Kershaw [42] and Ross Mounce. [43] In 2013 OKF obtained sponsorship from CCIA [44] for 3 fellowships, which were awarded to Rosemarie Graves, [45] Sam Moore [46] and Peter Kraker. [47] [48]

Other
Open Knowledge International also supports Apps for Europe, [49] and D-CENT, a European project created to share and organise data from seven countries, which is running from October 2013 to May 2016. [50]

See also
WebPage index: 00168
Creative Commons license
A Creative Commons ( CC ) license is one of several public copyright licenses that enable the free distribution of an otherwise copyrighted work. A CC license is used when an author wants to give people the right to share, use, and build upon a work that he/she has created. CC provides an author flexibility (for example, he/she might choose to allow only non-commercial uses of his/her own work) and protects the people who use or redistribute an author's work from concerns of copyright infringement as long as they abide by the conditions that are specified in the license by which the author distributes the work.
There are several types of CC licenses. The licenses differ by several combinations that condition the terms of distribution. They were initially released on December 16, 2002 by Creative Commons , a U.S. non-profit corporation founded in 2001. There have also been five versions of the suite of licenses, numbered 1.0 through 4.0. [1] As of 2016 [update] , the 4.0 license suite is the most current.
In October 2014 the Open Knowledge Foundation approved the Creative Commons CC BY , CC BY-SA , and CC0 licenses as conformant with the " Open Definition " for content and data. [2] [3] [4]

Applicable works
Work licensed under a Creative Commons license is governed by applicable copyright law. [5] This allows Creative Commons licenses to be applied to all work falling under copyright, including: books, plays, movies, music, articles, photographs, blogs, and websites. Creative Commons does not recommend the use of Creative Commons licenses for software. [6]
There are over 35,000 works that are available in hardcopy and have a registered ISBN number. Creative Commons splits these works into two categories, one of which encompasses self-published books. [7]
However, application of a Creative Commons license may not modify the rights allowed by fair use or fair dealing or exert restrictions which violate copyright exceptions. [8] Furthermore, Creative Commons licenses are non-exclusive and non-revocable. [9] Any work or copies of the work obtained under a Creative Commons license may continue to be used under that license. [10]
In the case of works protected by multiple Creative Common licenses, the user may choose either. [11]

Types of licenses
The CC licenses all grant the "baseline rights", such as the right to distribute the copyrighted work worldwide for non-commercial purposes, and without modification. [12] The details of each of these licenses depend on the version, and comprises a selection out of four conditions:
The last two clauses are not free content licenses, according to definitions such as DFSG or the Free Software Foundation 's standards, and cannot be used in contexts that require these freedoms, such as Wikipedia . For software , Creative Commons includes three free licenses created by other institutions: the BSD License , the GNU LGPL , and the GNU GPL . [14]
Mixing and matching these conditions produces sixteen possible combinations, of which eleven are valid Creative Commons licenses and five are not. Of the five invalid combinations, four include both the "nd" and "sa" clauses, which are mutually exclusive; and one includes none of the clauses. Of the eleven valid combinations, the five that lack the "by" clause have been retired because 98% of licensors requested attribution, though they do remain available for reference on the website. [15] [16] [17] This leaves six regularly used licenses + the CC0 public domain waiver :

Seven regularly used licenses
[17] [18]
For example, the Creative Commons Attribution (BY) license allows one to share and remix (create derivative works), even for commercial use, so long as attribution is given. [19]

Version 4.0 and international use
The original non-localized Creative Commons licenses were written with the U.S. legal system in mind, therefore the wording may be incompatible with local legislation in other jurisdictions , rendering the licenses unenforceable there. To address this issue, Creative Commons asked its affiliates to translate the various licenses to reflect local laws in a process called " porting ." [20] As of July 2011, Creative Commons licenses have been ported to over 50 jurisdictions worldwide. [21]
The latest version 4.0 of the Creative Commons licenses, released on November 25, 2013, are generic licenses that are applicable to most jurisdictions and do not usually require ports. [22] [23] [24] [25] No new ports have been implemented in version 4.0 of the license. [26] Version 4.0 discourages using ported versions and instead acts as a single global license. [27]

Rights

Attribution
Since 2004, all current licenses (beside the CC0 waiver) require attribution of the original author, the BY component. [16] The attribution must be given to "the best of [one's] ability using the information available". [28] Generally this implies the following:

Non-commercial licenses
The "non-commercial" option included in some Creative Commons licenses is controversial in definition, [29] as it is sometimes unclear what can be considered a non-commercial setting, and application, since its restrictions differ from the principles of open content promoted by other permissive licenses . [30] In 2014 Wikimedia Deutschland published a guide to using Creative Commons licenses as wiki pages for translations and as PDF. [31]

Zero / public domain
Besides licenses, Creative Commons also offers through CC0 a way to release material worldwide into the public domain . [18] CC0 is a legal tool for waiving as many rights as legally possible. [33] Or, when not legally possible, CC0 acts as fallback as public domain equivalent license . [33] Development of CC0 began in 2007 [34] and the tool was released in 2009. [35] [36] A major target of the license was the scientific data community. [37]
In 2010, Creative Commons announced its Public Domain Mark , [38] a tool for labeling works already in the public domain. Together, CC0 and the Public Domain Mark replace the Public Domain Dedication and Certification, [39] which took a U.S.-centric approach and co-mingled distinct operations.
In 2011, the Free Software Foundation added CC0 to its free software licenses , [40] and currently recommends CC0 as the preferred method of releasing software into the public domain . [41]
In February 2012 CC0 was submitted to Open Source Initiative (OSI) for their approval. [42] However, controversy arose over its clause which excluded from the scope of the license any relevant patents held by the copyright holder. This clause was added with scientific data in mind rather than software, but some members of the OSI believed it could weaken users' defenses against software patents . As a result, Creative Commons withdrew their submission, and the license is not currently approved by the OSI. [37] [43]
In 2013, Unsplash began using the CC0 license to distribute free stock photography . [44] [45] It now distributes several million photos a month [46] and has inspired a host of similar sites, including CC0 photography companies and CC0 blogging companies. [47] Lawrence Lessig , the founder of Creative Commons, has contributed to the site. [48] [ dead link ]
In October 2014 the Open Knowledge Foundation approved the Creative Commons CC0 as conformant with the "Open Definition" and recommend the license to dedicate content to the public domain. [3] [4]

Adaptation
Rights in an adaptation can be expressed by a CC license that is compatible with the status or licensing of the original work or works on which the adaptation is based. [49]

Legal aspects
The legal implications of large numbers of works having Creative Commons licensing are difficult to predict, and there is speculation that media creators often lack insight to be able to choose the license which best meets their intent in applying it. [50]
Some works licensed using Creative Commons licenses have been involved in several court cases. [51] Creative Commons itself was not a party to any of these cases; they only involved licensors or licensees of Creative Commons licenses. When the cases went as far as decisions by judges (that is, they were not dismissed for lack of jurisdiction or were not settled privately out of court), they have all validated the legal robustness of Creative Commons public licenses. Here are some notable cases:

Dutch tabloid
In early 2006, podcaster Adam Curry sued a Dutch tabloid who published photos from Curry's Flickr page without Curry's permission. The photos were licensed under the Creative Commons Non-Commercial license. While the verdict was in favor of Curry, the tabloid avoided having to pay restitution to him as long as they did not repeat the offense. Professor Bernt Hugenholtz, main creator of the Dutch CC license and director of the Institute for Information Law of the University of Amsterdam, commented, "The Dutch Court's decision is especially noteworthy because it confirms that the conditions of a Creative Commons license automatically apply to the content licensed under it, and binds users of such content even without expressly agreeing to, or having knowledge of, the conditions of the license." [52] [53] [54] [55]

Virgin Mobile
In 2007, Virgin Mobile Australia launched an Australian bus stop ad campaign promoting their cellphone text messaging service using the work of amateur photographers who uploaded their work to Flickr using a Creative Commons-BY (Attribution) license. Users licensing their images this way freed their work for use by any other entity, as long as the original creator was attributed credit, without any other compensation required. Virgin upheld this single restriction by printing a URL leading to the photographer's Flickr page on each of their ads. However, one picture, depicting 15-year-old Alison Chang at a fund-raising carwash for her church, [56] caused some controversy when she sued Virgin Mobile. The photo was taken by Alison's church youth counselor, Justin Ho-Wee Wong, who uploaded the image to Flickr under the Creative Commons license. [56] In 2008, the case (concerning personality rights rather than copyright as such) was thrown out of a Texas court for lack of jurisdiction. [57] [58]

SGAE vs Fernández
In the fall of 2006, the collecting society Sociedad General de Autores y Editores ( SGAE ) in Spain sued Ricardo Andrés Utrera Fernández, owner of a disco bar located in Badajoz who played CC-licensed music. SGAE argued that Fernández should pay royalties for public performance of the music between November 2002 and August 2005. The Lower Court rejected the collecting society's claims because the owner of the bar proved that the music he was using was not managed by the society. [59]
In February 2006, the Cultural Association Ladinamo (based in Madrid, and represented by Javier de la Cueva ) was granted the use of copyleft music in their public activities. The sentence said: "Admitting the existence of music equipment, a joint evaluation of the evidence practiced, this court is convinced that the defendant prevents communication of works whose management is entrusted to the plaintiff [SGAE], using a repertoire of authors who have not assigned the exploitation of their rights to the SGAE, having at its disposal a database for that purpose and so it is manifested both by the legal representative of the Association and by Manuela Villa Acosta, in charge of the cultural programming of the association, which is compatible with the alternative character of the Association and its integration in the movement called ' copy left '". [60]

GateHouse Media, Inc. vs. That's Great News, LLC
On June 30, 2010 GateHouse Media filed a lawsuit against That's Great News . GateHouse Media owns a number of local newspapers, including Rockford Register Star , which is based in Rockford, Illinois. That's Great News makes plaques out of newspaper articles and sells them to the people featured in the articles. [61] GateHouse sued That's Great News for copyright infringement and breach of contract. GateHouse claimed that TGN violated the non-commercial and no-derivative works restrictions on GateHouse Creative Commons licensed work when TGN published the material on its website. The case was settled on August 17, 2010, though the settlement was not made public. [61] [62]

Drauglis v. Kappa Map Group, LLC
The plaintiff was photographer Art Drauglis, who uploaded several pictures to the photo-sharing website Flickr using Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 Generic License (CC BY-SA), including one entitled "Swain's Lock, Montgomery Co., MD.". The defendant was Kappa Map Group, a map-making company, which downloaded the image and used it in a compilation entitled "Montgomery Co. Maryland Street Atlas". Though there was nothing on the cover that indicated the origin of the picture, the text " Photo: Swain's Lock, Montgomery Co., MD Photographer: Carly Lesser & Art Drauglis, Creative Commoms [ sic ] , CC-BY-SA-2.0 " appeared at the bottom of the back cover.
The validity of the CC BY-SA 2.0 as a license was not in dispute. The CC BY-SA 2.0 requires that the licensee to use nothing less restrictive than the CC BY-SA 2.0 terms. The atlas was sold commercially and not for free reuse by others. The dispute was whether Drauglis' license terms that would apply to "derivative works" applied to the entire atlas. Drauglis sued the defendants on June 2014 for copyright infringement and license breach, seeking declaratory and injunctive relief, damages, fees, and costs. Drauglis asserted, among other things, that Kappa Map Group "exceeded the scope of the License because defendant did not publish the Atlas under a license with the same or similar terms as those under which the Photograph was originally licensed." [63] The judge dismissed the case on that count, ruling that the atlas was not a derivative work of the photograph in the sense of the license. Since the atlas was not a derivative work of the photograph, Kappa Map Group did not need to license the entire atlas under the CC BY-SA 2.0 license. The judge also determined that the work had been properly attributed. [64]

Verband zum Schutz geistigen Eigentums im Internet (VGSE)
This incident has not been tested in court, but it highlights a potentially disturbing practice. In July 2016, German computer magazine LinuxUser reports that a German blogger Christoph Langner used two CC-BY licensed photographs from Berlin photographer Dennis Skley on his private blog Linuxundich.de . Langner duly mentioned the author and the license and added a link to the original. Langner was later contacted by the Verband zum Schutz geistigen Eigentums im Internet (VGSE) (Association for the Protection of Intellectual Property in the Internet) with a demand for €2300 for failing to provide the full name of the work, the full name of the author, the license text, and a source link, as is apparently required by the fine print in the license. Of this sum, €40 goes to the photographer and remainder is retained by VGSE. [65] [66]

Works with a Creative Commons license
Creative Commons maintains a content directory wiki of organizations and projects using Creative Commons licenses. [67] On its website CC also provides case studies of projects using CC licenses across the world. [68] CC licensed content can also be accessed through a number of content directories and search engines (see CC licensed content directories ).

Retired licenses
Due to either disuse or criticism, a number of previously offered Creative Commons licenses have since been retired, [15] [69] and are no longer recommended for new works. The retired licenses include all licenses lacking the Attribution element other than CC0, as well as the following four licenses:

See also
WebPage index: 00169
Derivative work
In copyright law , a derivative work is an expressive creation that includes major copyright-protected elements of an original, previously created first work (the underlying work ). The derivative work becomes a second, separate work independent in form from the first. The transformation, modification or adaptation of the work must be substantial and bear its author's personality to be original and thus protected by copyright. Translations, cinematic adaptations and musical arrangements are common types of derivative works.
Most countries' legal systems seek to protect both original and derivative works. [1] They grant authors the right to impede or otherwise control their integrity and the author's commercial interests. Derivative works and their authors benefit in turn from the full protection of copyright without prejudicing the rights of the original work's author.

Definition

Berne
The Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works , an international copyright treaty, stipulates that derivative works shall be protected although it does not use the term, namely that "Translations, adaptations, arrangements of music and other alterations of a literary or artistic work shall be protected as original works without prejudice to the copyright in the original work". [2]

United States of America
An extensive definition of the term is given by the United States Copyright Act in 17 U.S.C. § 101 :
17 U.S.C. § 103(b) provides:
17 U.S.C. § 106 provides:
US Copyright Office Circular 14: Derivative Works notes that:
The statutory definition is incomplete and the concept of derivative work must be understood with reference to explanatory case law . Three major copyright law issues arise concerning derivative works: (1) what acts are sufficient to cause a copyright-protected derivative work to come into existence; (2) what acts constitute copyright infringement of a copyright in a copyright-protected work; and (3) in what circumstances is a person otherwise liable for infringement of copyright in a copyright-protected derivative work excused from liability by an affirmative defense, such as first sale or fair use ?

European Union
French law prefers the term "œuvre composite" ("composite work") although the term '"œuvre dérivée" is sometimes used. It is defined in article L 113-2, alinea 2 of the Intellectual Property Code as "the new work in which a pre-existing work without the collaboration of its author". [3] The Court of Cassation has interpreted this statue as requiring two distinct inputs at different points in time. [4]
The Court of Justice of the European Union in 2010 decided on a matter of derivative works in Systran v. European Commission (Case T‑19/07 [5] ). However, it was overturned in 2013 [6] based on the conclusion that the case did not fall within the General Court's jurisdiction, after concluding that the dispute had been of a contractual nature, instead of a non-contractual one.

When does derivative-work copyright apply?

Originality requirement
For copyright protection to attach to a later, allegedly derivative work, it must display some originality of its own. It cannot be a rote, uncreative variation on the earlier, underlying work. The latter work must contain sufficient new expression, over and above that embodied in the earlier work for the latter work to satisfy copyright law’s requirement of originality .
Although serious emphasis on originality, at least so designated, began with the Supreme Court’s 1991 decision in Feist v. Rural , some pre- Feist lower court decisions addressed this requirement in relation to derivative works. In Durham Industries, Inc. v. Tomy Corp. [7] and earlier in L. Batlin & Son, Inc. v. Snyder . [8] the Second Circuit held that a derivative work must be original relative to the underlying work on which it is based. Otherwise, it cannot enjoy copyright protection and copying it will not infringe any copyright of the derivative work itself (although copying it may infringe the copyright, if any, of the underlying work on which the derivative work was based).
The Batlin case rested on the copyrightability of an "Uncle Sam" toy bank, first copyrighted in 1886. These toys have Uncle Sam's extended arm and outstretched hand adapted to receive a coin; when the user presses a lever, Uncle Sam appears to put the coin into a carpet bag. One maker of these banks, Jeffrey Snyder, had filed a copyright on such a bank in 1975, planning to import them for the American Bicentennial. Shortly thereafter, another company, L. Batlin & Sons, Inc., also began making a very similar toy bank which was based on Snyder's version (and not, incidentally, on the 19th century original). When the latter attempted to import the toy banks, the US Customs service notified them that they appeared to be infringing on Snyder's copyright, and would not allow the toy banks to be imported. Batlin then got an injunction against Snyder to deny the recording of his copyright and allowing them to import their banks. On appeal to the Second Circuit Court, Snyder took great pains to demonstrate how his banks varied in size and shape from the 19th century original, arguing that his banks, though similar to the older work, differed in a number of significant ways and warranted protection under a new copyright. However, his appeal was denied and the injunction against Snyder's copyright upheld (six members of the court voted to deny, the other three filing a dissenting opinion). Much of this decision focused on the fact that nearly all of the alterations in Snyder's version were made solely to allow the object to be more easily manufactured in plastic rather than metal, and therefore were functional, not artistic or creative. [9] [10] "To extend copyrightability to minuscule variations would simply put a weapon for harassment in the hands of mischievous copiers intent on appropriating and monopolizing public domain work." The issue was not whether or not Batlin's bank was a copy of Snyder's— it undoubtedly was— but whether or not Snyder could claim copyright protection, which the court decided he could not.
In the subsequent Durham case, the court applied the same principle in a suit between two different Disney toy licensees in which one licensee claimed that the other had pirated his Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck and Pluto. Durham conceded that in making these toys it used Tomy's Disney figures as models. That was not determinative. The court said that "the only aspects of Tomy's Disney figures entitled to copyright protection are the non-trivial, original features, if any, contributed by the author or creator of these derivative works." But Tomy's toys reflected "no independent creation, no distinguishable variation from preexisting works, nothing recognizably the author's own contribution that sets Tomy's figures apart from the prototypical Mickey, Donald, and Pluto, authored by Disney and subsequently represented by Disney or its licensees in a seemingly limitless variety of forms and media." Because the court considered that "it is clear that the originality requirement imposed by the Constitution and the Copyright Act has particular significance in the case of derivative works based on copyrighted preexisting works," it denied relief and dismissed the claim. Thus the law is clear that a derivative work is protectable only to the extent that it embodies original expression. Its non-original aspects are not copyright-protectable (what is loosely called "uncopyrightable").
In both of these cases, the defendants were held not to be liable for copyright infringement, even though they presumably copied a considerable amount from the plaintiff's work. They were not liable because the plaintiff did not enjoy copyright protection. The plaintiffs' works lacked enough originality to acquire copyright protection of their own. They were too close to the original works on which they were based.

Lawful works requirement
Copyright ownership in a derivative work attaches only if the derivative work is lawful, because of a license or other "authorization." The U.S. Copyright Office says in its circular on derivative works:
The courts have so far addressed little attention to the issue of lawful (i.e., not unlawful) use without authorization, as in fair-use cases such as the Pretty Woman case. Recently, however, in Keeling v. Hars , [13] the Second Circuit held that, if the creator of an unauthorized work stays within the bounds of fair use and adds sufficient original content, the original contributions in such an unauthorized derivative work are protectable under the Copyright Act. In that case, the plaintiff created a parody stage adaptation of a motion picture, without authorization.

When does derivative-work liability apply?
This issue sometimes arises in the context of the defendant purchasing a copy of a picture or some other work from the copyright owner or a licensee and then reselling it in different context. For example, pictures from greeting cards might be affixed to tiles or one kind of textile product might be turned into another that can be sold at a higher price. In Lee v. A.R.T. Co. , (the Annie Lee case), the defendant affixed the copyright owner’s copyright-protected note cards and small lithographs to tiles and then resold them. [14] The original art was not changed or reproduced, only bonded to ceramic and sold. The court held that this act was not original and creative enough to rise to the level of creating a derivative work, but effectively similar to any other form of display or art frame. [15]
Distribution rights differ from reproduction rights. While the first-sale doctrine entitles the copyright holder to begin the distribution chain of a copyrighted work - by selling note cards, for instance, or giving them away - it does not permit the copyright holder to control what is done with the item after it is distributed. Unless there is a separate contract between the parties, the person who owns the object has the right to give it away or resell it him or herself. In the case of Lee v. A.R.T. , since bonding the cards to ceramic did not create a derivative work, A.R.T. Co. was legally within their rights to resell the cards in such a fashion.
When the defendant's modification of the plaintiff's work is de minimis , too insubstantial to "count", there is no infringing preparation of a derivative work. So long as there is no derivative work, there is no infringement—since no conduct that the Copyright Act forbids has occurred.

Fixation requirement
In a House Report, [16] Congress said:
The 9th Circuit, however, has resisted this expansive view of liability for derivative works by imposing its own quasi-fixation requirement. In Micro Star v. FormGen Inc. [17] Judge Kozinski wrote:

The fair use defense in derivative work cases
Even if a work is found to be an unauthorized derivative work, an alleged infringer can escape liability via the defense of fair use . For example, in Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc. , the Supreme Court found that although a parody of the song " Oh, Pretty Woman " by 2 Live Crew was an unauthorized derivative work, fair use was still available as a complete defense. This case marked the Supreme Court's pointing to transformativeness as a major clue to application of the fair use defense to derivative works.
The defense of fair use has become very important in computer- and Internet-related works. Two 1992 Ninth Circuit decisions are illustrative.
In Lewis Galoob Toys, Inc. v. Nintendo of America, Inc. , [18] the appellate court held that it was a fair use for owners of copies of video games, such as Super Mario Bros. , to use Galoob's product the Game Genie to customize the difficulty or other characteristics of the game by granting a character more strength, speed, or endurance. Nintendo strongly opposed Galoob's product, allegedly because it interfered with the maintenance of the "Nintendo Culture," which Nintendo claimed was important to its marketing program. [19] The court held, among other things, that the fair use defense shielded Galoob's conduct. The court said that "a party who distributes a copyrighted work cannot dictate how that work is to be enjoyed. Consumers may use ... a Game Genie to enhance a Nintendo Game cartridge’s audiovisual display in such a way as to make the experience more enjoyable."
In Sega Enterprises, Ltd. v. Accolade, Inc. , [20] the court excused Accolade from copyright infringement liability on fair use grounds. Nintendo and Sega produced video game consoles. Each stored the games in plastic cartridges that provided game data to the consoles. By way of analogy, the Sega hardware console's “platform” differed from Nintendo's, as a Macintosh platform differs from that of a PC . Hence, a video game cartridge that works on one system does not work on the other. Sega and Nintendo sought to “license” access to their hardware platforms, and each company developed software "locks" to keep out cartridges that did not have the proper "key." Accolade sought a license from Sega for its key, but negotiations broke down over price. Accolade then decided to reverse engineer Sega's lock and key system. To do so, it had to download (copy) all of the computer code from Sega's product and disassemble it (translate it from machine code into human-readable assembly). Accolade succeeded and began to market new video games that it independently wrote, which were capable of being operated in Sega consoles. This led to copyright infringement litigation, in which Sega alleged that the downloading was improper copying (reproduction) of Sega's code. The court held that Sega was trying to use the copyright in its computer code to maintain a monopoly over the sale of video games, to which it was not legally entitled. Accolade downloaded the computer code only to ascertain how the lock worked, so that it could make a key that would permit its games to work in Sega consoles. The court held that such a use was fair use: "We conclude that where disassembly is the only way to gain access to the ideas and functional elements embodied in a copyrighted computer program and where there is a legitimate reason for seeking such access, disassembly is a fair use of the copyrighted work, as a matter of law." [21] However, note that since the passage of the anti-circumvention statutes contained in the DMCA , further court cases involving the fair-use defense of such activities have yet [ citation needed ] to be actually litigated.

Transformativeness
A crucial factor in current legal analysis of derivative works is transformativeness , largely as a result of the Supreme Court's 1994 decision in Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc. The Court's opinion emphasized the importance of transformativeness in its fair use analysis of the parody of " Oh, Pretty Woman " involved in the Campbell case. In parody, as the Court explained, the transformativeness is the new insight that readers, listeners, or viewers gain from the parodic treatment of the original work. As the Court pointed out, the words of the parody "derisively demonstrat[e] how bland and banal the Orbison [Pretty Woman] song" is.
The modern emphasis of transformativeness in fair use analysis stems from a 1990 article by Judge Pierre N. Leval in the Harvard Law Review , "Toward a Fair Use Standard", [22] which the Court quoted and cited extensively in its Campbell opinion. In his article, Leval explained the social importance of transformative use of another's work and what justifies such a taking:
The concept, as Leval and the Campbell Court described it, developed in relation to fair use of traditional works: literary works, musical works, and pictorial works. But recently courts have extended this rationale to Internet and computer-related works. In such cases, as illustrated by Kelly v. Arriba Soft Corporation [23] and Perfect 10, Inc. v. Amazon.com, Inc. , [24] the courts find a use (such as that of thumbnails in an image search engine, for indexing purposes) transformative because it provides an added benefit to the public, which was not previously available and might remain unavailable without the derivative or secondary use. The Ninth Circuit Court explained this in the Perfect 10 case:
The Ninth Circuit's treatment of transformativeness and fair use in the Arriba Soft and Perfect 10 cases illustrates different data points on the copyright infringement spectrum, at least with respect to transformativeness and fair use. Arriba Soft was a relatively polar case. The harm to Kelly, the copyright owner, was negligible; it was hardly more than hurt feelings, because as the Ninth Circuit said in its opinion – "Arriba's creation and use of the thumbnails [the derivative work] does not harm the market for or value of Kelly' s images." On the other hand, the court found that Arriba's use benefited the public: "Arriba's use of the images serves a different function than Kelly's use — improving access to information on the internet versus artistic expression." The balance thus tilted strongly in Arriba's favor. The foregoing analysis in this case thus made the Ninth Circuit to be the first court to make the equation highly beneficial to public = transformative , and as the Supreme Court explained in Campbell , the more transformative a derivative use the more likely the use is to be a fair use.
The Campbell Court recognized that the balance may not always be one-sided, as it was in Campbell itself and in Arriba Soft . In the Perfect 10 case the interests were more evenly balanced, for the first time in a derivative work case involving new information technology. Both Google and Perfect 10 had legitimate interests at stake and support for their respective positions. Thus, there was a finding that "Google’s wide-ranging use of thumbnails is highly transformative: their creation and display is designed to, and does, display visual search results quickly and efficiently to users of Google Image Search." But Google's use had some commercial aspects and was claimed to impair P10's commercial interests. Yet, on balance the Ninth Circuit found that the transformativeness outweighed the other fair use factors because "Google has provided a significant benefit to the public" in facilitating image searches by means of thumbnail images. This opinion provided a second instance of the "beneficial=transformative" equation described in the preceding paragraph (from the Arriba Soft case).
The use of pop-up advertising, in which third-party advertisements pop up on a competitor’s Web page and change its appearance to allegedly create a derivative work, [25] may present transformativeness issues. The proponents of such pop-ups (the defendants in infringement litigation) argue that they provide the public with additional information about making buying decisions (particularly in the form of price comparisons), but the opponents (the plaintiffs in these cases) argue that the defendants' conduct adversely affects the Web page proprietor's interest in the "integrity" of its Web page and its investment interest in creating and maintaining the page. [26]
An example of promotional advertising for a pop-up company, illustrating various pop-up techniques for changing the appearance of another firm's Web page is shown in this Flash . [27]
Little attention has been paid to the balancing of the interests at stake in derivative work copyright disputes where conflicting interests are present. In the Perfect 10 and Castle Rock cases, however, the courts appeared to have recognized that some conflict existed, but they finessed the balancing task by finding one side or the other's interest negligible, so that no serious work had to be done in gauging the balance. although several courts have found no copyright infringement for one reason or another. In an analogous area of copyright law, a solution reached was to permit the use challenged as infringement, but to require payment of a reasonable royalty. [28]

Examples of derivative works under U.S. law
The most famous derivative work in the world has been said to be L.H.O.O.Q. , [29] also known as the Mona Lisa With a Moustache . Generations of U.S. copyright law professors — since at least the 1950s — have used it as a paradigmatic example. Marcel Duchamp created the work by adding, among other things, a moustache, goatee, and the caption L.H.O.O.Q. (meaning in French “She is hot in the ass”) to Leonardo’s iconic work. These few seemingly insubstantial additions were highly transformative because they incensed contemporary French bourgeoisie [30] by mocking their cult of “Jocondisme,” [31] at that time said to be “practically a secular religion of the French bourgeoisie and an important part of their self image.” Duchamp’s defacement of their icon was considered “a major stroke of épater le bourgeois .” Thus it has been said that the “transformation of a cult icon into an object of ridicule by adding a small quantum of additional material can readily be deemed preparation of a derivative work.” [32] A parodic derivative work based on Duchamp's parodic derivative work is shown at this location .
The mockery of “Oh, Pretty Woman,” discussed in Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc. , is a similar example of transforming a work by showing it in a harsh new light or criticizing its underlying assumptions. Because of the parody's transformativeness, the Supreme Court found the derivative work a fair use.
Trivia books based on TV shows, such as Seinfeld , are considered derivative works, for purposes of infringement liability, at least if they incorporate a substantial amount of copyright-protected content from the TV episodes. [33] In Castle Rock the court found that any transformative purpose possessed in the derivative work was "slight to non-existent." Accordingly, the court held that defendants had prepared an infringing derivative work.
The musical West Side Story , is a derivative work based on Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet , because it uses numerous expressive elements from the earlier work. [34] However, Shakespeare's drama Romeo and Juliet is also a derivative work that draws heavily from Pyramus and Thisbe and other sources. Nevertheless, no legal rule prevents a derivative work from being based on a work that is itself a derivative work based on a still earlier work — at least, so long as the last work borrows expressive elements from the second work that are original with the second work rather than taken from the earliest work. The key is whether the copied elements are original and expressive (not merely conventional or mise en scène ); if that is so, the second or derivative work is independently subject to copyright protection, and if that is not, the second work (if unauthorized) may infringe the first, but it is not independently copyrightable. [35]
Pop-up advertising provides derivative works that can be transformative, [36] in that they provide the public with new functionality not previously offered — they may provide comparative price information, for example. [37] Yet, pop-ups may also impair interests of the proprietors of Web pages subjected to them. For example, the Half.com pop-up ad shown above left informs the public as to price competition between Half.com and Amazon.com . But the derivative-work version of Amazon's web page partially covers up Amazon's advertising (at least temporarily) and adversely affects Amazon's investment interest in the preparation and maintenance of its web page. This may present a more difficult case of balancing interests than that which the court faced in Arriba Soft or Perfect 10.
The gif animation parody of Duchamp’s work referred to above in this section, and pop-up advertising are examples of derivative works that became possible only with the advent of recent technology. The last sentence of section 101’s definition of derivative work (at the beginning of section 1.1 of this Article) defines annotations as derivative works. Annotations of other works have long existed, but new technology permits the creation of new forms of annotation. An illustration of such a new-technology annotation is provided in this example of an annotation of Chaucer’s Prologue to the Canterbury Tales , in which a small pop-up window provides the definition of a difficult word when the cursor is moused over the word. [38]

Canadian law
Though Canadian copyright law does not explicitly define "derivative work", the Copyright Act of Canada does provide the following generally agreed-upon [39] [40] examples of what constitutes a derivative work in section 3 :
In Théberge v. Galerie d'Art du Petit Champlain Inc. , [2002] 2 S.C.R. 336 , 2002 SCC 34, the Supreme Court of Canada clarified the statutory recognition of derivative works extended only to circumstances where there was production and multiplication, i.e. reproduction . Where there is no derivation, reproduction, or production of a new and original work which incorporates the artist's work, there is no violation of the Copyright Act.

See also
WebPage index: 00170
Duplicate content
Duplicate content is a term used in the field of search engine optimization to describe content that appears on more than one web page. The duplicate content can be substantial parts of the content within or across domains and can be either exactly duplicate or closely similar. [1] When multiple pages contain essentially the same content, search engines such as Google and Bing can penalize or cease displaying the copying site in any relevant search results.

Types

Non-malicious
Non-malicious duplicate content may include variations of the same page, such as versions optimized for normal HTML, mobile devices, or printer-friendliness, or store items that can be shown via multiple distinct URLs. [1] Duplicate content issues can also arise when a site is accessible under multiple subdomains, such as with or without the "www." or where sites fail to handle the trailing slash of URLs correctly. [2] Another common source of non-malicious duplicate content is pagination , in which content and/or corresponding comments are divided into separate pages. [3]
Syndicated content is a popular form of duplicated content. If a site syndicates content from other sites, it's important to link back to the original article. [1] [ why? ]

Malicious
Malicious duplicate content refers to content that is intentionally duplicated in an effort to manipulate search results and gain more traffic. This is known as search spam . There are number of tools available to verify the uniqueness of the content. [4] In certain cases, search engines penalize websites' and individual offending pages' rankings in the search engine results pages (SERPs) for duplicate content considered "spammy."

Resolutions
If content has been copied, there are multiple resolutions available to both parties. [5]
A HTTP 301 redirect (301 Moved Permanently) is a method of dealing with duplicate content to redirect users and search engine crawlers to the single pertinent version of the content. [1]

See also
WebPage index: 00171
Comparison of source code hosting facilities
A source code repository is a file archive and web hosting facility where a large amount of source code , for software or for web pages , is kept, either publicly or privately. They are often used by open-source software projects and other multi-developer projects to handle various versions. They help developers submit patches of code in an organized fashion. Often these web sites support version control , bug tracking , release management , mailing lists , and wiki -based documentation.
People who write software retain their copyright when their software is posted to any code hosting facilities, including the "non-gnu" section of GNU Savannah —with the exception of contributors to FSF-copyrighted programs at GNU Savannah . [1] [2] [3]

Overview

General information

Features

Available version control systems

Popularity

Specialized hosting facilities
The following are open-source software hosting facilities that only serve a specific narrowly focused community or technology.

Former hosting facilities

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00172
Computer-aided design
Computer-aided design ( CAD ) is the use of computer systems (or workstations ) to aid in the creation, modification, analysis, or optimization of a design . [1] CAD software is used to increase the productivity of the designer, improve the quality of design, improve communications through documentation, and to create a database for manufacturing. [2] CAD output is often in the form of electronic files for print, machining, or other manufacturing operations. The term CADD (for Computer Aided Design and Drafting ) is also used. [3]
Its use in designing electronic systems is known as electronic design automation , or EDA . In mechanical design it is known as mechanical design automation ( MDA ) or computer-aided drafting ( CAD ), which includes the process of creating a technical drawing with the use of computer software . [4]
CAD software for mechanical design uses either vector-based graphics to depict the objects of traditional drafting, or may also produce raster graphics showing the overall appearance of designed objects. However, it involves more than just shapes. As in the manual drafting of technical and engineering drawings , the output of CAD must convey information, such as materials , processes , dimensions , and tolerances , according to application-specific conventions.
CAD may be used to design curves and figures in two-dimensional (2D) space; or curves, surfaces, and solids in three-dimensional (3D) space. [5]
CAD is an important industrial art extensively used in many applications, including automotive , shipbuilding , and aerospace industries, industrial and architectural design , prosthetics , and many more. CAD is also widely used to produce computer animation for special effects in movies, advertising and technical manuals, often called DCC digital content creation . The modern ubiquity and power of computers means that even perfume bottles and shampoo dispensers are designed using techniques unheard of by engineers of the 1960s. Because of its enormous economic importance, CAD has been a major driving force for research in computational geometry , computer graphics (both hardware and software), and discrete differential geometry . [6]
The design of geometric models for object shapes, in particular, is occasionally called computer-aided geometric design ( CAGD ). [7]

Overview of CAD Software
Starting around the mid 1970s, as computer aided design systems began to provide more capability than just an ability to reproduce manual drafting with electronic drafting, the cost benefit for companies to switch to CAD became apparent. The benefits of CAD systems over manual drafting are the capabilities one often takes for granted from computer systems today; automated generation of Bill of Material , auto layout in integrated circuits , interference checking, and many others. Eventually CAD provided the designer with the ability to perform engineering calculations. During this transition, calculations were still performed either by hand or by those individuals who could run computer programs. CAD was a revolutionary change in the engineering industry, where draftsmen, designers and engineering roles begin to merge. It did not eliminate departments, as much as it merged departments and empowered draftsman, designers and engineers. CAD is just another example of the pervasive effect computers were beginning to have on industry. Current computer-aided design software packages range from 2D vector -based drafting systems to 3D solid and surface modelers. Modern CAD packages can also frequently allow rotations in three dimensions, allowing viewing of a designed object from any desired angle, even from the inside looking out. Some CAD software is capable of dynamic mathematical modeling, in which case it may be marketed as CAD.
CAD technology is used in the design of tools and machinery and in the drafting and design of all types of buildings, from small residential types (houses) to the largest commercial and industrial structures (hospitals and factories). [8]
CAD is mainly used for detailed engineering of 3D models and/or 2D drawings of physical components, but it is also used throughout the engineering process from conceptual design and layout of products, through strength and dynamic analysis of assemblies to definition of manufacturing methods of components. It can also be used to design objects. Furthermore, many CAD applications now offer advanced rendering and animation capabilities so engineers can better visualize their product designs. 4D BIM is a type of virtual construction engineering simulation incorporating time or schedule related information for project management.
CAD has become an especially important technology within the scope of computer-aided technologies , with benefits such as lower product development costs and a greatly shortened design cycle. CAD enables designers to layout and develop work on screen, print it out and save it for future editing, saving time on their drawings.

Uses
Computer-aided design is one of the many tools used by engineers and designers and is used in many ways depending on the profession of the user and the type of software in question.
CAD is one part of the whole Digital Product Development (DPD) activity within the Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) processes, and as such is used together with other tools, which are either integrated modules or stand-alone products, such as:
CAD is also used for the accurate creation of photo simulations that are often required in the preparation of Environmental Impact Reports, in which computer-aided designs of intended buildings are superimposed into photographs of existing environments to represent what that locale will be like, where the proposed facilities are allowed to be built. Potential blockage of view corridors and shadow studies are also frequently analyzed through the use of CAD.
CAD has been proven to be useful to engineers as well. Using four properties which are history, features, parameterization, and high level constraints. The construction history can be used to look back into the model's personal features and work on the single area rather than the whole model. Parameters and constraints can be used to determine the size, shape, and other properties of the different modeling elements. The features in the CAD system can be used for the variety of tools for measurement such as tensile strength, yield strength, electrical or electro-magnetic properties. Also its stress, strain, timing or how the element gets affected in certain temperatures, etc.

Types
There are several different types of CAD, [9] each requiring the operator to think differently about how to use them and design their virtual components in a different manner for each.
There are many producers of the lower-end 2D systems, including a number of free and open source programs. These provide an approach to the drawing process without all the fuss over scale and placement on the drawing sheet that accompanied hand drafting, since these can be adjusted as required during the creation of the final draft.
3D wireframe is basically an extension of 2D drafting (not often used today). Each line has to be manually inserted into the drawing. The final product has no mass properties associated with it and cannot have features directly added to it, such as holes. The operator approaches these in a similar fashion to the 2D systems, although many 3D systems allow using the wireframe model to make the final engineering drawing views.
3D "dumb" solids are created in a way analogous to manipulations of real world objects (not often used today). Basic three-dimensional geometric forms (prisms, cylinders, spheres, and so on) have solid volumes added or subtracted from them, as if assembling or cutting real-world objects. Two-dimensional projected views can easily be generated from the models. Basic 3D solids don't usually include tools to easily allow motion of components, set limits to their motion, or identify interference between components.
There are two types of 3D Solid Modeling
Top end systems offer the capabilities to incorporate more organic, aesthetics and ergonomic features into designs. Freeform surface modeling is often combined with solids to allow the designer to create products that fit the human form and visual requirements as well as they interface with the machine.

Technology
Originally software for Computer-Aided Design systems was developed with computer languages such as Fortran , ALGOL but with the advancement of object-oriented programming methods this has radically changed. Typical modern parametric feature based modeler and freeform surface systems are built around a number of key C modules with their own APIs . A CAD system can be seen as built up from the interaction of a graphical user interface (GUI) with NURBS geometry and/or boundary representation (B-rep) data via a geometric modeling kernel . A geometry constraint engine may also be employed to manage the associative relationships between geometry, such as wireframe geometry in a sketch or components in an assembly.
Unexpected capabilities of these associative relationships have led to a new form of prototyping called digital prototyping . In contrast to physical prototypes, which entail manufacturing time in the design. That said, CAD models can be generated by a computer after the physical prototype has been scanned using an industrial CT scanning machine. Depending on the nature of the business, digital or physical prototypes can be initially chosen according to specific needs.
Today, CAD systems exist for all the major platforms ( Windows , Linux , UNIX and Mac OS X ); some packages even support multiple platforms.
Right now, no special hardware is required for most CAD software. However, some CAD systems can do graphically and computationally intensive tasks, so a modern graphics card , high speed (and possibly multiple) CPUs and large amounts of RAM may be recommended.
The human-machine interface is generally via a computer mouse but can also be via a pen and digitizing graphics tablet . Manipulation of the view of the model on the screen is also sometimes done with the use of a Spacemouse/SpaceBall . Some systems also support stereoscopic glasses for viewing the 3D model .Technologies which in the past were limited to larger installations or specialist applications have become available to a wide group of users.These include the CAVE or HMD`s and interactive devices like motion-sensing technology

Software
CAD software enables engineers and architects to design, inspect and manage engineering projects within an integrated graphical user interface (GUI) on a personal computer system. Most applications support solid modeling with boundary representation (B-Rep) and NURBS geometry, and enable the same to be published in a variety of formats. A geometric modeling kernel is a software component that provides solid modeling and surface modeling features to CAD applications.
Based on market statistics, commercial software from Autodesk, Dassault Systems, Siemens PLM Software and PTC dominate the CAD industry. [10] [11] The following is a list of major CAD applications, grouped by usage statistics. [12]
[[

History
Designers have long used computers for their calculations. [13] [14] [15] [16] Digital computers were used in power system analysis or optimization as early as proto-" Whirlwind " in 1949 . Circuit [17] design theory, or power network methodology would be algebraic , symbolic , and often vector -based. Examples of problems being solved in the mid-1940s to 50s include, Servo motors controlled by generated pulse (1949), The digital computer with built-in compute operations to automatically co-ordinate transforms to compute radar related vectors (1951) and the essentially graphic mathematical process of forming a shape with a digital machine tool (1952). [18] These were accomplished with the use of computer software. The man credited with coining the term CAD. [19] Douglas T. Ross stated "As soon as I saw the interactive display equipment," [being used by radar operators 1953] it would be just what his data reduction group needed. With the Lincoln Lab people, they were the only ones who used the big,complex display systems put in for the pre-SAGE,Cape Cod system. But "we used it for our own personal workstation.". [20] The designers of these very early computers built utility programs so that programmers could debug programs using flow charts on a display scope with logical switches that could be opened and closed during the debugging session. They found that they could create electronic symbols and geometric figures to be used to create simple circuit diagrams and flow charts. [21] They made the pleasant discovery that an object once drawn could be reproduced at will, its orientation, Linkage [ flux , mechanical , lexical scoping ] or scale changed. This suggested numerous possibilities to them. It took ten years of interdisciplinary development [22] work before SKETCHPAD sitting on evolving math libraries emerged from MIT's labs. Additional developments were carried out in the 1960s within the aircraft, automotive, industrial control and electronics industries in the area of 3D surface construction, NC programming and design analysis, most of it independent of one another and often not publicly published until much later. Some of the mathematical description work on curves was developed in the early 1940s by Robert Issac Newton from Pawtucket, Rhode Island. Robert A. Heinlein in his 1957 novel The Door into Summer suggested the possibility of a robotic Drafting Dan . However, probably the most important work on polynomial curves and sculptured surface was done by Pierre Bézier , Paul de Casteljau ( Citroen ), Steven Anson Coons ( MIT , Ford ), James Ferguson ( Boeing ), Carl de Boor ( GM ), Birkhoff (GM) and Garibedian (GM) in the 1960s and W. Gordon (GM) and R. Riesenfeld in the 1970s.
The invention of the 3D CAD/CAM is attributed to a French engineer, Pierre Bezier ( Arts et Métiers ParisTech , Renault). After his mathematical work concerning surfaces, he developed UNISURF , between 1966 and 1968, to ease the design of parts and tools for the automotive industry. Then, UNISURF became the working base for the following generations of CAD software.
It is argued that a turning point was the development of the SKETCHPAD system at MIT [23] [24] by Ivan Sutherland (who later created a graphics technology company with Dr. David Evans). The distinctive feature of SKETCHPAD was that it allowed the designer to interact with his computer graphically: the design can be fed into the computer by drawing on a CRT monitor with a light pen . Effectively, it was a prototype of graphical user interface , an indispensable feature of modern CAD. Sutherland presented his paper Sketchpad: A Man-Machine Graphical Communication System in 1963 at a Joint Computer Conference having worked on it as his PhD thesis paper for a few years. Quoting, "For drawings where motion of the drawing, or analysis of a drawn problem is of value to the user, Sketchpad excels. For highly repetitive drawings or drawings where accuracy is required, Sketchpad is sufficiently faster than conventional techniques to be worthwhile. For drawings which merely communicate with shops, it is probably better to use conventional paper and pencil." Over time efforts would be directed toward the goal of having the designers drawings communicate not just with shops but with the shop tool itself. This goal would be a long time arriving.
The first commercial applications of CAD were in large companies in the automotive and aerospace industries, as well as in electronics. Only large corporations could afford the computers capable of performing the calculations. Notable company projects were, a joint project of GM (Dr. Patrick J.Hanratty) and IBM ( Sam Matsa , Doug Ross's MIT APT research assistant) to develop a prototype system for design engineers DAC-1 (Design Augmented by Computer) 1964; Lockheed projects; Bell GRAPHIC 1 and Renault .
One of the most influential events in the development of CAD was the founding of MCS (Manufacturing and Consulting Services Inc.) in 1971 by Dr. P. J. Hanratty, [25] who wrote the system ADAM (Automated Drafting And Machining) but more importantly supplied code to companies such as McDonnell Douglas ( Unigraphics ), Computervision ( CADDS ), Calma , Gerber , Autotrol and Control Data .
As computers became more affordable, the application areas have gradually expanded. The development of CAD software for personal desktop computers was the impetus for almost universal application in all areas of construction.
Other key points in the 1960s and 1970s would be the foundation of CAD systems United Computing , Intergraph , IBM , Intergraph IGDS in 1974 (which led to Bentley Systems MicroStation in 1984).
CAD implementations have evolved dramatically since then. Initially, with 3D in the 1970s, it was typically limited to producing drawings similar to hand-drafted drawings. Advances in programming and computer hardware, [26] [27] notably solid modeling in the 1980s, have allowed more versatile applications of computers in design activities.
Key products for 1981 were the solid modelling packages - Romulus (ShapeData) and Uni-Solid (Unigraphics) based on PADL-2 and the release of the surface modeler CATIA ( Dassault Systemes ). Autodesk was founded 1982 by John Walker, which led to the 2D system AutoCAD . The next milestone was the release of Pro/ENGINEER in 1987, which heralded greater usage of feature-based modeling methods and parametric linking of the parameters of features. Also of importance to the development of CAD was the development of the B-rep solid modeling kernels (engines for manipulating geometrically and topologically consistent 3D objects) Parasolid (ShapeData) and ACIS (Spatial Technology Inc.) at the end of the 1980s and beginning of the 1990s, both inspired by the work of Ian Braid. This led to the release of mid-range packages such as SolidWorks and TriSpective (later known as IRONCAD ) in 1995, Solid Edge (then Intergraph ) in 1996 and Autodesk Inventor in 1999. An independent geometric modeling kernel has been evolving in Russia since the 1990s. [28] Nikolay Golovanov joined ASCON Company in 1994 from the Kolomna Engineering Design Bureau and began development of C3D – the geometric kernel of the Russian popular CAD system, KOMPAS-3D. [29] Nowadays, C3D (C3D Labs) is the most valued Russian CAD product in the category of "components", i.e. products designed for integration in the end-user CAD systems of Russian and global vendors. [30]

See also
WebPage index: 00173
Open-access mandate
An open-access mandate is a policy adopted by a research institution, research funder, or government which requires researchers—usually university faculty or research staff and/or research grant recipients—to make their published, peer-reviewed journal articles and conference papers open access (1) by self-archiving their final, peer-reviewed drafts in a freely accessible institutional repository or disciplinary repository ("Green OA") or (2) by publishing them in an open-access journal ("Gold OA") [1] [2] [3] [4] or both.

Characteristics
Among the universities that have adopted open-access mandates for faculty are Harvard University , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , University College London , Queensland University of Technology , University of Minho (Portugal), University of Liege and ETH Zürich . Among the funding organizations that have adopted open-access mandates for grant recipients are National Institutes of Health (with the NIH Public Access Policy ), Research Councils UK , National Fund for Scientific Research , Wellcome Trust and European Research Council . For a full index of institutional and funder open-access mandates adopted to date, see the Registry of Open Access Mandatory Archiving Polices (ROARMAP) . [5]
Open-access mandates can be classified in many ways: by the type of mandating organization (employing institution or research funder), by the locus (institutional or institution-external) and timing of deposit itself (immediate, delayed), by the time (immediate, delayed) at which the deposit is made open access, and by whether or not there is a default copyright-retention contract (and whether it can be waived). Mandate types can also be compared for strength and effectiveness (in terms of the annual volume, proportion and timing of deposits, relative to total annual article output, as well as the time that access to the deposit is set as open access. [6] Mandates are classified and ranked by some of these properties in MELIBEA. [7]

Institutional and funder mandates
Universities can adopt open-access mandates for their faculty. All such mandates make allowances for special cases. [8] Tenured faculty cannot be required to publish; nor can they be required to make their publications open access. [9] However, mandates can take the form of administrative procedures, such as designating repository deposit as the official means of submitting publications for institutional research performance review, or for research grant applications or renewal. [10] Many European university mandates have taken the form of administrative requirements, whereas many U.S. university mandates have taken the form of a unanimous or near-unanimous self-imposed faculty consensus [11] consisting of a default rights-retention contract (together with a waiver option for individual special cases). [12]
Research funders such as government funding agencies or private foundations can adopt open-access mandates as contractual conditions for receiving funding. [8]

Principal kinds of open-access policies
"Mandate" can mean either "authorize" or "oblige". Both senses are important in inducing researchers to provide OA. Open-access advocate Peter Suber has remarked that "'mandate' is not a good word..." for open-access policies, "...but neither is any other English word." [8] Other ways to describe a mandate include "shifting the default publishing practice to open access" in the case of university faculty or "putting an open-access condition" on grant recipients. [13] Mandates are stronger than policies which either request or encourage open access, because they require that authors provide open access. Some mandates allow the author to opt out if they give reasons for doing so. [13]
Mandates may include the following clauses:

Locus of deposit
Most institutional open-access mandates require that authors self archive their papers in their own institutional repository . Some funder mandates specify institutional deposit, some specify institution-external deposit, and some allow either.

Timing of deposit
Mandates may require deposit immediately upon publication (or acceptance for publication) or after an allowable embargo.

Timing of opening access to deposit
Mandates may require opening access to the deposit immediately upon publication (or acceptance for publication) or after an allowable embargo.

Instances

Canadian funding agencies
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) proposed a mandate in 2006 and adopted it in September 2007, [15] becoming the first North American public research funder to do so. The CIHR Policy on Access to Research Outputs [16] provides two options to researchers: publication in open access journals, and making their manuscripts available in an online central ( PubMed Central Canada is recommended) or institutional repository.
In October 2013, the two other Canadian federal funding agencies, the National Science and Engineering Council (NSERC) and the Social Science and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) jointly proposed the same mandate as CIHR's, and launched a two-month consultation on what will become the Tri-Agency Open Access Policy. [17]
On February 27, 2015 a Tri-Agency Open Access Policy on Publications was announced. [18] [19] Peer-reviewed journal publications arising from Agency-supported research must be made freely available within 12 months of publication, whether by depositing in an online repository or by publishing in a journal that offers immediate or delayed open access. The policy is effective for grants awarded from May 1, 2015 onward.
On May 1, 2015 the International Development Research Centre adopted a new open access policy. [20] Books and journal articles must be made freely available within 12 months of publication, whether by publishing open access and using open access journals, or by uploading to an open access repository. The policy is effective for proposals received on or after July 20, 2015. [21]

United States funding agencies
In May 2006, the US Federal Research Public Access Act (FRPAA) [22] was proposed toward improving the NIH Public Access Policy. [23] Besides points about making open access mandatory, to which the NIH complied in 2008, it argues to extend self-archiving to the full spectrum of major US-funded research. In addition, the FRPAA would no longer stipulate that the self-archiving must be central; the deposit can now be in the author's own institutional repository (IR). The new U.S. National Institutes of Health 's Public Access Policy took effect in April 2008 and states that "all articles arising from NIH funds must be submitted to PubMed Central upon acceptance for publication". [23] It stipulates self-archiving in PubMed Central rather than in the author's own institutional repository . In 2012, the NIH announced it would enforce its Public Access Policy by blocking the renewal of grant funds to authors who don't follow the policy. [24]
In February 2013, the Fair Access to Science and Technology Research bill was introduced into both houses of Congress. It was described as a "strengthened version of FRPAA" [25] In the same month, the White House issued a directive requiring federal agencies "with over $100 million in annual conduct of research and development expenditures" to develop, within the next 6 months, a plan to make the peer-reviewed publications directly arising from Federal funding "publicly accessible to search, retrieve, and analyze". [26]

European funding agencies
In April 2006, the European Commission [27] recommended: "EC Recommendation A1: "Research funding agencies... should [e]stablish a European policy mandating published articles arising from EC-funded research to be available after a given time period in open access archives..." This recommendation has since been updated and strengthened by the European Research Advisory Board (EURAB). [28] The OpenAIRE ( Open Access Infrastructure for Research in Europe ) project has since been started.
The global shift towards open access to the results of publicly funded research (publications and data) has been a core strategy in the European Commission to improve knowledge circulation and thus innovation. It is illustrated in particular by the general principle for open access to scientific publications in Horizon 2020 and the pilot for research data. [29] In 2012, via a Recommendation, the European Commission encouraged all EU Member States to put publicly funded research results in the public sphere in order to strengthen science and the knowledge-based economy. [30]
To somewhat improve on the European Commission's (and FRPAA's) allowable embargo of up to six months, EURAB has revised the mandate: all articles must be deposited immediately upon acceptance; the allowable delay applies only to the time when access to the deposit must be made open access rather than to the time when it must be deposited. This is intended to permit individual users to use an eprint request "email eprint" button or "Fair Dealing" button found on some archives (e.g., DSPACE , [31] EPrints [32] ) to send a semi-automatic email message to the author requesting an individual eprint during the embargo period. [32] [33] This is not open access, but may provide for some needs during any embargo. A related idea was later put forth as the Open Access Button .

Effectiveness
For the four institutions with the oldest self-archiving mandates, the averaged percentage of green open-access self-archiving has been compared to the percentage for control articles from other institutions published in the same journals (for years 2002–2009, measured in 2011). Open-access mandates triple the percent Green OA (see figure below). [34] [35] Respective totals are derived from the Thomson Reuters Web of Science .

Tracking mandates
As of May 2015, open-access mandates have been adopted by over 550 universities and research institutions, and over 140 research funders worldwide. [36] Examples of universities which have open-access mandates are Harvard University [37] and MIT [38] in the United States and University College London [39] and ETH Zürich [40] in the European Union. Funders which require open access when their funding recipients publish include the NIH in the US and RCUK and ERC [41] in the EU. Mandate policy models and guidance have been provided by the Open Society Institute 's EPrints Handbook, [42] EOS, [43] OASIS [44] and Open Access Archivangelism. [45]
ROARMAP , the searchable Registry of Open Access Repository Mandatory Archiving Policies at the University of Southampton indexes the world's institutional, funder and governmental OA mandates (and the Open Access Scholarly Information Sourcebook (OASIS) [44] as well as EnablingOpenScholarship (EOS) [43] graph the quarterly outcome). SHERPA/JULIET is a SHERPA service which lists funder mandates only. [46]
In international cross-disciplinary surveys conducted by Swan (2005), [47] the vast majority of researchers respond that they would self archive willingly if their institutions or funders mandated it. Outcome studies by Sale (2006) [48] have confirmed these survey results.Both mandated and unmandated institutional and disciplinary repositories worldwide are indexed by SHERPA 's OpenDOAR [49] and their rate of growth is monitored and displayed by the University of Southampton's Registry of Open Access Repositories ( ROAR ). [50]
Recent studies have tested which mandate conditions are most effective in generating deposit. The three most important conditions identified were: (1) immediate deposit required, (2) deposit required for performance evaluation, and (3) unconditional opt-out allowed for the OA requirement but no opt-out allowed for the deposit requirement. [51] [52]

See also
WebPage index: 00174
Statutory law
Statutory law or statute law is written law set down by a body of legislature or by a singular legislator (in the case of an absolute monarchy ). [1] This is as opposed to oral or customary law ; or regulatory law promulgated by the executive or common law of the judiciary . Statutes may originate with national, state legislatures or local municipalities .

Codified law
The term codified law refers to statutes that have been organized ("codified") by subject matter; in this narrower sense, some but not all statutes are considered "codified." The entire body of codified statute is referred to as a "code," such as the United States Code , the Ohio Revised Code or the Code of Canon Law . The substantive provisions of the Act could be codified (arranged by subject matter) in one or more titles of the United States Code while the provisions of the law that have not reached their "effective date" (remaining uncodified) would be available by reference to the United States Statutes at Large . Another meaning of "codified law" is a statute that takes the common law in a certain area of the law and puts it in statute or code form.

Private law (particular law)
Another example of statutes that are not typically codified is a "private law" that may originate as a private bill , a law affecting only one person or a small group of persons. An example was divorce in Canada prior to the passage of the Divorce Act of 1968 . It was possible to obtain a legislative divorce in Canada by application to the Canadian Senate , which reviewed and investigated petitions for divorce, which would then be voted upon by the Senate and subsequently made into law. In the United Kingdom Parliament , private bills were used in the nineteenth century to create corporations , grant monopolies and give individuals attention to be more fully considered by the parliament. The government may also seek to have a bill introduced unofficially by a backbencher so as not to create a public scandal; such bills may also be introduced by the loyal opposition — members of the opposition party or parties. Sometimes a private member's bill may also have private bill aspects, in such case the proposed legislation is called a hybrid bill .
In Canon Law , private law is called "particular law." [2]

See also
WebPage index: 00175
Implied license
An implied license is an unwritten license which permits a party (the licensee) to do something that would normally require the express permission of another party (the licensor). Implied licenses may arise by operation of law from actions by the licensor which lead the licensee to believe that it has the necessary permission.
Implied licenses often arise where the licensee has purchased a physical embodiment of some intellectual property belonging to the licensor, or has paid for its creation, but has not obtained permission to use the intellectual property.

Examples

Implication: from surrounding circumstances or by operation of law?
In the United States, implied licenses are usually considered to be of two kinds: either they reflect the intention of the parties, which is inferred from a fact-specific inquiry into the surrounding circumstances, or else they are constructive agreements, in which case the intention of the parties is likely to be immaterial. In reality, there is a continuum between these kinds of implied license and it may be difficult to determine whether the license or contract in question is one which the law implies, irrespective of any protests by the unwilling licensor, or instead one inferred from the whole pattern of factual circumstances including the evidence of intent.
In England, there is more of a tendency to regard all implied licenses as matters of fact and intent, while what would be a license implied by law in the US is treated under some other branch of substantive law such as the doctrine of non-derogation from grants . [7]
In both countries, the exhaustion doctrine has the effect of creating an implied license to use a product sold under the "authority" of the patentee. It is controversial whether and to what extent contractual expedients can successfully limit the scope of such implied licenses.

Express license
The opposite of an implied license is an express license , which must be in writing, for some forms of intellectual property. Oral exclusive licenses were permitted, however, under US copyright law before 1978. [8] Oral nonexclusive copyright licenses remain valid under US law. [9] Patent licenses may be oral. [10] Licenses under the Semiconductor Chip Protection Act must be in writing. [11]
WebPage index: 00176
EUR-Lex
EUR-Lex is an official website of European Union law and other public documents of the European Union (EU), published in 24 official languages of the EU . The Official Journal (OJ) of the European Union is also published on EUR-Lex. Users can access EUR-Lex free of charge and also register for a free account, which offers extra features.

History
Data processing of legal texts at the European Commission started way back in the 1960s, still using punch cards at the time. A system was being developed to capture relationships between documents and analyse them to extract and re-use metadata , [1] but also to make retrieval easier.
Through the years, the system and its scope grew as the Commission started collaborating with other institutions of the European Union and as the Union started expanding . It was named CELEX (Communitatis Europae Lex) and soon became a well-used interinstitutional tool.
While initially used only internally, the system went through various degrees of availability to the public, including offering content under commercial licences via private companies . Finally, in 1997 a web version was launched and named EUR-Lex, hosted by the Publications Office of the European Union .
The EUR-Lex website was opened to the public in 2001, while CELEX still existed as a separate database until the end of 2004. Subsequently steps were undertaken to merge the two services and to make them completely free of charge.
With the accession of new countries to the European Union and advancements in web and data-processing technologies, the system needed to be improved. A new version was launched in 2004. In 2014 the website saw another major overhaul, including a new database called "CELLAR". [2]
"CELLAR" stores in a single place all metadata and digital content managed by the Publications Office in a harmonized and standardized way. [3]

Content
On EUR-Lex users can access documents in the official EU languages . Language coverage depends on the date of the accession of a country to the EU. All EU law in force on the date of the accession of a new Member State is available in the language of the acceding country as are all documents adopted after this date. Documents repealed or expired before the date of accession are not available in the language of the acceding country.
Only key legislation adopted jointly by the European Parliament and the Council is available in the Irish language, on a transitional basis. [4] [5]
While each document (and each language version) is an individual part of the database, the content is grouped into sectors. There are currently 12 sectors, each represented by a number or a letter: [6]

Official Journal of the European Union
In 1998 the Official Journal of the European Union (OJ) started being published online, on EUR-Lex. As of 1 July 2013, the digital version of the Official Journal bears legal value instead of the paper version, which is now printed on demand only. The e-OJ has an advanced electronic signature which guarantees its authenticity, integrity and inalterability. [7]
All the editions of the OJ are available on EUR-Lex, dating back to 1952, when they were available in French , Italian , Dutch and German . They can be easily retrieved via a search or by browsing.

EU law
EUR-Lex contains all EU law (sectors 3 and 4), which can be retrieved by browsing or using the search options. The main types of acts under this heading are EU treaties (sector 1), directives , regulations , decisions as well as consolidated legislation (sector 0), etc. Consolidation is the integration of a basic legal act and all of its successive amendments and corrigenda into one easy-to-read document. Consolidated texts are intended for use as reference and have no legal value. [8]
Acts which require transposition are published with a list of links to information about the national implementing measures (sector 7).

Preparatory acts and legislative procedures
The database contains also documents preceding legal acts, such as legislative proposals, reports, green and white papers , etc. (sector 5). It should be noted that some proposals never make it past the preparatory stage, but are still available for consultation.
Each legislative procedure is presented in EUR-Lex with a timeline and a list of events and pertaining documents. Procedures can be accessed via the search or from one of the procedure documents.

EU case law
These documents, authored by the Court of Justice of the European Union , form sector 6 and include, inter alia, judgments , orders, rulings and opinions of the Advocates General .

Other documents
EUR-Lex stores also international agreements (sector 2), parliamentary questions (sector 9), EFTA acts, which include also acts by the EFTA Court and by the EFTA Surveillance Authority (sector E); judgments delivered by courts in contracting states and the EU Court of Justice under the Brussels Regime ; [9] references to national case law concerning EU law (sector 8) and other public documents.

CELEX number and other identifiers

Celex number
While EU documents are numbered in different ways, each of them is assigned a unique, language independent identifier , a CELEX number.
This identifier is composed of the number of the sector, then 4 digits for the year, then one or two letters for the type of document and finally 2-4 digits for the number of the document. [10] For example, the CELEX number of the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive is 32012L0019 (3 is the sector, legislation; 2012 is the year of publication in the OJ; L represents EU directives and 0019 is the number under which the directives was published in the OJ).

ECLI
The European Case Law Identifier (ECLI) was introduced by the Council, which concluded that for "identification of judicial decisions a standard identifier should be used which is recognisable, readable and understandable by both humans and computers". [11] Documents can be retrieved using ECLI also on EUR-Lex.

ELI
EUR-Lex offers also the possibility to retrieve documents by their European Legislation Identifier introduced with Council Conclusions of 10 October 2012 (2012/C 325/02). [12]

Functionalities

Search
Documents can be retrieved via a search engine (IDOL [13] by HP Autonomy ) using various search forms. It is possible to search by document references, dates, text and a multitude of metadata . Registered users have the option of using the expert search and performing searches using Boolean operators .

Text display and formats
Texts and their metadata can be retrieved, displayed and downloaded in various formats ( html , pdf , xml ). For simultaneous work with several language versions, users can use the multilingual display, which is especially useful for translation and linguistics .

Reuse of data
The data is available for reuse via a web service for commercial or non-commercial purposes as long as the source is acknowledged. [14] Certain collections ( datasets ) of documents found on EUR-Lex can also be found on the European Open Data Portal .

Saved documents and searches
Registered users can save documents and searches in their EUR-Lex account, create search and print profiles, and set their own RSS feeds based on saved searches. [15]

Preferences
Registered users have access to a plethora of settings with which they can customise their experience on the website.

EUR-Lex for linguistic research
In 2016, all EUR-Lex texts have been converted by Sketch Engine into a multi-billion word multilingual parallel text corpus [16] for use by linguists, lexicographers , researchers, translators, interpreters, teachers and students of languages.

Access to the EUR-Lex corpus
Access to the corpus can be gained via Sketch Engine (30-day free trial with access to the EUR-Lex corpus available). The complete corpus is also available for download there as a vertical file .

Access to national law of EU member states
N-Lex is a common access point to national law of each country of European Union . It is an interface between users and databases of national legislation.

See also
WebPage index: 00177
Libre (word)
Libre / ˈ l iː b r ə / is a loan word in English [ citation needed ] , borrowed from French and Spanish , used to describe something as being "free", in the sense of "having freedom" or " liberty ". It is used in English to distinguish the two meanings of free : free as in freedom ( libre ) from free as in free of charge ( gratis ). Another sample is common: Free as "Free Speech", not as "Free Drink"!
Historically the word has been borrowed from Romance languages, usually to refer to free will or freedom of expression in some aspect of the lending culture (e.g. vers libre in French poetry, or the Spanish term Lucha libre , a style of wrestling).
In the 1990s, libre was proposed as an alternative term for free software which avoided the ambiguity in the word "free" in English. [1] The word gained some acceptance in the software community, though the terms "free software" and "open source software" remain dominant. "Free" and "open" have both been rigorously defined in the free software and the open source definitions which have formed the basis of similar definitions in the realms of education, knowledge and culture.
The word "libre" is now used in discourses requiring an unambiguous adjective meaning "free as in freedom" , often concerning one or more of the following: open source or open source software , free software , the free software movement or the free culture movement , open and libre knowledge.
In these contexts, "libre" encompasses the four essential freedoms defined in the free software definition , and is used to describe works which may be used, modified, copied and shared without permission from the copyright holder.
Public copyright licenses that grant these freedoms ( libre licences ) typically require attribution for contributors and may include copyleft terms that ensure these essential freedoms remain in future derivative works. Works that are in the public domain are also considered libre. [2] [3]
The word "libre" has also been recommended as an alternative for "open" when the core freedoms apply. [4]
Examples of terms that use "libre" in this way include libre software , FLOSS ( free/libre and open source software ), libre knowledge , libre resources and libre works .
The antonym "non-libre" (or proprietary ) is used to describe works released under licences which deny users one or more of the essential freedoms. For example, licences that forbid commercial use or derivative works are non-libre, as are works restricted by patents or trademarks.

Etymology
Libre comes from the Latin word līber , via the French and Spanish libre ; it shares that root with liberty . It denotes "the state of being free", in the sense of "having freedom" or "liberty". The Oxford English Dictionary (OED) describes libre as obsolete, [5] but the word has come back into limited use. [a] Its primary function in English is to serve as an adjective describing something as being free as in freedom ( libre ), irrespective of whether or not it is free of charge ( gratis ). It is important, however, to understand that words 'libre' and 'liber' are in fact two different words and do not have the same roots, as the word 'libre' or 'libra' actually means a 'book', or something to write in, as 'Libretto' is a small text of an opera (and not a free text give out at the performance, rather a booklet), [6] while word 'liber' or 'libertas' means freedom, [7] and ever since open source movement, and free software became popular these two words became one because of their similar sounds and the way they are written, where letters e and r get switched and someone just assumed that these two words are one and the same. Librarium is another word which stems from the root of Libra, and it means library in English. [8] Word 'libro' is still used in Italian and Croatian for the word "Book", but in languages such as English where sounds don't correspond to symbols, sometimes words get mixed up and now if we search online dictionaries we will find that word 'libra' means both book and freedom, and word 'liber' also means both of those things, while in fact they do not, they are two different words.

In other languages
Many Romance languages have separate words for libre and gratis avoiding the ambiguity of the word "free" in English. In these languages, libre (Spanish and French) and equivalents such as libero (Italian) and Livre (Portuguese), descend from the Latin līber (“free” in the liberty sense). The Latin word gratis is the root of its equivalent in those languages: gratis (Spanish), gratuit (French), gratuito (Italian) and grátis (Portuguese).
Most other languages also have separate words for gratis and libre. However, the ambiguity is not unique to English and subtleties arise in some languages.
In Filipino for example, the word "libre" (borrowed from Spanish) has the same cost/freedom ambiguity as the English word "free". Instead, the term "Malayang software" is recommended. [10] [b]
Some members of the Indian free software community use the term "swatantra software" [11] (स्वतंत्र सॉफ्टवेयर), borrowing a word from Sanskrit, rather than " muphta sŏphṭavēyara " (मुफ्त सॉफ्टवेयर, free software) which can also imply software gratis. However, the Sanskrit word has more specific connotations of independence rather than the general notion of freedom , and for this reason the Free Software Foundation recommends [10] the terms " mukta sŏphṭavēyara " (मुक्त सॉफ्टवेयर) for libre software and "mufta sŏphṭavēyara" (मुफ़्त सॉफ्टवेयर) for gratis software . In Hindi there is also a transliteration of the term freeware into phrīvēyara ( फ्रीवेयर , gratisware ).

History
Although use of libre in English to distinguish free/libre from free/gratis is relatively recent, the concept of works that are free of permission restrictions is as old as print itself. The Diamond Sutra , the world's oldest dated printed book, includes the sentence:
Similarly, the concept of restricted knowledge is not new. Examples include some Religious texts (e.g.closed canons [13] ), esoteric and secret knowledge restricted to initiates such as those associated with mystery religions and martial arts . The reasons and means of restriction have varied over time according to political and technical circumstances.
Historically, the word libre has been borrowed from Romance languages , usually to refer to free will [14] [15] or freedom of expression in some aspect of the lending culture (e.g. vers libre in French poetry).
Contemporary use of the word libre is mostly associated with liberation from restrictions on usage and sharing of works which are subject to copyright and other legal and technical limitations. Works include knowledge and cultural resources such as works of art, writing, education, music, software and other resources, typically in digital forms which are easily copied and distributed.

Vers libre
Vers libre , [16] a term borrowed from French which circulated in English in the early 1900s, refers to poetic forms created in 19th century France which liberated themselves from the rules (i.e. meter patterns, rhyme, etc.) of contemporary traditional forms [17]
Vers libre had hardly been heard of outside France. [18] until T. E. Hulme and F. S. Flint shared their knowledge thereof in 1909 with the Poets Club in London [16] which later became the heart of the Imagist movement [19]
Through Flint’s advocacy of the genre, [20] vers libre influenced Imagism in the discovery of new forms and rhythms. [21] Imagism, in the wake of French Symbolism (i.e. vers libre of French Symbolist poets [22] ), was the wellspring out of which the main current of Modernism in English flowed, [22] which T. S. Eliot later identified as ‘the point de repere usually taken as the starting point of modern poetry’, [23] as hundreds of poets were led to adopt vers libre as their medium [24]

Libre definition
The adopted meaning of "libre", as it is currently used, was first formalised in the free software definition published by the Free Software Foundation in 1986.
Although limited to software, the four core freedoms defined therein formed the basis for various definitions emanating from the free culture movement . These include definitions of libre knowledge [25] and free cultural works . [26]
Implicit in these definitions is the requirement that the resource (or work) is not restricted via technical means (e.g. DRM ) or legal limitations (e.g. via copyright , trademarks or patents ) which would prevent the user from being able to exercise these freedoms. [c] [d]

Music, art and culture
The free/libre software movement and definition also inspired initiatives in specific areas such as art and music whose histories are outlined in the Libre culture article.

Openness
In 1998, the term open source software was suggested as a substitute for free software because (like libre) it avoided the ambiguity of ‘free’ in English , (unlike libre) was not as value-laden as the term free software , and was therefore more acceptable to the commercial software industry. [27]
As did the free software movement , the open source movement also stimulated initiatives in other areas, usually pertaining to knowledge rather than culture. These promote terms such as " open data ", " open content ", OER (Open Educational Resources) and open knowledge .
The open source movement and its offshoots (e.g. open education and open knowledge ) emphasise pragmatics such as the benefits of peer production , whereas the free software movement and aligned branches (e.g. elements of the free culture movement such as Students for Free Culture and proponents of libre knowledge ) place greater value on ethics, freedom and social solidarity. [4] [28] [29] [30]
Although open source software and open knowledge [e] have formal definitions which encompass the types of freedoms called for in libre software , the adjective "open" is more broadly used in terms such as MOOC , OER and Open Access which do not all comply with such definitions.

Libre resources
The term "libre resources" or " libre works " typically refers to cultural or knowledge resources which meet the requirements of the libre definitions above. The resources or works are usually digitally represented on a device or medium such as files in an open/free format containing text, an image, sound, multimedia, etc. or combinations of these, accessible with libre software. [31]

Libre knowledge
Libre knowledge is knowledge released in such a way that
Whilst shared tacit knowledge is regarded as implicitly libre, ( explicit ) libre knowledge is defined as a generalisation of the libre software definition ( see above ).
The vision of the Wikimedia Foundation ,
and the success of Wikipedia, along with that of free/libre and open source software as a whole, are often cited as successful examples of libre knowledge and commons-based peer production . [f]
Explicit libre knowledge encompasses its components such as data , content/information , software and other libre resources used to represent and communicate knowledge.

Libre licences
Libre licences are licences pertaining to copyright in which the copyright owner has granted the freedoms specified in the definition of libre software and definitions derived from it such as the Definition of Free Cultural Works . [g] A libre resource (one so-licensed or in the public domain) is free of any restrictions which might prevent users from being able to exercise these freedoms (such as DRM or patent-encumbrance). [d] For example, of the still active Creative Commons licences, Creative Commons Attribution, Attribution-ShareAlike and Zero are libre licences.

Share-alike and copyleft
Copyleft describes a requirement on some libre licences that copies and modifications of the original work must be available under the same or similar licence. In this way, copyleft libre licences guarantee that all modifications, mixes and extensions of a libre work will be libre as well. [32]
The GNU General Public License was the first copyleft licence and remains the most commonly used for software. When a libre licence has a share-alike term, it is a copyleft licence. For example, the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike licence is a copyleft licence.
Copyleft licences are also described as reciprocal or (pejoratively) as viral licences .
Arguments for using copyleft or share-alike libre licences include that they encourage people to grow the commons, [33] [34] and that they are a stronger defence of the freedom of other users (in future), since the so-licensed resources may not be used to enhance non-libre resources (e.g. proprietary software and other restrictive knowledge and cultural resources). [35]

Permissive or copyfree
Permissive libre, copyfree, copycenter or academic licences are those libre licences which do not require derivative works to be licensed under the same licence as the original work. They also typically do not have other requirements that are common in copyleft licences, like restrictions on formats that the work can be available in or whether Digital Rights Management may be used on the product. The Copyfree Standard Definition, used by the Copyfree Initiative to certify copyfree licenses, disallows licenses that come with such copyleft requirements from certification.

Public domain
Public domain works are the least restricted libre works, although their status typically comes from the expiration of copyright rather than a libre licence. However, there are declarations that purport to place a work in the public domain or, in the case of the CC Zero licence, give it the same freedoms as works in the public domain.
Public domain libre software licences are sometimes described as beerware .

Statements and symbols
As well as the libre licences described above, which require copyright law to function, members of the libre movement have also created symbols and statements that purport to operate without a legal mechanism. Kopimi is described as a 'symbol showing that you want to be copied.' [37] Question Copyright artist-in-residence Nina Paley advocates Copyheart , a sentence intended to replace the usual copyright declaration on a work:
Regarding the lack of legal certainty provided by the statement, Paley writes:
Likewise, the Libre Society drafted two libre ‘licences’, but celebrated their lack of legal power. [39] They are the Res Divini Juris Licence and the Res Communes Licence, but neither is in common use.
A " Libre Puro " licence and emblem were drafted and discussed in collaboration with the Free Knowledge Foundation . Neither the licence nor the emblem were officially launched or are in common use.

Cultural significance
The loanword libre has usually entered the English language as part of a technical term in connection with exposure to foreign cultures. The specific reference points have typically been fields of activity where the foreign culture has a dominant role. Examples include cante libre ( free song , Spanish), vers libre ( free verse , French, see the History section above), and Lucha libre ( free wrestling , Spanish). In the relevant communities exposed to these terms, libre is understood to mean free as in freedom, and the terms are frequently used in those communities without translation.

Lucha libre
The term Lucha libre ( Spanish pronunciation: [ˈlutʃa ˈliβɾe] ) was originally used in the same way as the English term " freestyle wrestling ", [40] [41] [42] an amateur wrestling style without the restrictions of Greco-Roman wrestling . Nowadays it refers exclusively to the professional form. The style developed in Spanish speaking countries and rose to prominence most notably in Mexico. [43] [44] [45]
Outside of Mexico Lucha Libre has transcended the language barrier and crossed over into popular culture, especially in movies (e.g. Nacho Libre ) and television (e.g. Los Luchadores , ¡Mucha Lucha! ).
Lucha libre, its wrestlers (luchadors) and masks have inspired or are featured in other areas of pop culture such as mainstream advertising (e.g. in Canada, Telus 's Koodo Mobile Post Paid cell service uses a cartoon lucha libre wrestler as its spokesperson/mascot) and comics (e.g. Sonambulo , El Campeon and challengers in The Amazing Joy Buzzards , Lucha Master in the anime Air Master ).
Many fighting video games have featured characters based on luchadors, featuring both the masked aspects and the different wrestling style of Lucha Libre compared to traditional professional wrestling.
Lucha libre has served as inspiration for products, advertising and activism. Examples include Nike 's line of lucha libre inspired athletic shoes, [46] Coca-Cola 's Blue Demon Full Throttle energy drink named after the luchador Blue Demon, Jr. , [47] and the wearing of lucha libre inspired masks by members of the Russian feminist punk-rock collective Pussy Riot and supporters.
Depictions of luchadores are often used as symbols of Mexico and Mexican culture in non-Spanish speaking cultures.

Libre in popular music
Popular music is another channel by which words and phrases may cross language and cultural divides. Several albums with title tracks containing the word libre have achieved international acclaim and some have been nominated for Grammy Awards .
Some of these albums or songs are clearly about freedom, [h] while the association is less obvious in others.

Related concepts

See also

Notes

External links
WebPage index: 00178
Project Gutenberg
Project Gutenberg ( PG ) is a volunteer effort to digitize and archive cultural works, to "encourage the creation and distribution of eBooks ". [3] It was founded in 1971 by Michael S. Hart and is the oldest digital library . [4] Most of the items in its collection are the full texts of public domain books . The project tries to make these as free as possible, in long-lasting, open formats that can be used on almost any computer. As of 3 October 2015 [update] , Project Gutenberg reached 50,000 items in its collection. [5]
The releases are available in plain text but, wherever possible, other formats are included, such as HTML , PDF , EPUB , MOBI , and Plucker . Most releases are in the English language , but many non-English works are also available. There are multiple affiliated projects that are providing additional content, including regional and language-specific works. Project Gutenberg is also closely affiliated with Distributed Proofreaders , an Internet-based community for proofreading scanned texts.

History
Project Gutenberg was started by Michael Hart in 1971 with the digitization of the United States Declaration of Independence . [6] Hart, a student at the University of Illinois , obtained access to a Xerox Sigma V mainframe computer in the university's Materials Research Lab. Through friendly operators, he received an account with a virtually unlimited amount of computer time; its value at that time has since been variously estimated at $100,000 or $100,000,000. [7] Hart has said he wanted to "give back" this gift by doing something that could be considered to be of great value. His initial goal was to make the 10,000 most consulted books available to the public at little or no charge, and to do so by the end of the 20th century. [8]
This particular computer was one of the 15 nodes on ARPANET , the computer network that would become the Internet . Hart believed that computers would one day be accessible to the general public and decided to make works of literature available in electronic form for free. He used a copy of the United States Declaration of Independence in his backpack, and this became the first Project Gutenberg e-text . He named the project after Johannes Gutenberg , the fifteenth century German printer who propelled the movable type printing press revolution.
By the mid-1990s, Hart was running Project Gutenberg from Illinois Benedictine College . More volunteers had joined the effort. All of the text was entered manually until 1989 when image scanners and optical character recognition software improved and became more widely available, which made book scanning more feasible. [9] Hart later came to an arrangement with Carnegie Mellon University , which agreed to administer Project Gutenberg's finances. As the volume of e-texts increased, volunteers began to take over the project's day-to-day operations that Hart had run.
Starting in 2004, an improved online catalog made Project Gutenberg content easier to browse, access and hyperlink . Project Gutenberg is now hosted by ibiblio at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill .
Italian volunteer Pietro Di Miceli developed and administered the first Project Gutenberg website and started the development of the Project online Catalog. In his ten years in this role (1994–2004), the Project web pages won a number of awards, often being featured in "best of the Web" listings, and contributing to the project's popularity. [10]
Hart died on 6 September 2011 at his home in Urbana, Illinois at the age of 64. [11]

Affiliated organizations
In 2000, a non-profit corporation , the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, Inc. was chartered in Mississippi to handle the project's legal needs. Donations to it are tax-deductible . Long-time Project Gutenberg volunteer Gregory Newby became the foundation's first CEO . [12]
Also in 2000, Charles Franks founded Distributed Proofreaders (DP), which allowed the proofreading of scanned texts to be distributed among many volunteers over the Internet. This effort greatly increased the number and variety of texts being added to Project Gutenberg, as well as making it easier for new volunteers to start contributing. DP became officially affiliated with Project Gutenberg in 2002. [13] As of 2007 [update] , the 10,000+ DP-contributed books comprised almost a third of the nearly 54,600 [14] books in Project Gutenberg.

Kindle Store controversy
There have been many instances of Gutenberg books being sold for profit in the Kindle Store , one being the reselling of the 1906 book Fox Trapping . [15] The books may not have been altered except the stripping of the Project Gutenberg ("PG") terms & conditions, which is specified by PG when content is used elsewhere, [16] and possibly slight formatting changes. There is no legal impediment to the reselling of works in the public domain, but there exists a debate as to the appropriateness of simply reusing content that is created by volunteers, without sufficient modification. The debate questions sellers who take the PG editions without reformatting to include a linked table of contents, or without repackaging, re-editing, or reinterpretation of the data. Factors in the debate include whether or not the features of the Amazon platform render it accessible to a larger community of readers on a greater variety of devices, or whether the users of the Amazon platform are essentially "locked in" by the Kindle's platform-specific content.

CD and DVD project
In August 2003, Project Gutenberg created a CD containing approximately 600 of the "best" e-books from the collection. The CD is available for download as an ISO image . When users are unable to download the CD, they can request to have a copy sent to them, free of charge.
In December 2003, a DVD was created containing nearly 10,000 items. At the time, this almost represented the entire collection. In early 2004, the DVD also became available by mail.
In July 2007, a new edition of the DVD was released containing over 17,000 books, and in April 2010, a dual-layer DVD was released, containing nearly 30,000 items.
The majority of the DVDs, and all of the CDs mailed by the project, were recorded on recordable media by volunteers. However, the new dual layer DVDs were manufactured, as it proved more economical than having volunteers burn them. As of October 2010 [update] , the project has mailed approximately 40,000 discs. [17]

Scope of collection
As of August 2015 [update] , Project Gutenberg claimed over 54,600 [18] items in its collection, with an average of over 50 new e-books being added each week. [19] These are primarily works of literature from the Western cultural tradition . In addition to literature such as novels, poetry, short stories and drama, Project Gutenberg also has cookbooks , reference works and issues of periodicals. [20] The Project Gutenberg collection also has a few non-text items such as audio files and music-notation files. [21]
Most releases are in English, but there are also significant numbers in many other languages. As of April 2016 [update] , the non-English languages most represented are: French, German, Finnish, Dutch, Italian, and Portuguese. [4]
Whenever possible, Gutenberg releases are available in plain text , mainly using US-ASCII character encoding but frequently extended to ISO-8859-1 (needed to represent accented characters in French and Scharfes s in German, for example). Besides being copyright-free, the requirement for a Latin ( character set ) text version of the release has been a criterion of Michael Hart's since the founding of Project Gutenberg, as he believes this is the format most likely to be readable in the extended future. [22] Out of necessity, this criterion has had to be extended further for the sizable collection of texts in East Asian languages such as Chinese and Japanese now in the collection, where UTF-8 is used instead.
Other formats may be released as well when submitted by volunteers. The most common non-ASCII format is HTML , which allows markup and illustrations to be included. Some project members and users have requested more advanced formats, believing them to be much easier to read. But some formats that are not easily editable, such as PDF , are generally not considered to fit in with the goals of Project Gutenberg. Also Project Gutenberg has two options for master formats that can be submitted (from which all other files are generated): customized versions of the Text Encoding Initiative standard (since 2005) [23] and reStructuredText (since 2011). [24]
Beginning in 2009 the Project Gutenberg catalog began offering auto-generated alternate file formats, including HTML (when not already provided), EPUB and plucker . [25]

Ideals
Michael Hart said in 2004, "The mission of Project Gutenberg is simple: 'To encourage the creation and distribution of ebooks'". [3] His goal was, "to provide as many e-books in as many formats as possible for the entire world to read in as many languages as possible". [4] Likewise, a project slogan is to "break down the bars of ignorance and illiteracy", [26] because its volunteers aim to continue spreading public literacy and appreciation for the literary heritage just as public libraries began to do in the late 19th century. [27] [28]
Project Gutenberg is intentionally decentralized. For example, there is no selection policy dictating what texts to add. Instead, individual volunteers work on what they are interested in, or have available. The Project Gutenberg collection is intended to preserve items for the long term, so they cannot be lost by any one localized accident. In an effort to ensure this, the entire collection is backed-up regularly and mirrored on servers in many different locations. [29]

Copyright
Project Gutenberg is careful to verify the status of its ebooks according to U.S. copyright law . Material is added to the Project Gutenberg archive only after it has received a copyright clearance, and records of these clearances are saved for future reference. Project Gutenberg does not claim new copyright on titles it publishes. Instead, it encourages their free reproduction and distribution. [4]
Most books in the Project Gutenberg collection are distributed as public domain under U.S. copyright law. The licensing included with each ebook puts some restrictions on what can be done with the texts (such as distributing them in modified form, or for commercial purposes) as long as the Project Gutenberg trademark is used. If the header is stripped and the trademark not used, then the public domain texts can be reused without any restrictions.
There are also a few copyrighted texts, like of science fiction author Cory Doctorow , that Project Gutenberg distributes with permission. These are subject to further restrictions as specified by the copyright holder, although they generally tend to be licensed under Creative Commons .

Criticism
The text files use the format of plain text encoded in UTF-8 and wrapped at 65–70 characters, with paragraphs separated by a double line break. In recent decades the resulting relatively bland appearance and the lack of a markup possibility have often been perceived as a drawback of this format. [30] [ dubious – discuss ] Project Gutenberg attempts to address this by making many texts available in HTML, ePub, and PDF versions as well, but faithful to the mission of offering data that is easy to handle with computer code, plain ASCII text remains the most important format, and the ePub version still contains extra line breaks between paragraphs.
In December 1994, Project Gutenberg was criticized by the Text Encoding Initiative for failing to include apparatus (documentation) of the decisions unavoidable in preparing a text, or in some cases, documenting which of several (conflicting) versions of a text has been the one digitized. [31]
The selection of works (and editions) available has been determined by popularity, ease of scanning, being out of copyright, and other factors; this would be difficult to avoid in any crowd-sourced project. [32]
In March 2004, a new initiative was begun by Michael Hart and John S. Guagliardo [33] to provide low-cost intellectual properties. The initial name for this project was Project Gutenberg 2 (PG II), which created controversy among PG volunteers because of the re-use of the project's trademarked name for a commercial venture. [12]

Affiliated projects
All affiliated projects are independent organizations that share the same ideals and have been given permission to use the Project Gutenberg trademark. They often have a particular national or linguistic focus. [34]

List of affiliated projects

See also
WebPage index: 00179
Eric S. Raymond
Eric Steven Raymond (born December 4, 1957), often referred to as ESR , is an American software developer , author of the widely cited [2] 1997 essay and 1999 book The Cathedral and the Bazaar and other works, and open-source software advocate. He wrote a guidebook for the Roguelike game NetHack . [3] In the 1990s, he edited and updated the Jargon File , currently in print as The New Hacker's Dictionary . [4]

Early life
Raymond was born in Boston, Massachusetts , in 1957 and lived in Venezuela as a child. His family moved to Pennsylvania in 1971. [5] He has suffered from cerebral palsy since birth; his weakened physical condition motivated him to go into computing. [6]

Career
Raymond began his programming career writing proprietary software, between 1980 and 1985. [1] In 1990, noting that the Jargon File had not been maintained since about 1983, he adopted it; he currently has a third edition in print. Paul Dourish maintains an archived original version of the Jargon File, because, he says, Raymond's updates "essentially destroyed what held it together." [7]
In 1996 Raymond took over development of the open-source email software "popclient", renaming it to Fetchmail . [8] Soon after this experience, in 1997, he wrote the " The Cathedral and the Bazaar ", detailing his thoughts on open-source software development and why it should be done as openly as possible (i.e., the "bazaar" approach). The essay was based in part on his experience in developing Fetchmail. He first presented his thesis at the annual Linux Kongress on May 27, 1997. He later expanded the essay into a book, The Cathedral and the Bazaar: Musings on Linux and Open Source by an Accidental Revolutionary , in 1999. The internal white paper by Frank Hecker that led to the release of the Mozilla (then Netscape ) source code in 1998 cited The Cathedral and the Bazaar as "independent validation" of ideas proposed by Eric Hahn and Jamie Zawinski . [9] Hahn would later describe the 1999 book as "clearly influential". [10] :190
From the late 1990s onward, due in part to the popularity of his essay, Raymond became a prominent voice in the open source movement. He co-founded the Open Source Initiative in 1998, taking on the self-appointed role of ambassador of open source to the press, business and public. He remains active in OSI, and stepped down as president of the initiative in February 2005. [11] In 1998 Raymond received and published a Microsoft document expressing worry about the quality of rival open-source software. [12] Eric named this document, together with others subsequently leaked, " the Halloween Documents ".
In 2000–2002 he wrote a number of HOWTOs still included in the Linux Documentation Project [ citation needed ] . His personal archive also lists a number of non-technical and very early non-Linux FAQs [ citation needed ] . At this time he also created CML2 , a source code configuration system; while originally intended for the Linux operating system , it was rejected by kernel developers. [13] Raymond attributed this rejection to "kernel list politics". [14] Linus Torvalds on the other hand said in a 2007 mailing list post that as a matter of policy, the development team preferred more incremental changes. His 2003 book The Art of Unix Programming discusses user tools for programming and other tasks.
Raymond is currently the administrator of the project page for the GPS data tool gpsd . [15] Also, some versions of NetHack include his guide. [3] He has also contributed code and content to the free software video game The Battle for Wesnoth . [16]

Views on open source
Raymond coined an aphorism he dubbed " Linus' Law ", inspired by Linus Torvalds : "Given enough eyeballs, all bugs are shallow". [17] It first appeared in his book The Cathedral and the Bazaar . [18] :30
Raymond has refused to speculate on whether the "bazaar" development model could be applied to works such as books and music, not wanting to "weaken the winning argument for open-sourcing software by tying it to a potential loser". [19]
Raymond has had a number of public disputes with other figures in the free software movement . As head of the Open Source Initiative, he argued that advocates should focus on the potential for better products. The "very seductive" moral and ethical rhetoric of Richard Stallman and the Free Software Foundation fails, he said, "not because his principles are wrong, but because that kind of language ... simply does not persuade anybody". [20]
In a 2008 essay he "defended the right of programmers to issue work under proprietary licenses because I think that if a programmer wants to write a program and sell it, it's neither my business nor anyone else's but his customer's what the terms of sale are". [21] In the same essay he also said that the "logic of the system" puts developers into "dysfunctional roles", with bad code the result.

Political beliefs and activism
Raymond is a member of the Libertarian Party . He is a gun rights advocate. [22] He has endorsed the open source firearms organization Defense Distributed , calling them "friends of freedom" and writing "I approve of any development that makes it more difficult for governments and criminals to monopolize the use of force. As 3D printers become less expensive and more ubiquitous, this could be a major step in the right direction." [23] [24] In the midst of the hockey stick controversy on the origin and severity of global warming , Raymond opined that climate scientists have been bullied into pursuing a specific outcome. [25]

Personal life
Raymond describes himself as neo-pagan . [6]

Bibliography

By Eric Raymond

Books

Writings posted or archived on his website

See also
WebPage index: 00180
University of Helsinki
The University of Helsinki ( Finnish : Helsingin yliopisto , Swedish : Helsingfors universitet , Latin : Universitas Helsingiensis , abbreviated UH ) is a university located in Helsinki , Finland since 1829, but was founded in the city of Turku (in Swedish Åbo ) in 1640 as the Royal Academy of Åbo , at that time part of the Swedish Empire . It is the oldest and largest university in Finland with the widest range of disciplines available. Around 36,500 students are currently enrolled in the degree programs of the university spread across 11 faculties and 11 research institutes.
As of August 1, 2005, the University complies with the harmonized structure of the Europe-wide Bologna Process and offers Bachelor, Master, Licenciate , and Doctoral degrees . [4] Admission to degree programmes is usually determined by entrance examinations, in the case of bachelor's degrees, and by prior degree results, in the case of master and postgraduate degrees. Entrance is particularly selective (circa 15% of the yearly applicants are admitted). It has been ranked a top 100 university in the world according to the 2016 ARWU, QS and THE rankings. [5] [6] [7]
The university is bilingual, with teaching officially provided both in Finnish and Swedish. Generally speaking, however, the university is monolingual Finnish, as courses taught in Swedish are very few and far apart. Teaching in English is extensive throughout the university at Master, Licentiate, and Doctoral levels, making it a de facto third language of instruction.
Remaining true to its traditionally strong Humboldtian ethos, the University of Helsinki places heavy emphasis on high-quality teaching and research of a top international standard. [8] It is a member of various prominent international university networks, such as Europaeum , UNICA , [9] the Utrecht Network , and is a founding member of the League of European Research Universities .

History

Royal Academy of Åbo 1640–1828
The first predecessor of the university, The Cathedral School of Åbo , was presumably founded in 1276 for education of boys to become servants of the Church. As the university was founded in 1640 by Queen Christina of Sweden (1626–1689) in Turku (Sw. Åbo), as the Åbo Kungliga Akademi ( Latin : Regia Academia Aboensis ), the senior part of the school formed the core of the new University, while the junior year courses formed a grammar school. It was the third university founded in the Swedish Empire , following Uppsala University and the Academia Gustaviana in Dorpat (predecessor to the University of Tartu in Estonia ).

Imperial Alexander University in Finland 1828–1919
The second period of the University's history covers the period when Finland was a Grand Duchy of the Russian Empire, from 1809 to 1917. As Finland became part of the Russian Empire in 1809, Emperor Alexander I expanded the University and allocated substantial funds to it. Following the Great Fire of Turku in 1827, higher education within the country was moved to Helsinki, the new administrative heart of the Grand Duchy, in 1828, and renamed the Imperial Alexander University in Finland in honour of the late benefactor of the University. In the capital the primary task of the University was to educate the Grand Duchy’s civil servants.
The University became a community subscribing to the new Humboldtian ideals of science and culture, studying humanity and its living environment by means of scientific methods. The new statutes of the University enacted in 1828 defined the task of the University as promoting the development of “the Sciences and Humanities within Finland and, furthermore, educating the youth for the service of the Emperor and the Fatherland”.
The Alexander University was a centre of national life that promoted the birth of an independent Finnish State and the development of Finnish identity. The great men of 19th century Finland, Johan Vilhelm Snellman , Johan Ludvig Runeberg , Elias Lönnrot and Zachris Topelius , were all involved in the activities of the University. The University became a major center of Finnish cultural, political, and legal life in 19th century Finland, and became a remarkable primum mobile of the nationalist and liberal cultural movements, political parties, and student organisations.
In the 19th century university research changed from being collection-centred to being experimental, empirical, and analytical. The more scientific approach of the university led to specialisation and created new disciplines. As the scientific disciplines developed, Finland received ever more scholarly knowledge and highly educated people, some of whom entered rapidly evolving industry or the government.

University of Helsinki 1919–present
The third period of the university's history began with the creation of the independent Republic of Finland in 1917, and with the renaming of the university as the University of Helsinki . Once Finland gained her independence in 1917 the University was given a crucial role in building the nation state and, after World War II , the welfare state. Members of the academic community promoted the international relations of the new state and the development of its economic life. Furthermore, they were actively involved in national politics and the struggle for equality.
In the 20th century, scholarly research at the University of Helsinki reached the level of the European elite in many disciplines. This was manifested, among other things, by international recognitions granted to its professors, such as the Fields Medal received by the mathematician Lars Ahlfors (1936), the Nobel Prize in Chemistry granted to Professor A.I. Virtanen (1945) and the Nobel Prize in Medicine shared by Professor Ragnar Granit (1967).
After World War II, University research focused on improving Finnish living conditions and supporting major changes in the structure of society and business. The University also contributed to the breakthrough of modern technology. [ vague ] [ examples needed ]
The progress of scientific development created many new disciplines and faculties at the University of Helsinki. At present the University comprises 11 faculties, 500 professors and almost 40,000 students. The University has established as its goal to further its position as one of Europe’s top multidisciplinary research universities. [10]
In March 2014, two people were arrested and in June 2014 sentenced to prison for three years for plotting a mass murder at the University. [11] [12]

Organization

Faculties
The university is divided into eleven faculties. They are listed below in the official order used by the university, reflecting both the history of the university and the hierarchy of disciplines at the time when the university was established:
The university also comprises several independent institutes, such as research centres and libraries, the most notable of which are perhaps the National Library of Finland and Helsinki University Library . Helsinki Collegium for Advanced Studies is another independent institute within the University of Helsinki, an Institute for Advanced Study , which is modeled upon the Institute for Advanced Studies at Princeton . Previous directors include Raimo Väyrynen (2002–2004) and Juha Sihvola (2004–2009)]. [13] [14]

Academics

University rankings
University of Helsinki is ranked at 56th in the world by the 2016 Academic Ranking of World Universities [18] published by Shanghai Jiao Tong University . According to the Times Higher Education World University Rankings [19] for 2016, the University of Helsinki is ranked at 76th overall in the world. In 2014 THE–QS World University Rankings [20] list, the University of Helsinki was ranked 67th.

International Master’s Degree Programmes
The University of Helsinki offers a wide range of master’s degree programmes, taught entirely in English. The scope of the programmes is 120 ECTS credits , completed with two years of full-time study. Some programmes are organised by the University of Helsinki along with other Finnish and foreign universities. All programmes comply with the national legislation governing university education and are, therefore, recognised globally.

Research
Research institutes within the university include the following:

Campuses
The University is located on four main campuses . Originally, the entire university was located in the very centre of Helsinki, but due to the rapid growth of the University since the 1930s, premises have been built and acquired in other areas.

City Centre Campus
The historical City Centre Campus has been the hub of activity ever since the university moved from Turku to Helsinki in the early 19th century. The campus has a central location and reflects the architectural style of this part of the city. The University buildings in the city center house the Faculties of Theology, Law, Arts, Behavioural Sciences and Social Sciences plus administrative functions. Most of the buildings on the campus have a major architectural significance ranging from the dominating Neo-Classical, through the Jugendstil, to 20th century Modernism.
The City Centre Campus, extending around the historical centre of Helsinki, Senate Square, and Kruununhaka city district, is the administrative heart of the University of Helsinki and has the largest concentration of faculties in Helsinki.
After the Great Fire of Turku in 1827, Emperor Nicholas I ordered the Royal Academy of Turku be moved to the new capital city of the Grand Duchy of Finland, Helsinki, where the Imperial Alexander University in Finland began to operate the next year. Helsinki was to become Finland's window to the world; a European city to which the University belonged as an integral part. Carl Ludvig Engel , architect, was given the assignment of designing an Empire-style main building next to Senate Square, facing the Imperial Senate. The main building was completed in 1832. Thanks to the lessons learnt from the fire of Turku, the library was built separate from other premises. The library and several faculty buildings in the campus were also designed by Engel.
The main building as well as other buildings of the campus were badly damaged during the Soviet bombings in World War II but rebuilt after the war. [21]
The plan concerning the concentration of University facilities dating back to the 1980s, aimed to achieve a closer unity between facilities. The City Centre Campus does not stand out from the rest of the urban environment but is a part of the city, in line with the old University tradition. The University facilities still form a functional and coherent whole, consisting not only of historically valuable buildings, but also of facilities for 20,000 students and 3,000 teachers and other staff.

Kumpula Campus
The Kumpula Campus , housing the Faculty of Science, is located four kilometers north from the centre of Helsinki near tram lines 6 and 8. The Kumpula campus is some four kilometres from the centre of Helsinki. The campus houses the Departments of Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics and Statistics, Computer Science as well as Geosciences and Geography of the Faculty of Science of the University of Helsinki.
The university departments were located in Kumpula for the first time in 1978 when the City of Helsinki leased the area for the university. A planning competition for the city plan for the area was held a year earlier. In the 1980s, the Accelerator Laboratory of the Department of Physics was quarried into Kumpula rock and the construction of Kumpula Botanical Garden began in 1987. It was not, however, until the 1990s when the construction work proper began, transforming the area into a significant campus.
The Chemicum, the building housing the Department of Chemistry and VERIFIN (Finnish Institute for Verification of the Chemical Weapons Convention), and the Physicum, which provides facilities for physics, geology and geography are located on Kumpula campus surrounding a square named after the Finnish Nobel prize winner, A. I. Virtanen. Kumpula Campus Library is also located in the Physicum. The Kumpula Sports Centre is planned for the recreational use of both university staff and students and citizens of Helsinki alike. Completed in 2004, the Exactum provides facilities for seismology, computer science and mathematical subjects, as well as administrative services.
The campus comprises two main parts: the Botanical Garden, surrounding the old building stock of Kumpula manor and the modern new building stock located a couple of hundred metres north of the manor. The greenness of the area makes the dynamic campus stand out as a unique, distinctive complex. The campus offers study and research facilities for 6,000 students and 1,000 teachers. The Finnish Meteorological Institute moved to the area in 2005. That building is known as Dynamicum.

Meilahti Campus
The Meilahti Campus , with the Faculty of Medicine, is a part of the Meilahti Hospital District on the edge of the city centre. Just a few kilometres from the City Centre Campus, the Meilahti area has been transformed into a cradle of top research on medicine, 'Medilahti'. Established in the 1930s, the Women's Clinic was accompanied by Finland's leading hospital, Helsinki University Central Hospital (HUCH) in 1966. The same year saw the completion of facilities for theoretical subject departments on Haartmaninkatu street. The building is now being renovated and extended. The latest completed facilities in the campus include the National Library of Health Sciences Terkko and the research and teaching centre Biomedicum, which accommodates 1,200 researchers.
The Ruskeasuo premises, including the Department of Dentistry, Institute for Oral Health, Department of Public Health and Department of Forensic Medicine, also belong to the Meilahti campus. The Meilahti and Ruskeasuo areas form a close-knit complex providing a meeting place for medical education, international top-level research and nursing. The campus is a workplace for 2,000 students and 1,500 teachers.
Thanks to the years-long project to combine the teaching facilities of the Faculty of Medicine, Meilahti is now a functional unity of medicine and health care. The atmosphere in the campus inspires people in their studies, research and international co-operation.
Although the Meilahti campus is intertwined with the rest of Meilahti district, it succeeds in forming a clear-cut campus area with its hospital-type building stock.

Viikki Campus
The Viikki Campus is located in the semi-suburban greenspace of the Viikki area, some 8 kilometres north-east of the city centre. It houses the Faculties of Agriculture and Forestry, Biosciences, Veterinary Medicine and Pharmacy. It is an important concentration in the field of biosciences, even by European standards. Indeed, it is often called the bioscience campus or the “green campus”.
In addition to biosciences, the Campus is home to a wide range of other life science researchers and students in such fields as environmental science, veterinary medicine, food research and economics. Numerous international research groups also work on the Viikki Campus. The Viikki Campus is the location of four faculties, two independent institutes and the Viikki Science Library.
It also attracts an increasing number of businesses to the Helsinki Business and Science Park. The Finnish Game and Fisheries Research Institute and the Finnish Food Safety Authority, Evira, have also moved to Viikki and negotiations are under way to relocate MTT Agrifood Research Finland to Viikki to complement the Department of Economics and Management.
The Viikki Campus unites a multidisciplinary science community of more than 6,500 students and 1,600 teachers, a residential area emphasising ecological values and the natural surroundings, including recreational areas and nature reserves, and forms a unique whole. The Campus also has a unique tropical garden, Gardenia, co-owned by the City of Helsinki and the University of Helsinki, and the Viikinlahti conservation area, which is particularly popular among bird watchers.

Libraries and museums

The National Library of Finland
The National Library of Finland is the foremost research library in Finland and the main branch of the University of Helsinki's library system. The National Library of Finland is the oldest and largest scholarly library in Finland as well as one of the largest independent institutes at the University of Helsinki. It is responsible for the collection, description, preservation and accessibility of Finland’s printed national heritage and the unique collections under its care. The National Library also serves as a national service and development centre for the library sector and promotes national and international cooperation in the field.

The Helsinki University Main Library
The Main Library of the university is used by students for research and studying. Located a few blocks down the street from the university's main building in the city center, the new Main Library was opened in 2012 in the Kaisa House. The new library merged the undergraduate library and four dispersed faculty libraries of the city center campus to a collection of approximately 1.5 million books. [22] The architecture of the new building, designed by Anttinen Oiva Architects, has been praised [22] [23] and received several awards. [24]

The Helsinki University Museum
The Helsinki University Museum is the museum of the University of Helsinki and was located until June 2014 on Snellmanninkatu off the north-east corner of Senate Square. Museums new main exhibition will open in the University Main Building in March 2015.
Helsinki University Museum was established in 2003 by merging the former University Museum specialising in the history of the University of Helsinki, the Museum of Medical History, the Museum of the History of Veterinary Medicine, the Museum of the History of Dentistry and the Collections of Craft Science. To complement the new conglomeration of museums, the Mineral Cabinet, which today belongs to the Finnish Museum of Natural History, returned to its original location in the Arppeanum building. Each year the museum also holds one or two temporary exhibitions in a specially designed area. Museums exhibition in Arppeanum Building was closed in June 2014. New main exhibition will open in the University Main Building in March 2015.
The University Museum is in charge of the preservation and conservation of the University’s valuable museum collections and property – old tuition and research equipment, furniture and works of art. The museum maintains an index register of all valuables that are kept in the facilities of the University. The museum also provides library, archive and photographic services pertaining to the history of the University and the history of medical science.

Finnish Museum of Natural History
The Finnish Museum of Natural History is a research institution under the University of Helsinki. It is responsible for the national botanical, zoological, geological and paleontological collections consisting of samples from around the world. The collections serve scientific, public informational and educational purposes.

Student life

Student Union
The Student Union of the University of Helsinki ( Helsingin yliopiston ylioppilaskunta , HYY) was founded in 1868. It currently has 32,000 members and is one of the world's wealthiest student organizations, with assets of several hundred million euros . [25] Among other things, it owns a good deal of property in the city centre of Helsinki. The union has been at the centre of student politics from the 19th Century nationalist movements, through the actions of the New Left in the 1960s, up to the present. Its governing assembly consists of parties which are connected to faculty organisations, the Student Nations , and the mainstream political parties .

Student nations
The student nations are student organisations that provide extra-curricular activities to students. Along with the faculty-based organisations, the nations provide one of the main nodes of student social life. The nations at University of Helsinki have a special legal status in the Universities Act. There are 15 nations at the University, each one representing a historic region or province of Finland, with four of these representing Swedish-speaking regions. Membership is optional.

Notable alumni, faculty, and staff

Rectors

See also

Notes and references

External links
WebPage index: 00181
UKOLN
Formerly known as The United Kingdom Office for Library and Information Networking , UKOLN was a centre of expertise in digital information management, providing advice and services to the library, information, education and cultural heritage communities. UKOLN was based at the University of Bath and was funded by the JISC as well as project funding from JISC and the European Union , until 31 July 2013 when funding ceased. [1]

History
UKOLN was established in 1989, [2] although the organisation traces its roots back to 1977 with the foundation, by the British Library , of the Centre for Catalogue Research. Between 1994 and 2000, the Director of UKOLN was Lorcan Dempsey .
In May 2013 an article published in the Times Higher Education announced that " 16 of its 24 University of Bath-based staff [were made] redundant after the cessation of a £622,000 annual grant from the higher education technology body Jisc ". [3]
Although UKOLN continued after 31 July 2013 it was significantly reduced in size and was no longer working in many of the areas which were responsible for its visibility in national and international arenas. [4] UKOLN's Director departed without replacement in late 2013. [5] The remaining UKOLN staff are to be made redundant in July 2015, marking the closure of UKOLN after 26 years.

Work
UKOLN's main work traditionally included:
Its specialist areas included metadata and interoperability. It also published the Ariadne (Web magazine) , targeted principally at information science professionals in academia, archives, libraries and museums. UKOLN also organised many events, including the annual Institutional Web Management Workshop .
WebPage index: 00182
WikiEducator
WikiEducator is an international online community project for the collaborative development of learning materials, which educators are free to reuse, adapt and share without restriction. WikiEducator was launched in 2006 [4] [5] and is supported by the non-profit Open Education Resource Foundation (OER). [6] A variety of learning resources are available on WikiEducator: direct instructional resources such as lesson plans and full courses, as well as learning-support resources, such as individual school portals and funding proposals.
WikiEducator's stated goal is to build a thriving and sustainable global community dedicated to the design, development and delivery of free content for learning in realisation of a free version of the education curriculum by 2015. [7] [8] The project purports to focus on building capacity in the use of MediaWiki and related free software technologies, developing free content for use in educational institutions and elsewhere, facilitating the establishment of community networks and collaboration, and fostering new technologies. [9]

History
Wayne Mackintosh created the prototype of WikiEducator on a desktop machine, making the very first edit on 13 February 2006. [10] He registered the WikiEducator domain name on 12 February 2006 in New Zealand . In April 2006, the prototype was moved onto a hosted server with the financial assistance of Commonwealth of Learning (COL) . COL provided sponsorship and leadership for the project, including receipt of a $100,000 grant from The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation to develop WikiEducator. [11] On 1 July 2009, WikiEducator became an independent entity, headquartered at the new International Centre for Open Education at Otago Polytechnic in Dunedin , New Zealand. [6] While COL continues to provide some financial support for WikiEducator, the Open Education Resource Foundation maintains the technical and operational infrastructure of the WikiEducator community in accordance with the policies approved by the WikiEducator Community Council. [1]

Participant training
WikEducator's training programme is called Learning4Content (L4C). [12] Under this initiative, the WikiEducator project arranges free face-to-face as well as online wiki skills and OER development trainings. In return for participants' pledge to develop a learning resource on the wiki, the WikiEducator community supports them in their journey to acquire wiki editing skills and to experience the peer-based model for developing OERs. The WikiEducator community will also certify [13] new WikiEducators who request certification of their skills under the L4C initiative.

Recognition
WikiEducator was the inaugural recipient of the MERLOT Africa Network’s award for exemplary open educational resources (OERs) practices in 2008. [14]

See also
WebPage index: 00183
Intellectual property
Intellectual property ( IP ) refers to creations of the intellect for which a monopoly is assigned to designated owners by law . [1] Intellectual property rights (IPRs) are the protections granted to the creators of IP, and include trademarks , copyright , patents , industrial design rights , and in some jurisdictions trade secrets . [2] Artistic works including music and literature, as well as discoveries, inventions, words, phrases, symbols, and designs can all be protected as intellectual property.
While intellectual property law has evolved over centuries, it was not until the 19th century that the term intellectual property began to be used, and not until the late 20th century that it became commonplace in the majority of the world. [3]

History
The Statute of Monopolies (1624) and the British Statute of Anne (1710) are seen as the origins of patent law and copyright respectively, [4] firmly establishing the concept of intellectual property.
The first known use of the term intellectual property dates to 1769, when a piece published in the Monthly Review used the phrase. [5] The first clear example of modern usage goes back as early as 1808, when it was used as a heading title in a collection of essays. [6]
The German equivalent was used with the founding of the North German Confederation whose constitution granted legislative power over the protection of intellectual property ( Schutz des geistigen Eigentums ) to the confederation. [7] When the administrative secretariats established by the Paris Convention (1883) and the Berne Convention (1886) merged in 1893, they located in Berne, and also adopted the term intellectual property in their new combined title, the United International Bureaux for the Protection of Intellectual Property .
The organization subsequently relocated to Geneva in 1960, and was succeeded in 1967 with the establishment of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) by treaty as an agency of the United Nations . According to Lemley, it was only at this point that the term really began to be used in the United States (which had not been a party to the Berne Convention), [3] and it did not enter popular usage until passage of the Bayh-Dole Act in 1980. [8]
"The history of patents does not begin with inventions, but rather with royal grants by Queen Elizabeth I (1558–1603) for monopoly privileges... Approximately 200 years after the end of Elizabeth's reign, however, a patent represents a legal right obtained by an inventor providing for exclusive control over the production and sale of his mechanical or scientific invention... [demonstrating] the evolution of patents from royal prerogative to common-law doctrine." [9]
The term can be found used in an October 1845 Massachusetts Circuit Court ruling in the patent case Davoll et al. v. Brown. , in which Justice Charles L. Woodbury wrote that "only in this way can we protect intellectual property, the labors of the mind, productions and interests are as much a man's own...as the wheat he cultivates, or the flocks he rears." [10] The statement that "discoveries are...property" goes back earlier. Section 1 of the French law of 1791 stated, "All new discoveries are the property of the author; to assure the inventor the property and temporary enjoyment of his discovery, there shall be delivered to him a patent for five, ten or fifteen years." [11] In Europe, French author A. Nion mentioned propriété intellectuelle in his Droits civils des auteurs, artistes et inventeurs , published in 1846.
Until recently, the purpose of intellectual property law was to give as little protection as possible in order to encourage innovation. Historically, therefore, they were granted only when they were necessary to encourage invention, limited in time and scope. [12]
The concept's origins can potentially be traced back further. Jewish law includes several considerations whose effects are similar to those of modern intellectual property laws, though the notion of intellectual creations as property does not seem to exist – notably the principle of Hasagat Ge'vul (unfair encroachment) was used to justify limited-term publisher (but not author) copyright in the 16th century. [13] In 500 BCE, the government of the Greek state of Sybaris offered one year's patent "to all who should discover any new refinement in luxury". [14]

Intellectual property rights
Intellectual property rights include patents , copyright , industrial design rights , trademarks , plant variety rights , trade dress , geographical indications , [15] and in some jurisdictions trade secrets . There are also more specialized or derived varieties of sui generis exclusive rights, such as circuit design rights (called mask work rights in the US) and supplementary protection certificates for pharmaceutical products (after expiry of a patent protecting them) and database rights (in European law ).

Patents
A patent is a form of right granted by the government to an inventor, giving the owner the right to exclude others from making, using, selling, offering to sell, and importing an invention for a limited period of time, in exchange for the public disclosure of the invention. An invention is a solution to a specific technological problem, which may be a product or a process and generally has to fulfil three main requirements: it has to be new, not obvious and there needs to be an industrial applicability. [16] :17

Copyright
A copyright gives the creator of an original work exclusive rights to it, usually for a limited time. Copyright may apply to a wide range of creative, intellectual, or artistic forms, or "works". [17] [18] Copyright does not cover ideas and information themselves, only the form or manner in which they are expressed. [19]

Industrial design rights
An industrial design right (sometimes called "design right" or design patent ) protects the visual design of objects that are not purely utilitarian. An industrial design consists of the creation of a shape, configuration or composition of pattern or color, or combination of pattern and color in three-dimensional form containing aesthetic value. An industrial design can be a two- or three-dimensional pattern used to produce a product, industrial commodity or handicraft.

Plant varieties
Plant breeders' rights or plant variety rights are the rights to commercially use a new variety of a plant. The variety must amongst others be novel and distinct and for registration the evaluation of propagating material of the variety is examined.

Trademarks
A trademark is a recognizable sign , design or expression which distinguishes products or services of a particular trader from the similar products or services of other traders. [20] [21] [22]

Trade dress
Trade dress is a legal term of art that generally refers to characteristics of the visual and aesthetic appearance of a product or its packaging (or even the design of a building) that signify the source of the product to consumers. [23]

Trade secrets
A trade secret is a formula , practice, process, design , instrument, pattern , or compilation of information which is not generally known or reasonably ascertainable, by which a business can obtain an economic advantage over competitors and customers. There is no formal government protection granted; each business must take measures to guard its own trade secrets (e.g. Formula for coca-cola.)

Objectives of intellectual property law
The stated objective of most intellectual property law (with the exception of trademarks) is to "Promote progress." [24] By exchanging limited exclusive rights for disclosure of inventions and creative works, society and the patentee/copyright owner mutually benefit, and an incentive is created for inventors and authors to create and disclose their work. Some commentators have noted that the objective of intellectual property legislators and those who support its implementation appears to be "absolute protection". "If some intellectual property is desirable because it encourages innovation, they reason, more is better. The thinking is that creators will not have sufficient incentive to invent unless they are legally entitled to capture the full social value of their inventions". [12] This absolute protection or full value view treats intellectual property as another type of "real" property, typically adopting its law and rhetoric. Other recent developments in intellectual property law, such as the America Invents Act , stress international harmonization. Recently there has also been much debate over the desirability of using intellectual property rights to protect cultural heritage, including intangible ones, as well as over risks of commodification derived from this possibility. [25] The issue still remains open in legal scholarship.

Financial incentive
These exclusive rights allow owners of intellectual property to benefit from the property they have created, providing a financial incentive for the creation of an investment in intellectual property, and, in case of patents, pay associated research and development costs. [26] Some commentators, such as David Levine and Michele Boldrin , dispute this justification. [27]
In 2013 the United States Patent & Trademark Office approximated that the worth of intellectual property to the U.S. economy is more than US $5 trillion and creates employment for an estimated 18 million American people. The value of intellectual property is considered similarly high in other developed nations, such as those in the European Union. [28] In the UK, IP has become a recognised asset class for use in pension-led funding and other types of business finance. However, in 2013, the UK Intellectual Property Office stated: "There are millions of intangible business assets whose value is either not being leveraged at all, or only being leveraged inadvertently". [29]

Economic growth
The WIPO treaty and several related international agreements underline that the protection of intellectual property rights is essential to maintaining economic growth. The WIPO Intellectual Property Handbook gives two reasons for intellectual property laws:
The Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA) states that "effective enforcement of intellectual property rights is critical to sustaining economic growth across all industries and globally". [31]
Economists estimate that two-thirds of the value of large businesses in the United States can be traced to intangible assets. [32] "IP-intensive industries" are estimated to generate 72 percent more value added (price minus material cost) per employee than "non-IP-intensive industries". [33] [ dubious – discuss ]
A joint research project of the WIPO and the United Nations University measuring the impact of IP systems on six Asian countries found "a positive correlation between the strengthening of the IP system and subsequent economic growth." [34]

Morality
According to Article 27 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , "everyone has the right to the protection of the moral and material interests resulting from any scientific, literary or artistic production of which he is the author". [35] Although the relationship between intellectual property and human rights is a complex one, [36] there are moral arguments for intellectual property.
The arguments that justify intellectual property fall into three major categories. Personality theorists believe intellectual property is an extension of an individual. Utilitarians believe that intellectual property stimulates social progress and pushes people to further innovation. Lockeans argue that intellectual property is justified based on deservedness and hard work. [ citation needed ]
Various moral justifications for private property can be used to argue in favor of the morality of intellectual property, such as:
Lysander Spooner (1855) argues "that a man has a natural and absolute right—and if a natural and absolute, then necessarily a perpetual, right—of property, in the ideas, of which he is the discoverer or creator; that his right of property, in ideas, is intrinsically the same as, and stands on identically the same grounds with, his right of property in material things; that no distinction, of principle, exists between the two cases". [43]
Writer Ayn Rand argued in her book Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal that the protection of intellectual property is essentially a moral issue. The belief is that the human mind itself is the source of wealth and survival and that all property at its base is intellectual property. To violate intellectual property is therefore no different morally than violating other property rights which compromises the very processes of survival and therefore constitutes an immoral act. [44]

Infringement, misappropriation, and enforcement
Violation of intellectual property rights, called "infringement" with respect to patents, copyright, and trademarks, and "misappropriation" with respect to trade secrets, may be a breach of civil law or criminal law, depending on the type of intellectual property involved, jurisdiction, and the nature of the action.
As of 2011 trade in counterfeit copyrighted and trademarked works was a $600 billion industry worldwide and accounted for 5–7% of global trade. [45]

Patent infringement
Patent infringement typically is caused by using or selling a patented invention without permission from the patent holder. The scope of the patented invention or the extent of protection [46] is defined in the claims of the granted patent. There is safe harbor in many jurisdictions to use a patented invention for research. This safe harbor does not exist in the US unless the research is done for purely philosophical purposes, or in order to gather data in order to prepare an application for regulatory approval of a drug. [47] In general, patent infringement cases are handled under civil law (e.g., in the United States) but several jurisdictions incorporate infringement in criminal law also (for example, Argentina, China, France, Japan, Russia, South Korea). [48]

Copyright infringement
Copyright infringement is reproducing, distributing, displaying or performing a work , or to make derivative works , without permission from the copyright holder, which is typically a publisher or other business representing or assigned by the work's creator. It is often called "piracy". [49] While copyright is created the instance a work is fixed, generally the copyright holder can only get money damages if the owner registers the copyright. [ citation needed ] Enforcement of copyright is generally the responsibility of the copyright holder. [50] The ACTA trade agreement , signed in May 2011 by the United States, Japan, Switzerland, and the EU, and which has not entered into force, requires that its parties add criminal penalties, including incarceration and fines, for copyright and trademark infringement, and obligated the parties to active police for infringement. [45] [51] There are limitations and exceptions to copyright , allowing limited use of copyrighted works, which does not constitute infringement. Examples of such doctrines are the fair use and fair dealing doctrine.

Trademark infringement
Trademark infringement occurs when one party uses a trademark that is identical or confusingly similar to a trademark owned by another party, in relation to products or services which are identical or similar to the products or services of the other party. In many countries, a trademark receives protection without registration, but registering a trademark provides legal advantages for enforcement. Infringement can be addressed by civil litigation and, in several jurisdictions, under criminal law. [45] [51]

Trade secret misappropriation
Trade secret misappropriation is different from violations of other intellectual property laws, since by definition trade secrets are secret, while patents and registered copyrights and trademarks are publicly available. In the United States, trade secrets are protected under state law, and states have nearly universally adopted the Uniform Trade Secrets Act . The United States also has federal law in the form of the Economic Espionage Act of 1996 ( 18 U.S.C. §§ 1831 – 1839 ), which makes the theft or misappropriation of a trade secret a federal crime. This law contains two provisions criminalizing two sorts of activity. The first, 18 U.S.C. § 1831(a) , criminalizes the theft of trade secrets to benefit foreign powers. The second, 18 U.S.C. § 1832 , criminalizes their theft for commercial or economic purposes. (The statutory penalties are different for the two offenses.) In Commonwealth common law jurisdictions, confidentiality and trade secrets are regarded as an equitable right rather than a property right but penalties for theft are roughly the same as the United States. [ citation needed ]

Criticisms

The term "intellectual property"
Criticism of the term intellectual property ranges from discussing its vagueness and abstract overreach to direct contention to the semantic validity of using words like property and rights in fashions that contradict practice and law. Many detractors think this term specially serves the doctrinal agenda of parties opposing reform in the public interest or otherwise abusing related legislations; and that it disallows intelligent discussion about specific and often unrelated aspects of copyright, patents, trademarks, etc. [52]
Free Software Foundation founder Richard Stallman argues that, although the term intellectual property is in wide use, it should be rejected altogether, because it "systematically distorts and confuses these issues, and its use was and is promoted by those who gain from this confusion". He claims that the term "operates as a catch-all to lump together disparate laws [which] originated separately, evolved differently, cover different activities, have different rules, and raise different public policy issues" and that it creates a "bias" by confusing these monopolies with ownership of limited physical things, likening them to "property rights". [53] Stallman advocates referring to copyrights, patents and trademarks in the singular and warns against abstracting disparate laws into a collective term. He argues that "to avoid spreading unnecessary bias and confusion, it is best to adopt a firm policy not to speak or even think in terms of 'intellectual property'." [54]
Similarly, economists Boldrin and Levine prefer to use the term "intellectual monopoly" as a more appropriate and clear definition of the concept, which they argue, is very dissimilar from property rights. [55]
On the assumption that intellectual property rights are actual rights Stallman argues that this claim does not live to the historical intentions behind these laws, which in the case of copyright served as a censorship system, and later on, a regulatory model for the printing press that may have benefited authors incidentally, but never interfered with the freedom of average readers. [56] Still referring to copyright, he cites legal literature such as the United States Constitution and case law to demonstrate that it is meant to be an optional and experimental bargain that temporarily trades property rights and free speech for public, not private, benefit in the form of increased artistic production and knowledge. He mentions that "if copyright were a natural right nothing could justify terminating this right after a certain period of time". [57]
Law professor, writer and political activist Lawrence Lessig , along with many other copyleft and free software activists, has criticized the implied analogy with physical property (like land or an automobile). They argue such an analogy fails because physical property is generally rivalrous while intellectual works are non-rivalrous (that is, if one makes a copy of a work, the enjoyment of the copy does not prevent enjoyment of the original). [58] [59] Other arguments along these lines claim that unlike the situation with tangible property, there is no natural scarcity of a particular idea or information: once it exists at all, it can be re-used and duplicated indefinitely without such re-use diminishing the original. Stephan Kinsella has objected to intellectual property on the grounds that the word "property" implies scarcity, which may not be applicable to ideas. [60]
Entrepreneur and politician Rickard Falkvinge and hacker Alexandre Oliva have independently compared George Orwell's fictional dialect Newspeak to the terminology used by intellectual property supporters as a linguistic weapon to shape public opinion regarding copyright debate and DRM . [61] [62]

Alternative terms
In civil law jurisdictions, intellectual property has often been referred to as intellectual rights , traditionally a somewhat broader concept that has included moral rights and other personal protections that cannot be bought or sold. Use of the term intellectual rights has declined since the early 1980s, as use of the term intellectual property has increased.
Alternative terms monopolies on information and intellectual monopoly have emerged among those who argue against the "property" or "intellect" or "rights" assumptions, notably Richard Stallman . The backronyms intellectual protectionism and intellectual poverty , [63] whose initials are also IP , have found supporters as well, especially among those who have used the backronym digital restrictions management . [64] [65]
The argument that an intellectual property right should (in the interests of better balancing of relevant private and public interests) be termed an intellectual monopoly privilege (IMP) has been advanced by several academics including Birgitte Andersen [66] and Thomas Alured Faunce . [67]

Objections to overbroad intellectual property laws
Some critics of intellectual property, such as those in the free culture movement , point at intellectual monopolies as harming health (in the case of pharmaceutical patents ), preventing progress, and benefiting concentrated interests to the detriment of the masses, [68] [69] [70] [71] and argue that the public interest is harmed by ever-expansive monopolies in the form of copyright extensions , software patents , and business method patents . More recently scientists and engineers are expressing concern that patent thickets are undermining technological development even in high-tech fields like nanotechnology . [72] [73] [74] [75] [76]
Petra Moser has asserted that historical analysis suggests that intellectual property laws may harm innovation:
Peter Drahos notes, "Property rights confer authority over resources. When authority is granted to the few over resources on which many depend, the few gain power over the goals of the many. This has consequences for both political and economic freedoms with in a society." [78] :13
The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) recognizes that conflicts may exist between the respect for and implementation of current intellectual property systems and other human rights. [79] In 2001 the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights issued a document called "Human rights and intellectual property" that argued that intellectual property tends to be governed by economic goals when it should be viewed primarily as a social product; in order to serve human well-being, intellectual property systems must respect and conform to human rights laws. According to the Committee, when systems fail to do so they risk infringing upon the human right to food and health, and to cultural participation and scientific benefits. [80] [81] In 2004 the General Assembly of WIPO adopted The Geneva Declaration on the Future of the World Intellectual Property Organization which argues that WIPO should "focus more on the needs of developing countries, and to view IP as one of many tools for development—not as an end in itself". [82]
Further along these lines, The ethical problems brought up by IP rights are most pertinent when it is socially valuable goods like life-saving medicines are given IP protection. While the application of IP rights can allow companies to charge higher than the marginal cost of production in order to recoup the costs of research and development, the price may exclude from the market anyone who cannot afford the cost of the product, in this case a life-saving drug. [83] "An IPR driven regime is therefore not a regime that is conductive to the investment of R&D of products that are socially valuable to predominately poor populations". [83] :1108–9
Some libertarian critics of intellectual property have argued that allowing property rights in ideas and information creates artificial scarcity and infringes on the right to own tangible property. Stephan Kinsella uses the following scenario to argue this point:
Thomas Jefferson once said in a letter to Isaac McPherson on August 13, 1813:
In 2005 the RSA launched the Adelphi Charter , aimed at creating an international policy statement to frame how governments should make balanced intellectual property law. [86]
Another aspect of current U.S. Intellectual Property legislation is its focus on individual and joint works; thus, copyright protection can only be obtained in 'original' works of authorship. [87]

Expansion in nature and scope of intellectual property laws
Other criticism of intellectual property law concerns the expansion of intellectual property, both in duration and in scope.
In addition, as scientific knowledge has expanded and allowed new industries to arise in fields such as biotechnology and nanotechnology, originators of technology have sought IP protection for the new technologies. Patents have been granted for living organisms, [88] (and in the United States, certain living organisms have been patentable for over a century). [89]
The increase in terms of protection is particularly seen in relation to copyright, which has recently been the subject of serial extensions in the United States and in Europe . [58] [90] [91] [92] [93] With no need for registration or copyright notices, this is thought to have led to an increase in orphan works (copyrighted works for which the copyright owner cannot be contacted), a problem that has been noticed and addressed by governmental bodies around the world. [94]
Also with respect to copyright, the American film industry helped to change the social construct of intellectual property via its trade organization, the Motion Picture Association of America . In amicus briefs in important cases, in lobbying before Congress, and in its statements to the public, the MPAA has advocated strong protection of intellectual-property rights. In framing its presentations, the association has claimed that people are entitled to the property that is produced by their labor. Additionally Congress's awareness of the position of the United States as the world's largest producer of films has made it convenient to expand the conception of intellectual property. [95] These doctrinal reforms have further strengthened the industry, lending the MPAA even more power and authority. [96]
The growth of the Internet , and particularly distributed search engines like Kazaa and Gnutella , have represented a challenge for copyright policy. The Recording Industry Association of America , in particular, has been on the front lines of the fight against copyright infringement , which the industry calls "piracy". The industry has had victories against some services, including a highly publicized case against the file-sharing company Napster , and some people have been prosecuted for sharing files in violation of copyright. The electronic age has seen an increase in the attempt to use software-based digital rights management tools to restrict the copying and use of digitally based works. Laws such as the Digital Millennium Copyright Act have been enacted that use criminal law to prevent any circumvention of software used to enforce digital rights management systems. Equivalent provisions, to prevent circumvention of copyright protection have existed in EU for some time, and are being expanded in, for example, Article 6 and 7 the Copyright Directive . Other examples are Article 7 of the Software Directive of 1991 (91/250/EEC), and the Conditional Access Directive of 1998 (98/84/EEC). This can hinder legal uses, affecting public domain works, limitations and exceptions to copyright , or uses allowed by the copyright holder. Some copyleft licenses, like GNU GPL 3 , are designed to counter that. [97] Laws may permit circumvention under specific conditions like when it is necessary to achieve interoperability with the circumventor's program, or for accessibility reasons; however, distribution of circumvention tools or instructions may be illegal.
In the context of trademarks, this expansion has been driven by international efforts to harmonise the definition of "trademark", as exemplified by the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights ratified in 1994, which formalized regulations for IP rights that had been handled by common law, or not at all, in member states. Pursuant to TRIPs, any sign which is "capable of distinguishing" the products or services of one business from the products or services of another business is capable of constituting a trademark. [98]

See also
WebPage index: 00184
Music piracy
Music piracy is the copying and distributing of copies of a piece of music for which the composer, recording artist, or copyright -holding record company did not give consent. It has a long history, as Beethoven was afflicted with pirated copies of his music, which reduced the income he could make from publishing. [1] In the contemporary legal environment, it is a form of copyright infringement , which is a civil wrong and, under certain circumstances, even a crime in many countries. The late 20th and early 21st centuries saw much controversy about copyright piracy , regarding the ethics of redistributing media content, how much production and distribution companies in the media were losing, and the very scope of what ought to be considered "piracy"—and cases involving the piracy of music were among the most frequently discussed in the debate.

History
Music piracy was very limited in the decades prior to the invention of the internet and digital media. With the invention of newer technology that allowed for the piracy process to become less complicated, it became much more common. Users of the web began adding media files to the internet, and prior potential risks and difficulties to pirating music, such as the physicality of the process, were eliminated. It was much easier for people with little to no knowledge of technology and old piracy methods to gather media files. [2]
The first application that demonstrated the implications of music piracy was Napster . Napster enabled users to exchange music files over a common free server without any regard for copyright laws. [3] Napster was quickly shut down after a lawsuit filed by Metallica and a separate lawsuit in regards to the Digital Millennium Copyright Act . [2] Other music sharing services such as Limewire continued to be a resource to those searching for free music files. These platforms were also removed after a few years of service due to copyright laws and the Digital Millennium Copyright Act. After finding some loopholes, piracy began to exist in more legal forms, an example being Pirate Bay . This technical legality was due to the format of the websites and their country of origin and administration. The websites were set up so that the site itself did not host any of the illegal files, but gave the user a map as to where they could access the files. Additionally, in Pirate Bay's case, the website was hosted under Swedish law, where this “map” was not illegal. [2]

Arguments over legality
In face of the growing encroachment on potential sales from internet piracy, industry associations like the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) have lobbied for stricter laws and stricter punishment of those breaking copyright law. Record companies have also turned to technological barriers to copying, such as DRM , to some controversy . These organizations have tried to add more controls to the digital copy of the music to prevent consumers from copying the music. For the most part, the industry has come to a consensus that, if not DRM, then some similar measures are necessary for them to continue to make a profit.
Critics of the record companies' strategy have proposed that the attempts to maintain sales rates are impeding the rights of legitimate listeners to use and listen to the music as they wish. When the US Congress passed the Copyright Act of 1909 , it deliberately gave less copyright control to music composers than that of novelists: "Its fear was the monopoly power of rights holders, and that that power would stifle follow-on creativity". [4] According to the internationally established Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development , [5] "Existing laws and regulations may be too broad and general to deal adequately with the rapid technological developments that facilitate digital piracy, and policy makers may need to consider enacting some specific provisions to deal with these infringements. Such provisions should not unduly impede legitimate digital communications, nor unreasonably impact on the Internet as an effective communications platform, commercial channel and educational tool..." [5]
There have been several means of free access to copyrighted music for the general public including Napster, Limewire, and Spotify. Napster was a free file sharing software created by college student Shawn Fanning to enable people to share and trade music files in mp3 format. Napster became hugely popular because it made it so easy to share and download music files. However, the heavy metal band Metallica sued the company for copyright infringement. [6] This led to other artists following suit and shutting down Napster’s service. Likewise, Limewire was a free peer-to-peer file sharing software similar to that of Napster. The software enabled unlimited file sharing between computers and ended being one of the most popular sharing networks around. Like Napster, Limewire struggled through multiple legal battles and inevitably wound up being shut down. [7]
According to the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) since Shawn Fanning started the program file sharing program Napster in 1999 music revenue has gone down 53% from $14.6 billion to $7.0 billion in 2013. [8] A study done in 2007 by the Institute of Policy Innovation states that music piracy resulted in a loss of 71,060 U.S. jobs, out of which 23,860 would have been in the recording industry and 44,200 jobs in other unrelated industries. [9]

Law enforcement
The RIAA, a powerful lobby for the recording industry, is responsible for carrying out most of the lawsuits against music piracy in the United States. Some claim that the enforcement against music piracy, which may cost copyright violators up to $150,000 per infringement, [4] is unreasonable, and that it may even violate United States constitutional protections against cruel and unusual punishment . Some have accused the RIAA of outright bullying, as when one of their lawyers, Matt Oppenheimer, told the defendant in one lawsuit, “You don’t want to pay another visit to a dentist like me". [4] In that same case, according to Lawrence Lessig, "the RIAA insisted it would not settle the case until it took every penny [the defendant] had saved". [4]
Further attempts at progress towards controlling the privacy of public media content by targeting the elimination of piracy were made when the highly anticipated yet often debated bill known as the Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA) was passed in recent years. The bill was first introduced in October 2011 by the United States House representative Lamar S. Smith. [10] The general scope of the law was to fulfill the goal of putting a stop to online piracy by expanding upon existing criminal laws regarding copyright violations. The essential goal of the bill was to protect intellectual property of content creators by raising awareness of the severity of punishments for copyright infringement. Naturally, the bill was met with considerable opposition from various parties. One instance of this was an article comment by Edward J. Black, president and CEO of the Computer & Communications Industry Association, who questioned the potential effectiveness of the bill by reasoning that the major pirate websites that SOPA attempts to eliminate could just as easily respawn under a different name if taken down as early as a few hours later. [11] Additionally, strong protest attempts were made across the internet when numerous high-profile online organizations including Tumblr, Facebook, Twitter, and participating in American Censorship Day on January 18, with some sites including Reddit and Wikipedia going as far as completely blacking out all of their pages, redirecting the user to SOPA protest messages. [12] Ultimately, as a result of aggressive protests and lack of consenting opinions within the congress, SOPA was tabled on January 20 by its creator, House representative Lamar Smith. [13]

Economic ramifications
Piracy's real effect on music sales is difficult to accurately assess. In neoclassical economics prices are determined by the combination of the forces of supply and demand , but the participators in the digital market do not always follow the usual motives and behaviors of the supply and demand system. First, the cost of digital distribution has decreased significantly from the costs of distribution by former methods. Furthermore, the majority of the filesharing community will distribute copies of music for a zero price in monetary terms, and there are some consumers who are willing to pay a certain price for legitimate copies even when they could just as easily obtain pirated copies, [5] such as with pay what you want vendors.
Another issue is that because many people in the world illegally download music because they cannot afford to purchase legitimate copies, not every illegal download necessarily equates to a lost sale. This has some effect on music sales, but as Lawrence Lessig points out, there is wide asymmetry between the estimated volume of illegal downloading and the projected loss of sales:
According to Woolley's introduction each year It is estimated that 12.5 billion dollars are lost due to file sharing and music piracy, and 5 billion of that is profits lost from the music industry directly. Due to this dramatic loss in profits the music industry has been forced to cut down their staffing. Music piracy has become such an issue that the industry is encouraged to adapt to this new era and change. [14]

Digital copies
The article, "The Music Industry On (The) Line? Surviving Music Piracy In A Digital Era" By Jelle Janssens, Stijn Vandaele, and Tom Vander Beken presents an analysis of the prevalence of piracy in music trade, which has affected the global sales of CDs. This article points out that technological development such as file sharing; MP3 players, and CDRs have increased music piracy. The most common forms of music piracy are Internet Piracy and compact disc piracy. It also discusses the association between music piracy and organized crime, which is defined as profit-driven illegal activities. The fact that digital products are virtual instead of physical affects the economic mechanisms behind the production and distribution of content, and how piracy works for digital as opposed to physical products: "the main consequence of the non-physical form of digital products is their virtually negligible marginal cost of reproduction and their ability to be digitally delivered." [5] The cost of burning a CD drastically lowered the overhead for record companies, as well as for music pirates, and with the growing tendency toward online distribution among legitimate and illicit distributors alike, the expense of distributing shrunk further from the costs of printing and transporting CDs to merely the costs of maintaining a website . [5] By sheer volume of file transfers, though, distributing music through traditional web servers and FTP servers were not as popular as peer to peer (P2P) now, because the traditional direct download method is slower.
The 2008 British Music Rights survey [15] showed that 80% of people in Britain wanted a legal P2P service. This was consistent with the results of earlier research conducted in the United States, upon which the Open Music Model was based. [16] In addition, the majority of filesharers in the survey preferred to get their music from "local sources" such as LAN connections, email , flash drives , sharing with other people they know personally. [5] The other most common method of filesharing was with P2P technologies. By 2007, P2P networks' popularity had grown so much that they used as much as 39% of the total volume of information exchanged over the internet. [5]

Rights Holders Solution
Alongside the RIAA and BPI's industry anti-piracy service sit a number of other independent companies offering anti-piracy solutions. These companies tend to have a better reach and success rate than the slower industry bodies and provide an alternative solution. Notable market leaders include AudioLock , Web Sheriff, Topple Track, Detecnet, Muso and Attributor.

Minimising Online Music Piracy
There are ways to minimise music piracy on using the latest Google court decisions on the right to be forgotten as well as using some proven techniques relating to adding a watermark to the tracks and uploading the files yourself with promotional intent. [17]
A paper called the Music Anti-Piracy Best Practise Guidelines [18] has been published by music anti-piracy specialists AudioLock and endorsed by the Association of Independent Music , the Association For Electronic Music (AFEM), music distributors Believe Digital and Judge Jules (DJ and Lawyer). These guidelines give advice on how to minimise exposure to music-piracy and how best to utilise the solutions that are not available.
Statistics have shown that since the latter half the 2000s, there has been a decline in music piracy. According to a NPD survey, in 2012, approximately one in ten Internet users in the United States downloaded music through a file sharing service similar to BitTorrent or LimeWire. This number is significantly less than 2005, the peak of the piracy phenomenon, when one in five users used peer-to-peer networks to gather music files. The emergence of free streaming services has decreased the amount of users who pirate music on the internet. Services such as Spotify and Pandora have easy-to-use interfaces and decrease the risk for computer viruses and spyware. [19] In comparison to the illegal software used by older music piracy networks such as Napster or Limewire, current music streaming services such as Spotify and Rdio offer cheap yet legal access to copyrighted music by paying the rights holders through money made off of payments made by premium users and through advertisements [20]

See also
WebPage index: 00185
Software patent debate
The software patent debate is the argument about the extent to which, as a matter of public policy , it should be possible to patent software and computer-implemented inventions. Policy debate on software patents has been active for years. [1] The opponents to software patents have gained more visibility with less resources through the years than their pro-patent opponents. [2] Arguments and critiques have been focused mostly on the economic consequences of software patents.
One aspect of the debate has focused on the proposed European Union directive on the patentability of computer-implemented inventions , also known as the "CII Directive" or the "Software Patent Directive," which was ultimately rejected by the EU Parliament in July 2005.

Arguments for patentability
There are several arguments commonly given in defense of software patents or defense of the patentability of computer-implemented inventions.

Public disclosure

Economic benefit

Encouragement of innovation

Copyright limitations
Patents protect functionality. Copyright on the other hand only protects expression. Substantial modification to an original work, even if it performs the same function, would not be prevented by copyright. To prove copyright infringement also requires the additional hurdle of proving copying which is not necessary for patent infringement.
Copyright law protects unique expressions, while patent law protects inventions, which in the case of software, are algorithms ; copyright cannot protect a novel means of accomplishing a function, merely the syntax of one such means. [8]
This means that patents incentivize projects that are unique and innovative in functionality rather than simply form. Copyrights, in turn, only incentivize uniqueness in form. [9]

Protection for small companies
Software patents can afford smaller companies market protection by preventing larger companies from stealing work done by a smaller organization, leveraging their greater resources to go to market before the smaller company can. [10] Tesla once utilized this reasoning to qualify electric car patents, stating that "[Tesla] felt compelled to create patents out of concern that the big car companies would copy our technology and then use their massive manufacturing, sales and marketing power to overwhelm Tesla." [1] . They have since decided that to move the electric car market forward for all, their patents are best open sourced.

Hardware patents exist
Hardware and software are often interchangeable - software gives the hardware its value (ex. Amazon Echo, Hue Lightbulb, etc.). The difference between putting certain features in hardware and others in software depends on factors like cost, reliability, and frequency of the change. If people can patent hardware it does not make sense to not be able to also patent the software that is the core of the hardware. [11]

Arguments against patentability
Opponents of software patents argue that:

Software is math
A program is the transcription of an algorithm in a programming language . Since every ( Turing-complete ) programming language implements the Church's lambda calculus by virtue of the Church-Turing thesis , a program is thus the transcription of a mathematical function. Math is not patentable. Therefore, neither is software. [12]

Software encourages patent thickets
A patent thicket is a dense web of patents that companies must decipher to develop new technology. There are various types of patent thickets such as when a single innovation is protected by multiple patent holders or when a product is covered by numerous patents. The consequences of patent thickets are increased difficulty of innovation, complex cross-licensing relations between companies, and discouragement of newcomers from entering the software industry. [13]

Hinders research and development

Hinders innovation

Cost and loss of R&D funds

Copyright

Software is different

Trivial patents

Open source disadvantage

Software patents' usefulness as an information source is limited

Long patent pendencies

Patent trolls

Disproportionately harms startups

U.S. Supreme Court decisions
Several Supreme Court decisions since 2000, as well as the Federal Circuit and district court decisions interpreting and implementing them, have dramatically impacted the status of software patents in the United States. They have particularly affected many thousands of business-method patents that issued as a result of Federal Circuit decisions in the 1990s. The two principal Supreme Court decisions were Bilski v. Kappos and Alice v. CLS Bank , the latter of which confirmed the applicability of the earlier decision Mayo v. Prometheus to computer-related inventions in which a computer was used to implement an abstract principle or preexisting business practice. (These cases are the subject of separate Wikipedia articles, which discuss the background and rulings in these cases in more detail, and supply authorities supporting the generalizations about those cases that follow. Additional detail is found in the Wikipedia article Software patents under United States patent law , along with supporting citations not repeated in this summary of those articles.)

Bilski
The Bilski case involved a patent application on methods for hedging against commodity price fluctuations, which the PTO had rejected. The Federal Circuit , in In re Bilski , upheld the PTO's rejection on the grounds that the claims failed the machine-or-transformation test , which the court held should be used as the sole test of patent eligibility. The court did not hold all business methods to be patent ineligible, although a minority of the judges would have ruled that business methods are not properly the subject of patents.
The Supreme Court affirmed the judgment of ineligibility, in Bilski v. Kappos , but on more general, and less articulated in detail, grounds of undue abstractness. It rejected the Federal Circuit's elevation of the machine-or-transformation test as the sole test of patent eligibility, saying that rather it was simply a "useful clue." The 5-4 majority refused to hold that all business methods were incapable of being patented, but four justices would have established such a rule. A concurring opinion pointed out that the Court was unanimous, however, as to many issues in the Bilski case, including a rejection of the Federal Circuit's late 1990s State Street Bank decision, which allowed patents on any advance, technical or nontechnical (and in that case a numerical financial calculation of stock price changes) that produces a "useful, concrete and tangible result."
The Supreme Court's Bilski decision was criticized because of its lack of detailed guidance on how to determine whether a claim was directed to an abstract idea. Nonetheless, it provided some clarification and affirmed the Federal Circuit's taking a new direction in its software-related patent cases.

Mayo
In Mayo v. Prometheus , the Supreme Court invalidated a patent on a diagnostic method, because it non-inventively implemented a natural principle; the Court drew on cases involving computer software and other abstract ideas. In this case, the Court was much more detailed in describing how to recognize a patent-ineligible claim to an abstract idea. The Mayo methodology has come to dominate patent-eligibility law. It revived the approach of the Flook and Neilson cases, which is to treat the underlying principle, idea, or algorithm on which the claimed patent is based as if it were part of the prior art and to make patent eligibility turn on whether the implementation of it is inventive. This led to the "two-step" Alice test described next.

Alice
At the time the Mayo case was decided, there was some uncertainty over whether it applied only to natural principles (laws of nature) or more generally to patent eligibility of all abstract ideas and general principles, including those involved in software patents. The Alice decision confirmed that the test was general. The Alice case involved patents on electronic methods and computer programs for financial-trading systems on which trades between two parties who are to exchange payment are settled by a third party in ways that reduce the risk that one party will perform while the other will not. The patents cover what amounts to a computerized escrow arrangement.
The Court held that Mayo explained how to address the problem of determining whether a patent claimed an unpatentable abstract idea or instead a potentially patentable practical implementation of an idea. This requires using a "two-step" analysis.
In the first step, the court must determine whether the patent claim under examination contains an abstract idea, such as an algorithm, method of computation, or other general principle. If not, the claim is potentially patentable, subject to the other requirements of the patent code. If the answer is affirmative, the court must proceed to the next step.
In the second step of the analysis, the court must determine whether the patent adds to the idea "something extra" that embodies an "inventive concept." If there is no addition of an inventive element to the underlying abstract idea, the court will find the patent invalid under section 101. This means that the implementation of the idea must not be conventional or obvious to qualify for a patent. Ordinary and customary use of a general-purpose digital computer is insufficient; the Court said—"merely requiring generic computer implementation fails to transform [an] abstract idea into a patent-eligible invention."
The ruling continued with these points:
The Alice decision met a mixed reception, but it has profoundly affected U.S. patent law. In its wake, as explained in the Wikipedia article on the case , vast numbers of so-called software and business-method patents have been invalidated (the overwhelming majority of those which the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has considered and the number of such patents issuing has drastically fallen. The Alice decision has been widely criticized for its failure to specify in detail the boundaries of patent eligibility, but it has also been defended because its unanimity tends to stabilize decisional law in the field. [34]

Subsequent developments
After Alice , the Federal Circuit and district courts invalidated large numbers of business-method and software patents based on those courts' interpretations of Alice . Federal Circuit Judge William Bryson summed this up in these terms:

See also
WebPage index: 00186
Business models for open-source software
Open-source software is widely used both as independent applications and as components in non-open-source applications. Many independent software vendors (ISVs), value-added resellers (VARs), and hardware vendors ( OEMs or ODMs ) use open-source frameworks , modules, and libraries inside their proprietary, for-profit products and services. [1] From a customer's perspective, the ability to use open technology under standard commercial terms and support is valuable. They are willing to pay for the legal protection (e.g., indemnification from copyright or patent infringement), "commercial-grade QA", and professional support/training/consulting that are typical of commercial software, while also receiving the benefits of fine-grained control and lack of lock-in that comes with open-source.

Funding
Much unlike proprietary off-the-shelf software that come with restrictive licenses, open-source software is distributed freely, through the web and in physical media. Because creators cannot require each user to pay a license fee to fund development this way, a number of alternative development funding models have emerged.
An example of those funding models is when bespoke software is developed as a consulting project for one or more customers who request it. These customers pay developers to have this software developed according to their own needs and they could also closely direct the developers' work. If both parties agree, the resulting software could then be publicly released with an open-source license in order to allow subsequent adoption by other parties. That agreement could reduce the costs paid by the clients while the original developers (or independent consultants) can then charge for training, installation, technical support , or further customization if and when more interested customers would choose to use it after the initial release.
There also exist stipends to support the development of open source software, such as Google 's Summer of Code . [2]
Another approach to funding is to provide the software freely, but sell licenses to proprietary add-ons such as data libraries. For instance, an open-source CAD program may require parts libraries which are sold on a subscription or flat-fee basis. Open-source software can also promote the sale of specialized hardware that it interoperates with, some example cases being the Asterisk telephony software developed by PC-telephony hardware manufacturer Digium and the Robot Operating System (ROS) robotics platform by Willow Garage and Stanford AI Labs. Many open source software projects have begun as research projects within universities, as personal projects of students or professors, or as tools to aid scientific research. The influence of universities and research institutions on open-source shows in the number of projects named after their host institutions, such as BSD Unix , CMU Common Lisp , or the NCSA HTTPd which evolved into Apache .
Companies may employ developers to work on open-source projects that are useful to the company's infrastructure: in this case, it is developed not as a product to be sold but as a sort of shared public utility. A local bug-fix or solution to a software problem, written by a developer either at a company's request or to make his/her own job easier, can be released as an open-source contribution without costing the company anything. [3] A larger project such as the Linux kernel may have contributors from dozens of companies which use and depend upon it, as well as hobbyist and research developers.
A new funding approach for open-source projects is crowdfunding , organized over web platforms like Kickstarter , Indiegogo , or Bountysource . [4]

Challenges
Open-source software can be sold and used in general commercially . Also, commercial open-source applications have been a part of the software industry for some time. [1] [5] While commercialization or funding of open-source software projects is possible, it is considered challenging. [6]
Since several open-source licenses stipulate that authors of derivative works must distribute them under an open-source ( copyleft ) license, ISVs and VARs have to develop new legal and technical mechanisms to foster their commercial goals, [7] as many traditional mechanisms are not directly applicable anymore.
Traditional business wisdom suggests that a company's methods, assets, and intellectual properties should remain concealed from market competitors ( trade secret ) as long as possible to maximize the profitable commercialization time of a new product. [8] Open-source software development minimizes the effectiveness of this tactic; development of the product is usually performed in view of the public, allowing competing projects or clones to incorporate new features or improvements as soon as the public code repository is updated, as permitted by most open-source licenses. Also in the computer hardware domain, a hardware producer who provides free and open software drivers reveals the knowledge about hardware implementation details to competitors, who might use this knowledge to catch up.
Therefore, there is considerable debate about whether vendors can make a sustainable business from an open-source strategy. In terms of a traditional software company, this is probably the wrong question to ask. Looking at the landscape of open source applications, many of the larger ones are sponsored (and largely written) by system companies such as IBM who may not have an objective of software license revenues. Other software companies, such as Oracle and Google, have sponsored or delivered significant open-source code bases. These firms' motivation tends to be more strategic, in the sense that they are trying to change the rules of a marketplace and reduce the influence of vendors such as Microsoft. Smaller vendors doing open-source work may be less concerned with immediate revenue growth than developing a large and loyal community, which may be the basis of a corporate valuation at merger time.

Approaches
A variety of open-source compatible business approaches have gained prominence in recent years [ according to whom? ] ; notable examples include dual licensing , software as a service , not charging for the software but for services , freemium , donation-based funding, and crowdfunding .
There are several different types of business models for making profit using open-source software (OSS) or funding the creation. Below are existing and legal commercial business approaches in context of open-source software and open-source licenses. [7] The acceptance of these approaches varies; some of these approaches are recommended (like selling services), others are accepted, while still others are considered controversial or even unethical by the open-source community. The underlying objective of these business models is to harness the size and international scope of the open-source community (typically more than an order of magnitude larger than what would be achieved with closed-source models) for a sustainable commercial venture. [ citation needed ] The vast majority of commercial open-source companies experience a conversion ratio (as measured by the percentage of downloaders who buy something) well below 1%, so low-cost and highly-scalable marketing and sales functions are key to these firms' profitability. [ citation needed ]

Dual-licensing
Dual licensing offers the software under an open-source license but also under separate proprietary license terms. The proprietary version can be sold to finance the continued development of the free open-source version. [9] Customers can be attracted to a no-cost and open-source edition, then be part of an up-sell to a commercial enterprise edition. Further, customers will learn of open-source software in a company's portfolio and offerings but generate business in other proprietary products and solutions, including commercial technical support contracts and services. A popular example is Oracle 's MySQL database which is dual-licensed under a commercial proprietary license as also under the GPLv2 . [10] Another example is the Sleepycat License . Flask developer Armin Ronacher stated that the AGPLv 3 was a "terrible success" as "vehicle for dual commercial licensing" and noted that MongoDB , RethinkDB , OpenERP , SugarCRM as well as WURFL utilizing the license for this purpose. [11]

Selling professional services
The financial return of costs on open-source software can also come from selling services , such as training, technical support , or consulting , rather than the software itself. [12] [13] [14]
Another possibility is offering open-source software in source code form only, while providing executable binaries to paying customers only, offering the commercial service of compiling and packaging of the software. Also, providing goods like physical installation media (e.g., DVDs ) can be a commercial service.
Open-source companies using this business model successfully are for instance RedHat and IBM ; [15] a more specialized example is that of Revolution Analytics .

Selling of branded merchandise
Some open-source organizations such as the Mozilla Foundation [16] and the Wikimedia Foundation [17] sell branded merchandise articles like t-shirts and coffee mugs. This can be also seen as an additional service provided to the user community .

Selling of certificates and trademark use
Another financing approach is innovated by Moodle , an open source learning management system and community platform. [18] [19] The business model revolves around a network of commercial partners [20] who are certificated and therefore authorised to use the Moodle name and logo , [21] and in turn provide a proportion of revenue to the Moodle Trust, which funds core development. [22]

Selling software as a service
Selling subscriptions for online accounts and server access to customers is a way of making profit based on open-source software. Also, combining desktop software with a service, called software plus services . Providing cloud computing services or software as a service (SaaS) without the release of the open-source software itself, neither in binary nor in source form, conforms with most open-source licenses (with exception of the AGPL ).
Because of its lack of software freedoms, Richard Stallman calls SaaS "inherently bad" while acknowledging its legality. [23] [24] The FSF called the server-side use-case without release of the source-code the " ASP loophole in the GPLv2" and encourage therefore the use of the Affero General Public License which plugged this hole in 2002. [25] [26] In 2007 the FSF contemplated including the special provision of AGPLv1 into GPLv3 but ultimately decided to keep the licenses separate. [27]

Partnership with funding organizations
Other financial situations include partnerships with other companies. Governments , universities , companies, and non-governmental organizations may develop internally or hire a contractor for custom in-house modifications, then release that code under an open-source license. Some organizations support the development of open-source software by grants or stipends , like Google's Summer of Code initiative founded in 2005. [2]

Voluntary donations
Also, there were experiments by Independent developers to fund development of open-source software donation -driven directly by the users, e.g., with the Illumination Software Creator in 2012. [28] SourceForge , for example, allows users to donate money to the projects it hosts that opt to accept donations. [29] Internet micro-payments systems like PayPal , flattr , and Bitcoin help this approach.
Larger donation campaigns also exist. In 2004 the Mozilla Foundation carried out a fundraising campaign to support the launch of the Firefox 1.0 web browser . It placed a two-page ad in the December 16 edition of the New York Times listing the names of the thousands who had donated. [30] [31]

Bounty driven development
The users of a particular software artifact may come together and pool money into an open-source bounty for the implementation of a desired feature or functionality. Offering bounties as funding has existed for some time. For instance, Bountysource is a web platform which has offered this funding model for open source software since 2003.
Another bounty source is companies or foundations that set up bounty programs for implemented features or bugfixes in open-source software relevant to them. For instance, Mozilla has been paying and funding freelance open-source programmers for security bug hunting and fixing since 2004. [32] [33] [34]

Pre-order/crowdfunding/reverse-bounty model
A newer funding opportunity for open-source software projects is crowdfunding , which shares similarities with the pre-order or Praenumeration business model, as well as the reverse bounty model, typically organized over web platforms like Kickstarter , [35] Indiegogo , [36] or Bountysource [4] (see also comparison of crowd funding services ). One example is the successfully funded Indiegogo campaign in 2013 by Australian programmer Timothy Arceri, who offered to implement an OpenGL 4.3 extension for the Mesa library in two weeks for $2,500. [36] Arceri delivered the OpenGL extension code which was promptly merged upstream, and he later continued his efforts on Mesa with successive crowdfunding campaigns. [37] Later, he found work as an employee in this domain with Collabora and in 2017 with Valve Corporation . [38] Another example is the June 2013 crowdfunding on Kickstarter [39] [40] of the open source video game Cataclysm: Dark Days Ahead which raised the payment of a full-time developer for 3.5 months. Patreon funding has also become an effective option, as the service gives the option to pay out each month to creators, many of whom intend to develop free and open source software. [41]

Advertising-supported software
In order to commercialize FOSS, many companies (including Google , Mozilla , and Canonical ) have moved towards an economic model of advertising-supported software . For instance, the open-source application AdBlock Plus gets paid by Google for letting whitelisted Acceptable Ads bypassing the browser ad remover. [42] As another example is SourceForge , an open-source project service provider, has the revenue model of advertising banner sales on their website. In 2006, SourceForge reported quarterly takings of $6.5 million [43] and $23 million in 2009. [44]

Selling of optional proprietary extensions
Some companies sell proprietary but optional extensions, modules, plugins or add-ons to an open-source software product. This can be a "license conform" approach with many open-source licenses if done technically sufficiently carefully. For instance, mixing proprietary code and open-source licensed code in statically linked libraries [45] or compiling all source code together in a software product might violate open-source licenses, while keeping them separated by interfaces and dynamic-link libraries might often adhere to license conform.
This approach is a variant of the freemium business model. The proprietary software may be intended to let customers get more value out of their data, infrastructure, or platform, e.g., operate their infrastructure/platform more effectively and efficiently, manage it better, or secure it better. Examples include the IBM proprietary Linux software , where IBM contributes to the Linux open-source ecosystem, but it builds and delivers (to IBM’s paying customers) database software , middleware , and other software that runs on top of the open-source core. Other examples of proprietary products built on open-source software include Red Hat Enterprise Linux and Cloudera 's Apache Hadoop -based software. Some companies appear to re-invest a portion of their financial profits from the sale of proprietary software back into the open source infrastructure. [46]
Some companies, such as Digium , sell proprietary but optional digital electronics hardware controlled by an open-source software product. [47]

Selling of required proprietary parts of a software product
A variant of the approach above is the keeping of required data content (for instance a video game 's audio, graphic, and other art assets) of a software product proprietary while making the software's source code open-source. While this approach is completely legitimate and compatible with most open-source licenses, customers have to buy the content to have a complete and working software product. [48] Restrictive licenses can then be applied on the content, which prevents the redistribution or re-selling of the complete software product. Examples for open-source developed software are Kot-in-Action Creative Artel video game Steel Storm , engine GPLv2 licensed while the artwork is CC-BY-NC-SA 3.0 licensed, [49] and Frogatto & Friends with an own developed open-source engine [50] and commercialization via the copyrighted game assets [51] for iPhone , BlackBerry and MacOS . [52] [53] [54] [55]
Other examples are Arx Fatalis (by Arkane Studios ) [56] and Catacomb 3-D (by Flat Rock Software ) [57] with source code opened to the public delayed after release, while copyrighted assets and binaries are still sold on gog.com as digital distribution . [58] [59]
Doing so conforms with the FSF and Richard Stallman, who stated that for art or entertainment the software freedoms are not required or important. [60]
The similar product bundling of an open-source software product with a proprietary hardware part is called tivoization and legal with most open-source licenses except GPLv3 , which explicitly prohibits this use-case. [61]

Re-licensing under a proprietary license
If a software product uses only own software and open-source software under a permissive free software licence , a company can re-license the resulting software product under a proprietary license and sell the product without the source code or software freedoms . [62] For instance, Apple Inc. is an avid user of this approach by using source code and software from open-source projects. For example, the BSD Unix operating system kernel (under the BSD license ) was used in Apple's Mac PCs that were sold as proprietary products. [63]

Obfuscation of source code
An approach to allow commercialization under some open-source licenses while still protecting crucial business secrets, intellectual property and technical know-how is obfuscation of source code. This approach was used in several cases, for instance by Nvidia in their open-source graphic card device drivers. [64] This practice is used to get the open-source-friendly propaganda without bearing the inconveniences. There has been debate in the free-software/open-source community on whether it is illegal to skirt copyleft software licenses by releasing source code in obfuscated form, such as in cases in which the author is less willing to make the source code available. The general consensus was that while unethical, it was not considered a violation.
The Free Software Foundation , on the other hand, is clearly against this practice. [65] The GNU General Public License since version 2 has defined "source code" as "the preferred form of the work for making modifications to it." This is intended to prevent the release of obfuscated source code. [66]

Delayed open-sourcing
Some companies provide the latest version available only to paying customers. A vendor forks a non- copyleft software project then adds closed-source additions to it and sells the resulting software. After a fixed time period the patches are released back upstream under the same license as the rest of the codebase. This business model is called version lagging or time delaying. [46] [67]
For instance, the MariaDB Corporation created for business compatible "delayed open-sourcing" the source-available Business source license (BSL) [68] which automatically relicenses after three years to the FOSS GPL. [69] [70] This approach garantuees for licensees that they have source code access (e.g. for code audits ), are not locked into a closed platform , or suffer from planned obsolescence , while for the software developer a time-limited exclusive commercialization is possible. [69]
However, this approach works only with own software or permissive licensed code parts, as there is no copyleft FOSS license available which allows the time delayed opening of the source code after distributing or selling of a software product.

Open sourcing on end-of-life
An extreme variant of "delayed open-sourcing" is a business practice popularized by id Software [71] [72] and 3D Realms , [73] [74] which released several software products under a free software license after a long proprietary commercialization time period and the return of investment was achieved. The motivation of companies following this practice of releasing the source code when a software reaches the commercial end-of-life , is to prevent that their software becomes unsupported Abandonware or even get lost due to digital obsolescence . [75] This gives the user communities the chance to continue development and support of the software product themselves as an open-source software project. [76] Many examples from the video game domain are in the list of commercial video games with later released source code .
Popular non-game software examples are the Netscape Communicator which was open-sourced in 1998 [77] [78] and Sun Microsystems 's office suite , StarOffice , which was released in October 2000 at its commercial end of life. [79] Both releases formed the basis of important open-source projects, namely Mozilla Firefox and OpenOffice.org / LibreOffice . However, Firefox eventually gained a more-than-self-sustaining revenue model, so Firefox was not an example of a commercial end-of-life release.

FOSS and economy
According to Yochai Benkler , the Berkman Professor for Entrepreneurial Legal Studies at Harvard Law School , free software is the most visible part of a new economy of commons-based peer production of information, knowledge, and culture. As examples, he cites a variety of FOSS projects, including both free software and open source. [80]
This new economy is already under development. In order to commercialize FOSS, many companies, Google being the most successful, are moving towards an economic model of advertising-supported software . In such a model, the only way to increase revenue is to make the advertising more valuable. Facebook has recently come under fire for using novel user tracking methods to accomplish this. [81]
This new economy is not without alternatives. Apple's App Stores have proven very popular with both users and developers. The Free Software Foundation considers Apple's App Stores to be incompatible with its GPL and complained [82] that Apple was infringing on the GPL with its iTunes terms of use. Rather than change those terms to comply with the GPL, Apple removed the GPL-licensed products from its App Stores. [83] The authors of VLC , one of the GPL-licensed programs at the center of those complaints, recently began the process to switch from the GPL to the LGPL and MPL . [84] [85]

Examples
Much of the Internet runs on open-source software tools and utilities such as Linux , Apache , MySQL , and PHP , known as the LAMP stack for web servers. [ citation needed ] Using open source appeals to software developers for three main reasons: low or no cost, access to source code they can tailor themselves, and a shared community that ensures a generally robust code base, with quick fixes for new issues.
Despite doing much business in proprietary software, some companies like Oracle Corporation and IBM participated in developing free and open-source software to deter from monopolies and take a portion of market share for themselves. See Commercial open-source applications for the list of current commercial open-source offerings. Netscape 's actions were an example of this, and thus Mozilla Firefox has become more popular, getting market share from Internet Explorer . [86]

See also
WebPage index: 00187
Libertarian perspectives on intellectual property
Libertarians have differing opinions on the validity of intellectual property .

Political parties
The Libertarian Party of Canada takes "a moderate approach to patents and copyrights", calling for "a careful review of existing and proposed legislation". [1]

Anarcho-capitalist views
Since anarcho-capitalists oppose the existence of even a minimal state, this ideological framework requires that any functions served by intellectual property law promulgation and enforcement be provided through private sector institutions.
Murray Rothbard argues for allowing contractually arising infinite copyright terms and against the need for any government role in protecting intellectual property. [2] He states that government's involvement in defining arbitrary limits on the duration, scope, etc. of intellectual property in order to "promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts" is inherently problematic, since "By what standard do you judge that research expenditures are 'too much,' 'too little,' or just about enough?" He argues that intellectual property laws can actually hinder innovation, since competitors can be indefinitely discouraged from further research expenditures in the general area covered by the patent because the courts may hold their improvements as infringements on the previous patent, and the patent holder is discouraged from engaging in further research in this field because the privilege discourages his improvement of his invention for the entire period of the patent, with the assurance that no competitor can trespass on his domain. [3]
Morris and Linda Tannehill propose that ideas in the form of inventions could be registered in a privately owned "data bank"; the inventor could then buy insurance against the theft and unauthorized commercial use of the invention, and the insurance company would guarantee to not only compensate the inventor for any losses suffered due to such infringement but to stop such unauthorized use. [4]
Opponents to intellectual property rights include Wendy McElroy , [5] Tom G. Palmer , [6] Henri Lepage , Boudewijn Bouckaert , Jeffrey Tucker , and N. Stephan Kinsella . [7] Kinsella points out in Against Intellectual Property that patents may be inefficient since they divert resources from research and development to patent filing and lawsuits. He notices that theoretical research can not be patented as easily as practical research and thus theoretical research is relatively underfunded. Moreover, he argues that property rights can only apply to resources that are scarce, which intellectual property is not. Kinsella also claims that the only way that intellectual property rights can be implemented is by limiting others' physical property rights. [8]
David D. Friedman takes a neutral stance on intellectual property, claiming "there are good arguments on both sides of that question". [9]

Left-libertarian views
Roderick T. Long argues that the concept of intellectual property is not libertarian. He holds that prohibiting people from using, reproducing, and trading copyrighted material is an infringement of freedom of speech and freedom of the press , and that since information exists in people's minds and other people's property, one cannot own information without owning other people. Claiming that authors and publishers will continue to produce absent copyright protection, he cites the fact that hundreds of thousands of articles are uploaded onto the Internet by their authors every day, available to anyone in the world for free and that nearly all works written before the 20th century are in the public domain, yet pre-1900 works are still published and sold. [10]
Benjamin Tucker , opposing intellectual property, writes, "...the patent monopoly...consists in protecting inventors...against competition for a period long enough to extort from the people a reward enormously in excess of the labor measure of their services, – in other words, in giving certain people a right of property for a term of years in laws and facts of Nature, and the power to exact tribute from others for the use of this natural wealth, which should be open to all." [11]

Ayn Rand's views
Ayn Rand , founder of Objectivism , supported copyrights and patents, noting in Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal : [12]
She held that patent should be granted for limited terms only:

Other libertarian and anarcho-libertarian views
Anarchists such as Lysander Spooner and J. Neil Schulman have also argued for forms of intellectual property. [13]
WebPage index: 00188
Share-alike
Share-alike is a copyright licensing term, originally used by the Creative Commons project, to describe works or licences that require copies or adaptations of the work to be released under the same or similar licence as the original. [1] Copyleft licences are free content or free software licences with a share-alike condition.
Two currently-supported Creative Commons licences have the ShareAlike condition: Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike (a copyleft , free content licence) and Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike (a proprietary licence).
The term has also been used outside copyright law to refer to a similar plan for patent licensing . [2]

Copyleft
Copyleft or libre share-alike licences are the largest subcategory of share-alike licences. They include both free content licences like Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike and free software licences like the GNU General Public License . These licences have been described pejoratively as viral licences , because the inclusion of copyleft material in a larger work typically requires the entire work to be made copyleft. The term reciprocal license has also been used to describe copyleft, but has also been used for non-libre licenses (see, for example, the Microsoft Limited Reciprocal License ).
Free content and software licences without the share-alike requirement are described as permissive licences .

Creative Commons
As with all six licences in the current Creative Commons suite, CC Attribution-ShareAlike and CC Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike require attribution . According to Creative Commons, the advantage of this license is that future users are not able to add new restrictions to a derivative of your work; their derivatives must be licensed the same way. [3]
The 3.0 and 4.0 version of the ShareAlike licenses include a compatibility clause, allowing Creative Commons to declare other licenses as compatible and therefore derivatives may use these instead of the license of the original work.

Version history
Over the years, Creative Commons has issued 5 versions of the BY-SA and BY-NC-SA licenses (1.0, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0 and 4.0).

Adoption
In June 2009 the Wikipedia community and Wikimedia Foundation board approved the adoption of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike (CC BY-SA) license as the main content license for Wikipedia and other Wikimedia sites. Creative Commons hailed this decision as a victory for free culture as well as visionary leadership. [14]

See also
WebPage index: 00189
Copyright Alliance
The Copyright Alliance is a nonprofit, nonpartisan 501(c)(4) organization representing artistic creators across a broad range of copyright disciplines. [1]
The Copyright Alliance's institutional members include over forty trade organizations, associations, unions, companies, and guilds, that represent millions of individual creators. [2] The Copyright Alliance also directly collaborates with and represents thousands of creative individuals and small businesses. [2] The creative industries represented include writers, composers, recording artists, journalists, documentarians, filmmakers, graphic artists, visual artists, photographers, and software developers. [3] The Copyright Alliance seeks to unite creators across various disciplines, to advocate for the protection of creative works, and to promote the livelihoods of creators. [3] [4]

History
At its launch in May 2007 the Copyright Alliance was founded by four Board members, ASCAP, Broadcast Music Inc., the Motion Picture Association of America and Universal. It was initially created and masterminded by the President and CEO Jack Valenti, of the Motion Picture Association of America. Music Legends Steve Cropper and Lamont Dozier attended the launch, that included a membership of 29 organizations purporting to represent 11 million workers, including the Association of American Publishers , Microsoft , the Recording Industry Association of America , Viacom and Walt Disney . [5]
The launch of the Copyright Alliance was supported by U.S. House of Representatives Judiciary Committee Chairman John Conyers (D-MI), ranking Representative Howard Coble (R-NC), and Representative Howard Berman (D-CA), members of the United States House Judiciary Subcommittee on Intellectual Property, Competition, and the Internet . Berman, speaking of his inspiration by the late Jack Valenti , spoke of "the constant assaults on copyright law" and called the group's launch "a tremendous idea". [5] Coble said that ""Digitization and related technologies beg some changes to the copyright laws, and I wish you the best of luck and my support as you roll out the Copyright Alliance" [6]
The Copyright Alliance was launched in opposition to the Digital Freedom Campaign , formed the preceding October, whose members include the Consumer Electronics Association , Public Knowledge , and the Electronic Freedom Foundation . [5]
Patrick Ross [7] served as executive director for four years until succeeded by Sandra Aistars on December 20, 2010. [8] Prior to taking the position Aistars was Vice President and Associate General Counsel at Time Warner. On September 15, 2015, it was announced that Keith Kupferschmid would succeed Sandra Aistars as CEO of the Copyright Alliance. [9] Kupferschmid previously served as General Counsel and Senior Vice President for Intellectual Property at the Software & Information Industry Association (SIIA). [10]

Members
As of September 2015 the Copyright Alliance listed forty-one organizations as board and executive members. [11]

Activities
In 2009, the organization presented a letter to the White House asking it to pursue policies supportive of artists' rights signed by 11,000 artists and creators. [12] Over the years, the Copyright Alliance has collaborated with various groups. In 2014, It helped the US Copyright Office present its 2014 World IP Day program [13] That same year, it also hosted a briefing on Capitol Hill with the Creative Rights Caucus to "discuss the challenges photographers and visual artists face in the internet age." [14] The organization also works with groups such as Google , Yahoo , and Public Knowledge to develop voluntary best practices for addressing online copyright infringement. [15]

Political issues
The group supported an IP-PRO bill establishing a " copyright czar " in June 2008 Senate Judiciary Committee hearings. [16] The PRO-IP bill was introduced in the Senate shortly thereafter and passed into law. [17] Ars Technica called the bill a victory for "Big Content", though a provision for the Department of Justice to join suits for the benefit of copyright holders was stripped from the bill. [18]
On November 16, 2009, the Copyright Alliance was joined by some of its grassroots members in hand-delivering a letter to the White House signed by more than 11,000 artists and creators, calling on President Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden to defend the rights of artists and creators.
In May 2009 it launched the Creators Across America campaign, which includes videos of artists and creators across the United States speaking about their arts and their rights under copyright law.
Copyright Alliance received $600,000 from the MPAA in 2012, which that year had also donated $475,000 to the Center for Copyright Information and $100,000 each to the Democratic Governors Association and Republican Governors Association as part of an anti-piracy campaign. [19]

See also
WebPage index: 00190
Piratbyrån
Piratbyrån Piratbyrån ( help · info ) ("The Pirate Bureau") was a Swedish organization (or think tank ) established to support the free sharing of information, culture, and intellectual property . Piratbyrån provided a counterpoint to lobby groups such as the Swedish Anti-Piracy Bureau .
In 2005 Piratbyrån released an anthology entitled Copy Me , [1] containing selected texts previously available from its website. Members of Piratbyrån participated in debates on Swedish Radio and Swedish Television and also gave several lectures in other European countries, such as at the 2005 22nd Chaos Communication Congress in Berlin. [2]
Piratbyrån's activities might have changed over the years, partly as a result of the addition of the Pirate Party to the Swedish political scene. During Walpurgis Night 2007, Piratbyrån burned all of their remaining copies of Copy Me in a ritual-like performance, declaring:
Jonas Andersson, a Swedish researcher specialized in the politics of file-sharing , gave this brief definition in October 2009:
The MPAA -funded Svenska Antipiratbyrån (Swedish Anti-Piracy Bureau), an agency devoted to fighting copyright infringement, was formed in 2001, before Piratbyrån. Piratbyrån humorously copied the name of their opponent, removing the "anti". [5]
In June 2010 the group disbanded following the death of co-founder and prominent member Ibrahim Botani , also known as Ibi Kopimi Botani. [5] [6] Several former members of Piratbyrån are now involved in Telecomix . The front page of the website was replaced with the three words Stängt för eftertanke (Swedish for Closed for reflection ). [7]

Self-definition
In 2008 Piratbyrån published a report titled Piratbyrån - The Bureau of Piracy Activities 2007 which starts with the following description of the organisation:

Definition by Prix Ars Electronica jury
As Piratbyrån received an "award of distinction" at Prix Ars Electronica in 2009, [9] [10] the jury statement said:

BitTorrent tracker
Members of Piratbyrån founded the BitTorrent tracker The Pirate Bay in 2003 as a Swedish language site. The Pirate Bay now operates independently from Piratbyrån, although a number of The Pirate Bay administrators were also active in Piratbyrån. [12] [13]

Police raid
On the morning of May 31, 2006, the servers of both The Pirate Bay , a popular Swedish BitTorrent tracker , and Piratbyrån were confiscated in a raid by Swedish police. The seizure was part of investigation into possible illegal activities on the part of The Pirate Bay. Piratbyrån and the Antipiratbyrån set up a temporary news blog during the investigation. [14] [15]

Activities in 2007
In Piratbyrån - The Bureau of Piracy Activities 2007 , published in 2008, Piratbyrån list its activities for the year 2007. Activities by Piratbyrån members include lectures at universities and conferences, the publication of reports, participation in art projects and research projects, an interview with Vanity Fair in February 2007, participation in the planning of The Oil of the 21st Century conference in Berlin, presentations at a Norwegian computer party (The Gathering), interviews to the media regarding the raid on The Pirate Bay , opening of a webshop to sell Kopimi Klothing, participation in the organisation of protests to mark the one-year anniversary of the police raid on The Pirate Bay , attendance of the BELEF07 festival in Belgrade ( Serbia ), and participation in the organisation of a one-day art event in Stockholm titled "Who Makes And Owns Your Work". [8]
In March 2007 Piratbyrån members were invited to a meeting with the executive group for the Swedish Film Institute , to share their views about film and copying. According to Piratbyrån "The leadership listens with interest — only to some months later launch new anti-piracy initiatives...". In the same month Piratbyrån collaborates with the Norwegian group Piratgruppen , launching the counter-campaign "Piracy frees music" (promoted via The Pirate Bay ), in response to the "Piracy kills music" anti-piracy campaign by the Norwegian record industry. [8]
In 2007 members of Piratbyrån also contributed to the production of the film Steal This Film (Part Two) , which features interviews with Piratbyrån members and was released in December 2007. [8]

Activities in 2009
Piratbyrån organized the "Spectrial", a theatricalizing intervention in The Pirate Bay trial in Stockholm, early in 2009. [16] [ citation needed ]
Installed the Embassy of Piracy - The Embassy of Piracy , for the First Internet Pavilion at the Venice Biennial [17]
At the Prix Ars Electronica Piratbyrån received an "award of distinction" (including a prize money of 5000 euro) in the category "Digital Communities". [9] [10] The motivation of the jury underlined the Piratbyrån "never forget that humor and irony are among the strongest weapons available to cultural producers." [11]

Kopimi
The Kopimi symbol, also spelled kopimi , was conceived in January 2005 by Piratbyrån co-founder Ibrahim Botani . The logo, pronounced "copy me", can be used to specifically request people to copy and distribute a work, for any purpose. Botani intended the logo to be the opposite of copyright, which usually restricts copying a work, and as a unifying symbol of the anti-copyright ideas Piratbyrån stood for. [18] As such, Kopimi may be considered an anti-copyright notice of sorts.
Later in 2005, the Kopimi logotype was included in the Piratbyrån book Copy Me . [19] It was also put on the front page of The Pirate Bay , where it remains until this day. The history section of the site stated: " Some of you may have noticed that little symbol at the bottom of the page, the pyramid. It's a symbol called Kopimi (Copy Me) which was founded by an old friend of ours, the artist Ibi Botani. It's basically about promoting copying. Using the kopimi symbol on something not only shows that it is ok to copy it, it says it wants to be copied, mixed or manipulated! " [20]
While Kopimi may appear to be a radical free content license , in effect similar to Creative Commons Zero , no one associated with Piratbyrån ever called Kopimi a license, instead describing it as a symbol of certain ideas. The website of Kopimi contains no terms or legal text. The Open Source Initiative , Free Software Foundation , or any other organisation within the open-source movement , does not list Kopimi as an approved license. [21] [22]
Wikimedia Commons , a repository of free content and a sister site of Wikipedia, allows users to label their files with Kopimi. [23]

Kopimism
Kopimism and kopimist(s) are terms derived from Botani's symbol. It is unclear who coined them, but they have been used since at least July 2006. [24] [25] In January 2007, the Pirate Bay used the terms when they attempted (unsuccessfully) to buy Sealand , a large sea fort off the coast of England and a self-proclaimed country. The Pirate Bay declared: " To make sure the owners will be kopimistic and that the country won’t be governed by people that do not care about its future, we have come up with a plan. With the help of all the kopimists on Internets, we want to buy Sealand. " [26] [27]
The Missionary Church of Kopimism was founded in 2010 by Isak Gerson, a philosophy student and a member of the Pirate Party of Sweden . After two failed attempts, Kopimism was officially recognized as a religion by the Swedish government in January 2012. The Church considers copying a holy virtue, and uses various Kopimi symbols to present itself. [28] [29]

Copie
Inspired by Kopimi, the Pirate Party of Brazil created their own version of the concept called "Copie", which plays both on the Portuguese words "copie" (meaning copy) and "co-pie" (meaning tweet together). The Copie logo shows 5 birds tweeting together. [30]

See also
WebPage index: 00191
Rick Falkvinge
Rick Falkvinge (born Dick Greger Augustsson on 21 January 1972) is a Swedish information technology entrepreneur and founder of the Swedish Pirate Party . [1] He is currently a political evangelist with the party, spreading the ideas across the world. [2]

Youth and early career
Falkvinge grew up in Ruddalen, Gothenburg , and studied Natural Sciences at Göteborgs Högre Samskola . During his high school years, he was active in Moderat Skolungdom and Moderata Ungdomsförbundet , the youth wings of the Moderaterna party in Sweden. His passion for technology was visible at an early age, and he would spend time as a toddler just pressing doorbell buttons in electronics stores. [3] [4]
His first computer was a Commodore VIC-20 , where he wasn't content just pressing its buttons, but also opened it up and took it apart, to study its inner workings. He learned how to disable the system calls, and learned all relevant memory positions. His interest for computers as a technological phenomenon was as large as his fascination for the possibility of using computers as tools. He has likened this to amateur radio enthusiasts and their interest for the technology and its applications alike. [4]
His VIC-20 would soon be replaced by a Commodore 64 , the most sold computer model ever. He started swapping files early, and continued the mixtape tradition with his friends, only using disks instead. He started attending copyparties , where people brought their computer and a box of disks, and copied files between one another: images, games, texts, programs. [4]
Falkvinge created his first company, Infoteknik (literally Infotechnology ), in 1988 at the age of 16. [3] The inefficiency in administrative business tasks irritated him, and he wanted to digitize the world. [4]
In 1994 to 1998, he was active as an entrepreneur with five employees [3] in software development in Gothenburg , Kalmar and Strömsund .
Having grown tired of snide remarks about his first name Dick, and above all what he calls the moralism among systems developers who would make it impossible for him to even use his real name online, he changed his first name in 2004 from Dick to Rickard, with just Rick for short. As he changed his first name, he also changed his last name from Augustsson to the current Falkvinge (literally Falconwing ). He wanted a unique last name describing his character. He has always been fascinated by birds, and thinks that large raptors symbolize pride, freedom, and vision. [5]

The Pirate Party
In the Fall of 2005, Rick Falkvinge started to consider creating a political party focused on the issues of file sharing , copyright , and patents . The dominating Swedish organization in the copyright debate at this time was the Pirate Bureau , which was not affiliated with any party. On 16 December 2005, Falkvinge registered the domain name piratpartiet.se (literally The Pirate Party ), and on 1 January 2006, the party's web site was launched through a message on a Direct Connect hub, signaling the start of the petition to register a new political party in Sweden. [6] According to the party, the site got three million hits in the first two days, [6] and in the morning of 2 January, the newspaper Dagens Industri published a notice about the initiative, [7] followed by a longer article in the tabloid Aftonbladet after lunch. [8] Falkvinge took out a large bank loan, quit his job at Cypak, and started working with building the Pirate Party full-time. [4]

Raid against The Pirate Bay
Following the raid on The Pirate Bay on 31 May 2006, Falkvinge mobilized every part of the Pirate Party, [9] and in the protests that followed on June 3, he held his first widely translated and acclaimed speech, "Nothing new under the Sun". [10] [11] [12]
In the week that followed the raid, Falkvinge was on the TV news daily, and Pirate Party membership tripled from 2,200 to 6,600. [13]

General elections in 2006
In the general elections in 2006, the Pirate Party achieved 0.63%. Falkvinge was noticeably downcast when the exit polls arrived during the election night party, but promised the gathered people that this would not be the end of the fight. [14]
One number that gave a bit of hope was that the mock-up school elections gave the Pirate Party 4.5%, showing that the party had a potential future. [15]

Economic hardship
On 29 December 2008, Falkvinge published a letter on his blog, stating that he was no longer able to pay his rent as the bank loan he had used to cover his work for the Pirate Party had run out, and that he had run out of additional credit. At the time, the Pirate Party did not have a strong enough economy to hire someone, and therefore, he asked the members of the party to donate money to him. [16]
He led the Pirate Party while living off of donations from supporters for 18 months, [17] until he was hired by the European Parliament following entry. [18]

Success in European Elections
The success in the European Elections in 2009, where the Pirate Party achieved 7.13% under his leadership, catapulted Falkvinge and the top candidate Christian Engström onto every newspaper front page in the country, as well as making the top news on CNN, headlines on BBC, Reuters and others. [19] Media described the election night party as ecstatic [20] as the Pirate Party became the largest party by far for voters under 30, with 25% of those votes. [21]
Falkvinge called this success a re-ignition for the civil liberties fight in Europe and the world. [20]
Not long after the European Elections, media predicted that the Pirate Party was also on its way into Swedish Parliament, as they got 3.9% support in a poll. [22] The threshold for entry is 4.0%. This support did not materialize in the 2010 parliamentary elections .

Controversies
During the election campaign of 2009, Falkvinge announced privately on Facebook that as he was touring the country, he was looking for women to sleep with while on the campaign trail. [17] This was picked up by tabloids and blogs and caused a minor controversy. [17]
In the launch of the party's election manifesto in 2010, Falkvinge caused a controversy by stating that freedom of speech and freedom of the press should take precedence over the current ban on possession of drawings potentially depicting child pornography, and that the party wanted to repeal current legislation on the topic. [23] This followed a Swedish court case where a manga -researcher and translator was indited for possession of a handful drawings as part of a very large manga collection. The Swedish Union of Journalists openly and immediately proclaimed their support for this stance, and the irrationality of a law which persecuted individuals of a crime with no victim. [24] Despite this, the stance created internal controversy in the Pirate Party and Falkvinge initially backed away from his position, [25] before reiterating it in 2012. [26]

Stepping down as party leader
On 1 January 2011, five years after the party's foundation, Falkvinge announced that he was stepping down as party leader, [2] and that deputy party leader Anna Troberg would step into the role. This announcement was done during a live broadcast. [27]

Current career
Falkvinge works as a political evangelist in the Pirate Party and pirate movement at large, traveling to speak about the ideas and concepts. [2]
In May 2011, he started exploring bitcoin and its effects on society's economy [28] and was quoted by the Swedish Public Service Television ( SVT ) as a reference in this context. [29]
In February 2016, it was announced that Falkvinge had accepted a full-time role as head of privacy for Private Internet Access , a US-based personal VPN service. [30]

Leadership style
Peter Santesson, Ph.D. in Political Sciences, has analyzed Falkvinge's leadership style and found it unique in Swedish politics. Falkvinge is never late to admit a mistake, and openly displays his weaknesses, acting to diminish his own authority. Among other things, Santesson refers to the episode where Falkvinge said he was flat broke and asked for donations, something that no other politician has attempted and much less succeeded with. Santesson argues that this personality, where Falkvinge takes responsibility for mistakes and admits them immediately without reservation, makes Falkvinge appear even more charismatic. Santesson compares it to techniques used in pick-up artistry . [31]
In 2013, Rick Falkvinge wrote a book called Swarmwise: The Tactical Manual to Changing the World , [32] in which he describes a new kind of organization that he built in the Swedish Pirate Party, and the role of leadership in this organization.

Awards and recognition
In 2012, TIME Magazine shortlisted Falkvinge as one of the world's most influential people, [33] and The Guardian listed Falkvinge as one of the world's Top 20 Internet Freedom Fighters. [34]
In 2011, The magazine Foreign Policy named Falkvinge as one of the Top 100 Global Thinkers. [35]
Falkvinge was awarded the Swedish Guldmusen award as IT person of the year 2010, citing his successes in bringing the Net and its consequences to the political table. [36]
He has been listed as one of the 100 most influential people in Sweden by Fokus magazine. [37]

Appearances
Falkvinge has given presentations on his ideas in cities "from Aarhus to Zurich". [38] Notable appearances include Stanford Law School , [39] Google , [40] O'Reilly Open Source Convention [41] and TheNextWeb. [42]
The Danish documentary Good Copy Bad Copy contains an interview with Falkvinge explaining how the Pirate Party grew as a result of the raid against The Pirate Bay on 31 May 2006. At the time, The Pirate Bay had no formal connections to the party.
He also appears in the documentary Steal This Film and TPB AFK .

Personal life
Falkvinge lives in Sollentuna , a suburb north of Stockholm . His personal interests include whisky , cooking , and motorcycles . He spends his summers in a cabin on Björkö , an island just off Gothenburg . [43]
He likes speeding and has called it a national sport in Sweden. [43]
He has no children and is not married but openly polyamorous , [43] which still precludes marriage for legal reasons as of April 2014.

See also
WebPage index: 00192
Steal This Film
Steal This Film is a film series documenting the movement against intellectual property directed by Jamie King (producer) , produced by The League of Noble Peers and released via the BitTorrent peer-to-peer protocol.
Two parts, and one special The Pirate Bay trial edition of the first part, have been released so far, and The League of Noble Peers is working on "Steal this Film - The Movie" and a new project entitled "The Oil of the 21st Century". [2]

Part one
Part One , shot in Sweden and released in August 2006, combines accounts from prominent players in the Swedish piracy culture ( The Pirate Bay , Piratbyrån , and the Pirate Party ) with found material, propaganda-like slogans and Vox Pops .
It includes interviews with The Pirate Bay members Fredrik Neij (tiamo), Gottfrid Svartholm (anakata) and Peter Sunde (brokep) that were later re-used by agreement in the documentary film Good Copy Bad Copy , as well as with Piratbyrån members Rasmus Fleischer (rsms), Johan (krignell) and Sara Andersson (fraux).
The film [3] is notable for its critical analysis of an alleged regulatory capture [4] attempt performed by the Hollywood film lobby to leverage economic sanctions by the United States government on Sweden through the WTO . Evidence is presented of pressure applied through Swedish courts on Swedish police to conducting a search and seizure against The Pirate Bay to disrupt its BitTorrent tracker service, in contravention of Swedish law. [5]
The Guardian 's James Flint called Part One "at heart a traditionally structured 'talking heads' documentary" with "amusing stylings" from film-makers who "practice what they preach." [6] It also screened at the British Film Institute and numerous independent international events, and was a talking point in 2007's British Documentary Film Festival. [7] [8] In January 2008 it was featured on BBC Radio 4 's Today , in a discussion piece which explored the implications of P2P for traditional media. [ citation needed ]
Material found in Steal This Film includes the music of Can , tracks "Thief" and "She Brings the Rain"; clips from other documentary interviews with industry and governmental officials; several industry anti-piracy promotionals; logos from several major Hollywood studios, and sequences from The Day After Tomorrow , The Matrix , Zabriskie Point , and They Live . The use of these short clips is believed to constitute fair use .

Part two
Steal This Film (Part 2) [9] (sometimes subtitled 'The Dissolving Fortress') was produced during 2007. It premiered (in a preliminary version) at a conference entitled "The Oil of the 21st Century - Perspectives on Intellectual Property" in Berlin, Germany, November 2007. [10]
Thematically, Part 2 "examines the technological and enforcement end of the copyright wars, and on the way that using the internet makes you a copier, and how copying puts you in legal jeopardy." [11] It discusses Mark Getty 's assertion that 'intellectual property is the oil of the 21st century'. Part 2 draws parallels between the impact of the printing press and the internet in terms of making information accessible beyond a privileged group or "controllers". The argument is made that the decentralised nature of the internet makes the enforcement of conventional copyright impossible. Adding to this the internet turns consumers into producers, by way of user generated content , leading to the sharing, mashup and creation of content not motivated by financial gains. This has fundamental implications for market-based media companies. The documentary asks "How will society change" and states "This is the Future - And it has nothing to do with your bank balance".
Boing Boing 's Cory Doctorow called it 'an amazing, funny, enraging and inspiring documentary series', and Part II "even better than part I." [11]

Interviewees (in order of appearance)

Trial Edition
A Trial Edition (also known as '2.5' or 'Spectrial' edition) was released to coincide with the trial in 2009 of The Pirate Bay. This version includes material from Steal This Film I and II combined with new interviews shot with Peter Sunde and others during 2008, some historical background about the Pirate Bay and Dutch printers (who were also considered pirates) as well as interview clips about the legal conflict itself. [12] Steal This Film 'Spectrial Edition' is widely available online and it is thought to be this version that is now available to television stations and others. One full-length copy is available for online viewing on the popular video-sharing website YouTube . [13] [14]
The new edition of Steal This Film was part of the Official Selection and in competition at the 2009 Roma Fiction Festival (Factual strand). [15] [16] The jury awarded a Special Mention for its "unconventional style and provocative look at the media revolution taking place in the world." [17]

Festivals, cinema and other screenings
Steal This Film was selected for the Sheffield International Documentary Film Festival 2008, [18] South By Southwest festival 2008 in Austin, Texas , [19] and the Singapore International Film Festival 2008. [20] Other festivals at which it was shown included Tampere Film Festival, 2008, [21] Salt Spring Film Festival 2007, [22] Rhythm of the Line Festival 2007 [23] and Kerala International Film Festival, India. [ citation needed ] Steal This Film was nominated for the Ars Electronica 2008 Digital Communities prize [24] and was a semi-finalist in online video-streaming site Babelgum's 2008 competition. Amongst others it has been shown on History Channel Spain, Canal + Poland, Noga Israel, TV4 Sweden and Dublin Community TV, Ireland. [ citation needed ]
The film is taught in Universities on media courses worldwide, including New York University's Media Culture & Communication course. [25]

Online distribution
The film is famous partly for being one of the most downloaded documentaries to date. [ citation needed ] Part One was released through an arrangement with The Pirate Bay; the filesharing site marketed Steal This Film in place of its own pirate ship logo. This produced millions of downloads for the film [ citation needed ] and catapulted it to wide recognition on the Internet after it hit Digg, Slashdot, Reddit and other online centers of attention.
Steal This Film (Part 2) was distributed in a similar manner, but with more trackers and indexes involved, including Isohunt and Mininova . Estimates of the total current downloads of the film hover at around the 6 million mark via bittorrent alone. [ citation needed ] Since the creators have not attempted to restrict copying, the film is also available on YouTube, Google Video and many other web-based video services.
A cam version leaked soon after the premiere of Steal This Film (Part 2) in Berlin. [26] Part 2 had its theatrical (rather than viewed online) premiere at the openly organised Who Makes And Owns Your Work artistic seminar in Stockholm 2007. [27] Despite the principles of the seminar itself (organised via public wiki in a year-long process), the involvement of Piratbyran roused the funders of the seminar, the Swedish Arts Grants Committee, to prohibit Piratbyran's logo on the seminar marketing materials alongside its own. [28] The seminar initiators' solution was to add a black sticker dot over the logo, which was easily peeled off. Another condition given by the Committee was that a moderator or an anti-piracy spokesperson be present to balance the debate. [29]
The documentary was officially released for peer-to-peer filesharing using peer-to-peer networks on 28 December 2007 and, according to the filmmakers, downloaded 150,000 times in the first three days of distribution. [30] Pirate Bay encouraged the downloading of Steal This Film Two, announcing its release on its blog. [31] Steal This Film Part 2 was also screened by the Pirate Cinema Copenhagen in January 2008. [32] The documentary can also be downloaded on the official Steal This Film website. [33]

Language
Both Part One and Part Two are in English, mostly, with the former having some Swedish dialogue subtitled in English. Due to great interest in the documentary by volunteer translators, Part Two has subtitles in Czech, Croatian, Danish, Dutch, French, Finnish, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Turkish and Ukrainian.

Financing
As well as funding from BRITDOC , the Steal This Film producers continues to utilize a loose version of the Street Performer Protocol [ citation needed ] , collecting voluntary donations via a PayPal account, from the website. [34] For future financing, director Jamie King (producer) has written that he and the League of Noble Peers propose, a "post IP compensation system" which "allows viewers and listeners to make voluntary payments right from the client in which they play media." [35]

Donations
The League of Noble Peers asked for donations and more than US$30,000 has been received as of 5 July 2009. [36] The filmmakers report that roughly one in a thousand viewers are donating, mostly USD $15–40.

Credits
Steal This Film One and Two are credited as 'conceived, directed, and produced' by The League of Noble Peers . Where Part One contains no personal attribution, Part Two has full credits.

See also
WebPage index: 00193
The Internet's Own Boy
The Internet's Own Boy: The Story of Aaron Swartz is a 2014 American biographical documentary film about Aaron Swartz written, directed, and produced by Brian Knappenberger . [3] [4] The film premiered in the US Documentary Competition program category at the 2014 Sundance Film Festival on January 20, 2014. [5]
After its premiere at Sundance, Participant Media and FilmBuff acquired distribution rights of the film. The film was released to theatres and VOD on June 27, 2014, in United States. [6] It will be followed by a broadcast television premiere on Participant's network Pivot in late 2014. [7] [8] [9] [10]
The film also played at the 2014 SXSW on March 15, 2014. [11] It served as the opening film at the 2014 Hot Docs Canadian International Documentary Festival on April 24, 2014. [12]
The film's UK premiere took place at Sheffield Doc/Fest in June 2014 and won the Sheffield Youth Jury Award that year. [13] In August 2014, the film was screened at the Barbican Centre in London as part of Wikimania 2014 . The BBC also aired the film in January 2015 as part of its Storyville documentary brand. It was also released on the Internet with a Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 4.0 license. [14]

Synopsis
The film depicts the life of American computer programmer, writer, political organizer, and Internet activist Aaron Swartz . Footage of Swartz as a child is featured at the start and end of the film. The film is narrated by figures from Swartz's life, including his mother, brothers, and girlfriends.

Reception
The film received positive response from critics. [15] Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a 93% rating based on reviews from 57 critics, with an average score of 7.3/10. [16]
Geoffrey Berkshire in his review for Variety described it as "A spellbinding portrait of the Internet whiz kid's life and political convictions, which were cut short by his suicide in early 2013." [17] John DeFore of The Hollywood Reporter gave the film a positive review and said that it was an "Excellent newbie-friendly account of a story that rocked the Web's cognoscenti." [18] Katherine Kilkenny from Indiewire said that " The Internet’s Own Boy aspires to provoke Capitol Hill by educating its viewers to inspire questions. Questions for those revered leaders in Silicon Valley — and for a government whose restrictions of the internet have been applied with a sledgehammer, as one source of the film says, instead of a scalpel." [19] In her review for The Daily Telegraph , Amber Wilkinson gave the film three stars out of five and said that "Knappenberger's film is a heavy watch, mostly using talking heads and footage of Swartz before his death to tell a story which comes to question the state of civil liberties in the US." [20]
In December 2014 the film was listed among 15 films on a "short list" to advance to a round of voting for Documentary Feature in the 87th Academy Awards , [21] however it did not advance to a nomination.
WebPage index: 00194
IUCN Red List
The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species (also known as the IUCN Red List or Red Data List ), founded in 1964, is the world's most comprehensive inventory of the global conservation status of biological species . The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) is the world's main authority on the conservation status of species. A series of Regional Red Lists are produced by countries or organizations, which assess the risk of extinction to species within a political management unit.
The IUCN Red List is set upon precise criteria to evaluate the extinction risk of thousands of species and subspecies. These criteria are relevant to all species and all regions of the world. The aim is to convey the urgency of conservation issues to the public and policy makers, as well as help the international community to try to reduce species extinction. According to IUCN (1996), the formally stated goals of the Red List are (1) to provide scientifically based information on the status of species and subspecies at a global level, (2) to draw attention to the magnitude and importance of threatened biodiversity, (3) to influence national and international policy and decision-making, and (4) to provide information to guide actions to conserve biological diversity. [1]
Major species assessors include BirdLife International , the Institute of Zoology (the research division of the Zoological Society of London ), the World Conservation Monitoring Centre , and many Specialist Groups within the IUCN Species Survival Commission (SSC). Collectively, assessments by these organizations and groups account for nearly half the species on the Red List.
The IUCN aims to have the category of every species re-evaluated every five years if possible, or at least every ten years. This is done in a peer reviewed manner through IUCN Species Survival Commission (SSC) Specialist Groups, which are Red List Authorities responsible for a species, group of species or specific geographic area, or in the case of BirdLife International , an entire class ( Aves ). [2]

History

1964 Red List of Threatened Plants
The 1964 IUCN Red List of Threatened Plants used the older pre-criteria Red List assessment system. Plants listed may not, therefore, appear in the current Red List. IUCN advise that is best to check both the online Red List and the 1997 plants Red List publication. [3]

2006 release
The 2006 Red List, released on 4 May 2006 evaluated 40,168 species as a whole, plus an additional 2,160 subspecies , varieties , aquatic stocks , and subpopulations .

2007 release
On 12 September 2007, the World Conservation Union (IUCN) released the 2007 IUCN Red List of Threatened Species . In this release, they have raised their classification of both the western lowland gorilla ( Gorilla gorilla gorilla ) and the Cross River gorilla ( Gorilla gorilla diehli ) from endangered to critically endangered , which is the last category before extinct in the wild , due to Ebola virus and poaching , along with other factors. Russ Mittermeier , chief of Swiss -based IUCN's Primate Specialist Group, stated that 16,306 species are endangered with extinction, 188 more than in 2006 (total of 41,415 species on the Red List). The Red List includes the Sumatran orangutan ( Pongo abelii ) in the Critically Endangered category and the Bornean orangutan ( Pongo pygmaeus ) in the Endangered category. [4]

2008 release
The 2008 Red List was released on 6 October 2008, at the IUCN World Conservation Congress in Barcelona , and "has confirmed an extinction crisis, with almost one in four [mammals] at risk of disappearing forever". The study shows at least 1,141 of the 5,487 mammals on Earth are known to be threatened with extinction, and 836 are listed as Data Deficient . [5]

2012 release
The Red List of 2012 was released 19 July 2012 at Rio+20 Earth Summit ; nearly 2,000 species were added, with 4 species to the extinct list, 2 to the rediscovered list. The IUCN assessed a total of 63,837 species which revealed 19,817 are threatened with extinction. With 3,947 described as "critically endangered" and 5,766 as "endangered", while more than 10,000 species are listed as "vulnerable". At threat are 41% of amphibian species, 33% of reef-building corals, 30% of conifers, 25% of mammals, and 13% of birds. The IUCN Red List has listed 132 species of plants and animals from India as "Critically Endangered". [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14]

IUCN Red List Categories
Species are classified by the IUCN Red List into nine groups, [15] set through criteria such as rate of decline, population size, area of geographic distribution, and degree of population and distribution fragmentation.
When discussing the IUCN Red List, the official term " threatened " is a grouping of three categories: Critically Endangered, Endangered, and Vulnerable.

1994 categories and criteria
The older 1994 has only a single "Lower Risk" category which contained three subcategories:
In the 2001 system Near Threatened and Least Concern have now become their own categories, while Conservation Dependent is no longer used and has been merged into Near Threatened.

Possibly extinct
The tag of "possibly extinct" (PE) [16] is used by Birdlife International , the Red List Authority for birds for the IUCN Red List. [17] BirdLife International has recommended PE become an official tag for Critically Endangered species, and this has now been adopted, along with a "Possibly Extinct in the Wild" tag for species with populations surviving in captivity but likely to be extinct in the wild (e.g. Spix's macaw ).

Versions
There have been a number of versions, dating from 1991, including: [18] [19]
For plants, the 1997 Red List is the most important source. [20]

Criticism
In 1997, the IUCN Red List came under criticism on the grounds of secrecy (or at least poor documentation) surrounding the sources of its data. [21]
These allegations have led to efforts by the IUCN to improve its documentation and data quality, and to include peer reviews of taxa on the Red List. The list is also open to petitions against its classifications, on the basis of documentation or criteria. [22] A Nature editorial defended the Red List's relevance in October 2008. [23]
It has been suggested that the IUCN Red List and similar works are prone to misuse by governments and other groups that draw possibly inappropriate conclusions on the state of the environment or to effect exploitation of natural resources. [24]

See also
WebPage index: 00195
Chordate
A chordate is an animal belonging to the phylum Chordata ; they possess a notochord , a hollow dorsal nerve cord , pharyngeal slits , an endostyle , and a post-anal tail , for at least some period of their life cycle. Chordates are deuterostomes , as during the embryo development stage the anus forms before the mouth. They are also bilaterally symmetric coelomates . In the case of vertebrate chordates, the notochord is usually replaced by a vertebral column during development, and they may have body plans organized via segmentation .
Taxonomically, the phylum includes the subphyla Vertebrata , which includes fish , amphibians , reptiles , birds , and mammals ; Tunicata , which includes salps and sea squirts ; and Cephalochordata , comprising the lancelets . There are also additional extinct taxa. The Vertebrata are sometimes considered as a subgroup of the clade Craniata , consisting of chordates with a skull ; the Craniata and Tunicata compose the clade Olfactores.
Of the more than 65,000 living species of chordates, about half are bony fish of the class Osteichthyes . The world's largest and fastest animals, the blue whale and peregrine falcon respectively, are chordates, as are humans . Fossil chordates are known from at least as early as the Cambrian explosion .
Hemichordata , which includes the acorn worms , has been presented as a fourth chordate subphylum, but it now is usually treated as a separate phylum. The Hemichordata, along with the Echinodermata (which includes starfish , sea urchins , sea cucumbers , and crinoids ), form the Ambulacraria , the sister taxon of the Chordates. The Chordata and Ambulacraria form the superphylum Deuterostomia, composed of the deuterostomes .

Overview of affinities
Attempts to work out the evolutionary relationships of the chordates have produced several hypotheses. The current consensus is that chordates are monophyletic , meaning that the Chordata include all and only the descendants of a single common ancestor, which is itself a chordate, and that craniates ' nearest relatives are tunicates.
All of the earliest chordate fossils have been found in the Early Cambrian Chengjiang fauna , and include two species that are regarded as fish , which implies that they are vertebrates. Because the fossil record of early chordates is poor, only molecular phylogenetics offers a reasonable prospect of dating their emergence. However, the use of molecular phylogenetics for dating evolutionary transitions is controversial.
It has also proved difficult to produce a detailed classification within the living chordates. Attempts to produce evolutionary " family trees " shows that many of the traditional classes are paraphyletic .
While this has been well known since the 19th century, an insistence on only monophyletic taxa has resulted in vertebrate classification being in a state of flux. [3]

Origin of name
Although the name Chordata is attributed to William Bateson (1885), it was already in prevalent use by 1880. Ernst Haeckel described a taxon comprising tunicates, cephalochordates, and vertebrates in 1866. Though he used the German vernacular form, it is allowed under the ICZN code because of its subsequent latinization. [2]

Definition
Chordates form a phylum of animals that are defined by having at some stage in their lives all of the following: [4]
There are soft constraints that separate chordates from certain other biological lineages, but have not yet been made part of the formal definition:
There is still much ongoing differential (DNA sequence based) comparison research that is trying to separate out the simplest forms of chordates. As some lineages of the 90% of species that lack a backbone or notochord might have lost these structures over time, this complicates the classification of chordates. Some chordate lineages may only be found by DNA analysis, when there is no physical trace of any chordate-like structures. [8]

Subdivisions

Craniata (Vertebrata)
Craniates , one of the three subdivisions of chordates, all have distinct skulls . They include the hagfish which have no vertebrae . Michael J. Benton commented that "craniates are characterized by their heads, just as chordates, or possibly all deuterostomes , are by their tails". [9]
Most are vertebrates , in which the notochord is replaced by the vertebral column . [10] These consist of a series of bony or cartilaginous cylindrical vertebrae, generally with neural arches that protect the spinal cord , and with projections that link the vertebrae. However hagfish have incomplete braincases and no vertebrae, and are therefore not regarded as vertebrates, [11] but as members of the craniates, the group from which vertebrates are thought to have evolved . [12] However the cladistic exclusion of hagfish from the vertebrates is controversial, as they may be degenerate vertebrates who have lost their vertebral columns. [13]
The position of lampreys is ambiguous. They have complete braincases and rudimentary vertebrae, and therefore may be regarded as vertebrates and true fish . [14] However, molecular phylogenetics , which uses biochemical features to classify organisms, has produced both results that group them with vertebrates and others that group them with hagfish. [15] If lampreys are more closely related to the hagfish than the other vertebrates, this would suggest that they form a clade , which has been named the Cyclostomata . [16]

Tunicata (tunicates, or urochordates)
Most tunicates appear as adults in two major forms, both of which are soft-bodied filter-feeders that lack the standard features of chordates: "sea squirts" are sessile and consist mainly of water pumps and filter-feeding apparatus; [17] salps float in mid-water, feeding on plankton , and have a two-generation cycle in which one generation is solitary and the next forms chain-like colonies . [18] However, all tunicate larvae have the standard chordate features, including long, tadpole -like tails; they also have rudimentary brains, light sensors and tilt sensors. [17] The third main group of tunicates, Appendicularia (also known as Larvacea) retain tadpole-like shapes and active swimming all their lives, and were for a long time regarded as larvae of sea squirts or salps. [19] The etymology of the term Urochorda(ta) (Balfour 1881) is from the ancient Greek οὐρά (oura, "tail") + Latin chorda ("cord"), because the notochord is only found in the tail. [20] The term Tunicata (Lamarck 1816) is recognised as having precedence and is now more commonly used. [17]

Cephalochordata: Lancelets
Cephalochordates are small, "vaguely fish-shaped" animals that lack brains, clearly defined heads and specialized sense organs. [21] These burrowing filter-feeders compose the earliest-branching chordate sub-phylum. [22] [23] [24]

Origins
The majority of animals more complex than jellyfish and other Cnidarians are split into two groups, the protostomes and deuterostomes , the latter of which contains chordates. [25] It seems very likely the 555 million-year-old Kimberella was a member of the protostomes. [26] [27] If so, this means the protostome and deuterostome lineages must have split some time before Kimberella appeared—at least 558 million years ago , and hence well before the start of the Cambrian 541 million years ago . [25] The Ediacaran fossil Ernietta , from about 549 to 543 million years ago , may represent a deuterostome animal. [28]
Fossils of one major deuterostome group, the echinoderms (whose modern members include starfish , sea urchins and crinoids ), are quite common from the start of the Cambrian, 542 million years ago . [30] The Mid Cambrian fossil Rhabdotubus johanssoni has been interpreted as a pterobranch hemichordate. [31] Opinions differ about whether the Chengjiang fauna fossil Yunnanozoon , from the earlier Cambrian, was a hemichordate or chordate. [32] [33] Another fossil, Haikouella lanceolata , also from the Chengjiang fauna, is interpreted as a chordate and possibly a craniate, as it shows signs of a heart, arteries, gill filaments, a tail, a neural chord with a brain at the front end, and possibly eyes—although it also had short tentacles round its mouth. [33] Haikouichthys and Myllokunmingia , also from the Chengjiang fauna, are regarded as fish . [29] [34] Pikaia , discovered much earlier (1911) but from the Mid Cambrian Burgess Shale (505 Ma), is also regarded as a primitive chordate. [35] On the other hand, fossils of early chordates are very rare, since invertebrate chordates have no bones or teeth, and only one has been reported for the rest of the Cambrian. [36]
The evolutionary relationships between the chordate groups and between chordates as a whole and their closest deuterostome relatives have been debated since 1890. Studies based on anatomical, embryological , and paleontological data have produced different "family trees". Some closely linked chordates and hemichordates, but that idea is now rejected. [5] Combining such analyses with data from a small set of ribosome RNA genes eliminated some older ideas, but opened up the possibility that tunicates (urochordates) are "basal deuterostomes", surviving members of the group from which echinoderms, hemichordates and chordates evolved. [37] Some researchers believe that, within the chordates, craniates are most closely related to cephalochordates, but there are also reasons for regarding tunicates (urochordates) as craniates' closest relatives. [5] [38]
Since early chordates have left a poor fossil record, attempts have been made to calculate the key dates in their evolution by molecular phylogenetics techniques—by analyzing biochemical differences, mainly in RNA. One such study suggested that deuterostomes arose before 900 million years ago and the earliest chordates around 896 million years ago . [38] However, molecular estimates of dates often disagree with each other and with the fossil record, [38] and their assumption that the molecular clock runs at a known constant rate has been challenged. [39] [40]

Classification

Taxonomy
Traditionally, Cephalochordata and Craniata were grouped into the proposed clade "Euchordata", which would have been the sister group to Tunicata/Urochordata. More recently, Cephalochordata has been thought of as a sister group to the "Olfactores", which includes the craniates and tunicates. The matter is not yet settled.
The following schema is from the third edition of Vertebrate Palaeontology . [41] The invertebrate chordate classes are from Fishes of the World . [42] While it is structured so as to reflect evolutionary relationships (similar to a cladogram ), it also retains the traditional ranks used in Linnaean taxonomy .

Phylogeny

Closest nonchordate relatives

Hemichordates
Hemichordates ("half (½) chordates") have some features similar to those of chordates: branchial openings that open into the pharynx and look rather like gill slits; stomochords, similar in composition to notochords , but running in a circle round the "collar", which is ahead of the mouth; and a dorsal nerve cord—but also a smaller ventral nerve cord.
There are two living groups of hemichordates. The solitary enteropneusts , commonly known as "acorn worms", have long proboscises and worm-like bodies with up to 200 branchial slits, are up to 2.5 metres (8.2 ft) long, and burrow though seafloor sediments . Pterobranchs are colonial animals, often less than 1 millimetre (0.039 in) long individually, whose dwellings are interconnected. Each filter feeds by means of a pair of branched tentacles, and has a short, shield-shaped proboscis. The extinct graptolites , colonial animals whose fossils look like tiny hacksaw blades, lived in tubes similar to those of pterobranchs. [46]

Echinoderms
Echinoderms differ from chordates and their other relatives in three conspicuous ways: they possess bilateral symmetry only as larvae - in adulthood they have radial symmetry , meaning that their body pattern is shaped like a wheel; they have tube feet ; and their bodies are supported by skeletons made of calcite , a material not used by chordates. Their hard, calcified shells keep their bodies well protected from the environment, and these skeletons enclose their bodies, but are also covered by thin skins. The feet are powered by another unique feature of echinoderms, a water vascular system of canals that also functions as a "lung" and surrounded by muscles that act as pumps. Crinoids look rather like flowers, and use their feather-like arms to filter food particles out of the water; most live anchored to rocks, but a few can move very slowly. Other echinoderms are mobile and take a variety of body shapes, for example starfish , sea urchins and sea cucumbers . [47]

See also
